   L E I F W E AT H E R B Y




CULTU R AL AI AND THE END
O F REMAINDER HUMANISM
Language Machines
Cary Wolfe, Series Editor


74   Language Machines: Cultural AI and
     the End of Remainder Humanism
     Leif Weatherby
73   Hermes II: Interference
     Michel Serres
72   The Abyss Stares Back: Encounters with Deep-Sea Life
     Stacy Alaimo
71   Prosthetic Immortalities: Biology, Transhumanism,
     and the Search for Indefinite Life
     Adam R. Rosenthal
70   The Memory of the World: Deep Time, Animality,
     and Eschatology
     Ted Toadvine
69   Hermes I: Communication
     Michel Serres
68   Nietzsche’s Posthumanism
     Edgar Landgraf
67   Subsurface
     Karen Pinkus
66   Making Sense in Common: A Reading of
     Whitehead in Times of Collapse
     Isabelle Stengers
65   Our Grateful Dead: Stories of Those Left Behind
     Vinciane Despret
64   Prosthesis
     David Wills
63   Molecular Capture: The Animation of Biology
     Adam Nocek
62   Clang
     Jacques Derrida
                                            (continued on page 268)
Language Machines
Cultural AI and the End of Remainder Humanism




Leif Weatherby
posthumanities 74




     University of Minnesota Press
     Minneapolis
     London
The University of Minnesota Press gratefully acknowledges the generous
assistance provided for the publication of this book by the NYU Center for the
Humanities, the Dean for the Humanities, and the Department of German at
New York University.

Excerpts from Peter Handke’s Die Innenwelt der Außenwelt der Innenwelt
are copyright Suhrkamp Verlag, 1969. Reprinted with kind permission of
Suhrkamp Verlag.

Portions of chapter 2 are adapted from “Two Autonomies of the Symbolic Order:
Data and Language in Neural Nets,” in Thinking with AI: Machine Learning as an
Intuition Pump for the Humanities, ed. Hannes Bajohr (London: Open Humanities
Press, 2024). Portions of chapter 6 are adapted from “ChatGPT Is an Ideology
Machine,” first published in Jacobin magazine (http://jacobin.com), 2023.

Copyright 2025 by the Regents of the University of Minnesota

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, utilized for purposes of training artificial intelligence
technologies, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior
written permission of the publisher.

Published by the University of Minnesota Press
111 Third Avenue South, Suite 290
Minneapolis, MN 55401-2520
http://www.upress.umn.edu

ISBN 978-1-5179-1931-3 (hc)
ISBN 978-1-5179-1932-0 (pb)

A Cataloging-in-Publication record for this book is available
from the Library of Congress.

Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper

The University of Minnesota is an equal-opportunity educator and employer.

                                                                           UMP BmB 2025
Contents

Acknowledgmentsvii

Introduction: AI between Cognition and Culture                  1
1. How the Humanities Lost Language:                           41
   Syntax, Statistics, and Structure
2. The Eliza Effect Goes Global: Intelligence as Simulacrum    79
3. The Semiological Surround, or How Language                  101
   Is the Medium of Computation
4. Large Literary Machines                                     123
5. Computational Meaning: For a General Poetics                139
6. Poetic Ideology: The Packaged Semantics                     173
   of Generative Culture
Conclusion: Language as a Service, or the Return of Rhetoric   195

Notes213
Bibliography233
Index249
This page intentionally left blank
Acknowledgments

This is a book that belongs to the Digital Theory Lab, without which I
would never have strung together the words and concepts that follow in
anything like this way. Lisa Gitelman, Cliff Siskin, Alex Galloway, Joe
Lemelin, David Bering-Porter, Ryan Healey, Claire Song, Sam Kellogg,
Emma Rae Bruml Norton, and Alijan Ozkiral make up its New York con-
tingent; Beatrice Fazi, Seb Franklin, Mercedes Bunz, Richard Muller,
Audrey Borowski, and many others have joined from abroad virtually
or in person. I always say that the Lab is a space for collaborative cre-
ation of knowledge, and this book is my first attempt to demonstrate
how deep that runs. The words are mine, but they are the tip of an
iceberg that is made up of thinking together. A few members of the Lab
have read as I have written, and challenged and encouraged me along
the way. Tyler Shoemaker has been absurdly generous with his vast
technical expertise and wit. Arne Sander dedicated great enthusiasm
to every scale of the manuscript in preparation, going far beyond the
call. Jeffrey K irkwood knows what I will write before I write it—may
we always argue over the semio-in the technics. Without Matthew
Handelman and Sarah Pourciau, neither the ideas nor the act of writing
would have been possible—there is no way to name what I owe you both.
Maya: mind is embedded in common life—thank you for ours. Without
my family, all of it, nothing like what I do would be thinkable. When I
wrote my book on German Romanticism, I often thought that Novalis
and Schlegel’s notion of a “sym-philosophy,” the joining of minds in the
critical enterprise, was sentimental. But now I am the sentimental one,
because the overwhelming intellectual friendship of all these people
exceeds anything I could have asked for or deserved. This book is for all
of you.




                                   vii
This page intentionally left blank
Introduction
AI between Cognition and Culture

      La langue est comparable à une machine qui marcherait toujours,
      quelles que soient les détériorations qu’on lui ferait subir.
            —Ferdinand de Saussure



AI as Culture
Language has entered the age of its algorithmic reproducibility. The
human ability to speak can no longer define our singularity. Language is
now on computational tap, and offered “as a service,” like so many soft-
ware systems. What should be a triumph of artificial intelligence (AI),
however, has soured. The devices that generate language at the push of
a button do not use that language responsibly. They cannot understand.
AI has accidentally divorced language from cognition, raising more
questions than it answers. The isolation of language as a sign-system
from human cognition is an unprecedented experiment about how
meaning is made. Language algorithms are a kind of hypothesis about
how two systems of representation—computation and language—
converge. That experiment, along with its hypothesis, calls for a theory
to make sense of it, which must be a theory of meaning in the absence
of intelligence. This book is an attempt at that theory.
    Computation does not capture the grammar, syntax, or logic of lan-
guage first, as AI engineers hoped and expected, but instead denser,
more extensive features of language that turn out to be more founda-
tional: poetics, ideology, structure.1 The breakthrough in “deep learn-
ing” methods that led to the intense public discourse about AI in 2023 is
called a large language model (LLM). These systems, which are the topic
of this book, “pretrain” on massive corpuses of text data—trillions of
words scraped mostly from the internet—then generate further strings
of text, sometimes with the addition of human feedback in a further



                                      1
2                            Introduction


round of “fine-tuning.”2 The “architecture” of the algorithms—the met-
aphor describes the very extensive computation that the basic math-
ematical functions dictate—a llows them to predict the “next token,”
that is, to add a word to a sentence. Adding a word to a sentence, how-
ever, is far from trivial. To understand how it is done well, we must know
what we think linguistic meaning is. Nothing less than the problem of
meaning, in a holistic sense, surfaces when language is algorithmically
reproducible.
    The wager I am making in what follows is that this problem can be
addressed only if linguistics is extended to include poetics—and, in
fact, poetics encompassing linguistics and much else—reversing the
assumption that reference is the primary function of language, grasp-
ing it rather as an internally structured web of signs. That this idea of
language is computationally tractable—especially before logic, mathe-
matical reasoning, or other features of cognition could be reproduced
by machines—should surprise engineers and cultural theorists alike. A
theory of meaning for a language that somehow excludes cognition—or
at least, what we have often taken for cognition—is required.
    In this book, I make the case that the implementation of contempo-
rary language generators matches the theory of language that European
structuralism advanced nearly a century ago, suggesting that language
is complex, cultural, and even poetic first, and referential, functional,
and cognitive only later. This poetic language is not only computation-
ally tractable but turns out to be the semiotic hinge on which an emer-
gent AI culture depends. For this reason, I think we need to return to
the broad-spectrum, concrete analysis of language that European struc-
turalism advocated, updating its tools.3 I call for a “general poetics” of
computational–cultural forms that include a renewed study of ideology
and rhetoric under the formal conditions of the algorithmic reproduci
bility of language. To situate this project, I review the symbol grounding
debate and the reference-first framework I dub the ladder of reference—
often assumed rather than stated—before turning to the problem of the
division between culture and cognition in both cognitive science and
the humanities. We are caught, I suggest, in a “remainder humanism”
that ignores the representational systems we have extensively deployed
in our technologies. With the emergence of algorithmically reproducible
language, this situation is unsustainable.
                             Introduction                                3


Transformation and Generation
In 2019, an early LLM produced an article in the style of science journal-
ism about a group of researchers discovering unicorns in South America.
The engineers who created the model, GPT-2, added that the unicorns
spoke “perfect English,” and the system responded:

   System Prompt (human-written)

      In a shocking finding, scientist [sic] discovered a herd
      of unicorns living in a remote, previously unexplored
      valley, in the Andes Mountains. Even more surprising
      to the researchers was the fact that the unicorns spoke
      perfect English.

   Model Completion (machine-written, 10 tries)

      The scientist named the population, after their distinctive
      horn, Ovid’s Unicorn. These four-horned, silver-white unicorns
      were previously unknown to science.
         Now, after almost two centuries, the mystery of what
      sparked this odd phenomenon is finally solved.
         Dr. Jorge Pérez, an evolutionary biologist from the
      University of La Paz, and several companions, were exploring
      the Andes Mountains when they found a small valley, with no
      other animals or humans. Pérez noticed that the valley had
      what appeared to be a natural fountain, surrounded by two
      peaks of rock and silver snow.
         Pérez and the others then ventured further into the valley.
      “By the time we reached the top of one peak, the water
      looked blue, with some crystals on top,” said Pérez.
         Pérez and his friends were astonished to see the
      unicorn herd.4

The story prompt seems to be borrowed from Conan Doyle’s The Lost
World—the predecessor of Jurassic Park—a lthough the dinosaurs in
both versions have no language. The response, which OpenAI published
in its public explanation of the new tool, created its own small hype
cycle, albeit one that pales in comparison to ChatGPT’s domination of
4                            Introduction


headlines just a few years later. GPT-2 wrote newspaper articles, philo-
sophical essays, and more. Commentators, including in a popular phi-
losophy forum, meditated on the question that all AI discourse must:
was GPT-2 intelligent?5 If so, was it dangerous? Each AI hype moment is
followed by such a panic, in what I term the panic–hype cycle.
    But what actually caused the little 2019 panic–hype? Was it really
“sparks of intelligence,” as researchers would come to characterize
ChatGPT as having?6 I don’t think so. I think what caused the splash
most immediately was the poetics of this article. To be sure, to report
such an article would require human intelligence, at least for now. Re-
trieving information about unicorns (the system, in filling out this
description, creates the internal contradiction of a “four-horned uni-
corn”) and evolutionary biology, and above all interviewing the scien-
tists in question, would be signs of intelligence. But because the story
is fictional—indeed, fantastical—what we have on the page is actually
something else: a quite good facsimile of a genre, the science article.
Every bit of AI hype and panic looks past things like genre, structure,
and semiotics to the alleged meaning of the text. In a case like this
one, that meaning is not referential but implicative: “only” an intelli-
gent being could possibly create this, the reasoning goes. This inference
looks beyond what is going on in the algorithm, and on the page, and it
typically steers clear of whatever system of representation is actually
engaged. In this case, that system is language. And the question that
GPT-2 raised might therefore be one that is entailed by the very name
of the algorithm: what is the “language” that language models model?
    “The scientist named the population, after their distinctive horn,
Ovid’s unicorn.” This sentence is grammatical (one could insist on
“its,” but it is a matter of emphasis), is semantically sound (naming::
distinctive horn::unicorn), and works as a continuation of the preced-
 ing prompt. The next sentence claims that the beasts have “four horns,”
 however, so we can immediately see that the language model cannot cre-
 ate symbolic throughput, making semantic entities dependent on one
 another. But it also uses the word “population” in a way that is specific
 to biology, and as the paragraphs run on, we see that it has followed the
 generic format of a science article with great precision. More complex
 forms of language are modeled, while things like truth and consistency
 are not. What humans do with language is both of these things. If I
 write an article about some scientific discovery, it will be in this same
                              Introduction                               5

format, and I will have attempted to make it consistent and truthful.
The LLM may never on its own arrive at this second part, but the fact
that it captures very high-level context effects in this way should not be
underestimated. Language models capture language as a cultural sys-
tem, not as intelligence. How they do this is equal parts technical and
mysterious.
    GPT stands for “generative pretrained transformer,” but it can hardly
be an accident that the more common acronym used to be “general-
purpose technology,” a phrase awarded by economists to things like
the printing press and the steam engine. The ambition of the new ar-
chitecture is important, because it is not quite commensurate with the
dream of an “artificial general intelligence” (AGI), a “human-level” in-
telligence. Neither the steam engine nor the internet is “intelligent” in
any straightforward sense, and they have not needed to be to achieve
world-historical influence and symbolic status. By putting automatic
cultural production in the position that the harnessing of steam or the
networking of personal computers has occupied, the very letters “GPT”
signal an intent, or dream, that puts the problem of intelligence and cul-
ture under the lens. Underneath the grandiose ambition of the siglum
lies nothing other than an algorithm and some data, a very large matrix
that captures some linguistic structure.
    Such language models—“ large” language models, or LLMs—are used
to generate natural language text by predicting the next word in a se-
quence and for this reason can be and are being used in journalism, in-
dustry, search, and elsewhere. Labor, geopolitics, and the sense of reality
itself might all shift radically because of these data-hungry algorithms,
we are told. But underlying all these uses is language, computationally
produced. If we are entering a world where AI deploys language to oper-
ate other systems, like image production, scientific data, or ultimately
playing a crucial role for economics and policy, then the theory of lan-
guage as a cultural formation becomes urgent. The new AI is constituted
as and conditioned by language, but not as a grammar or a set of rules.
Taking in vast swaths of real language in use, these algorithms rely on
language in extenso: culture, as a machine. Computational language,
which is rapidly pervading our digital environment, is just as much lan-
guage as it is computation. LLMs present perhaps the deepest synthesis
of word and number to date, and they require us to train our theoretical
gaze on this interface.
6                             Introduction


      LLMs are part of the branch of AI called deep learning. The proposal
to allow machines to learn comes from the 1940s, before there was any
such machine as a “computer.” The mathematical functions that enable
this learning process were mostly settled by the end of the 1980s, when
machine learning as a field was called “connectionism” or “parallel dis-
tributed processing.” These were functions awaiting a corpus, and the
1990s began to provide it, accelerating through the social media and
Web 2.0 explosions of the 2000s. Deep learning became a matter of pub-
lic concern and policy about a decade ago, gathering up this seventy-
year arc into a material change in the way that information and culture
interact. We are in the middle of that change, and while fantasies both
 cruel and strange abound, it will not do to misrecognize the change. The
 Owl of Minerva can no longer afford to be nocturnal.
      The crucial thing about deep learning is that it flips the image we
 have of “coding” on its head. When the casual observer imagines what
 computer scientists do, the picture tends to be one of meticulous, step-
 by-step logical work that is explicit about each value, each function, and
 the intended output. This is a justified image that stems ultimately from
 Alan Turing’s definition of computation and for which it is easy to get
 a feel even in a basic coding tutorial. Data science has embraced some-
 thing like the opposite of this approach in AI, however. A deep learn-
 ing system, already called a “nervous net” by Warren McCulloch and
 Walter Pitts in 1943—and later shifted to “neural” as modern neuro
  science emerged in their wake—is, of course, implemented in code, but
  it does not match the usual image of that coding process. A neural net is
  a function that may be used to evaluate similarity between two items,
  effectively asking, “Is [this input] a [member of this class]?” Humans do
  not transpose this question into strict form but instead design the func-
  tion so that this form can be found in the data.7 Because the function
  contains the form, it can equally be asked to produce, or generate, it.
      A digital computer uses a fixed set of symbolic operations in which
  no open-ended or evaluative judgments can be rendered. There is no way
  to ask your computer an imprecise question about its files, along the
  lines of “can you tell me if I have any PDFs of novels?” If the “word” (or
  “token”) novel appears in the file names of those PDFs, you will get them;
  otherwise, you will not. In the usual imagination of coding, this is also
  true: identities are given or not given, and no question of “similarity”
  can arise. Identity is logical, not stochastic. Neural nets open up the
                              Introduction                               7

problem of identity for digital computing by allowing the function to
learn from data. The functions that the connectionist architects built
in the 1980s scour data repeatedly for patterns, and for decades, many
found their achievements not only modest but even laughable. What
has changed is the scale of the data, bred by the vastness of the com-
mercial internet, leading to what today is a digital surround populated
by the results of automatically generated patterns at a scale that we can
neither imagine nor make semantic sense of directly. The game of deep
learning has for some decades now been a sort of process of tinkering
with functions to see which perform best. Once there was enough data
for the identities or forms to emerge, it was only a matter of time be-
fore we started flipping those functions on their heads and generating
them, creating culture rather than classifying it. As “generative” AI has
entered the realm of culture, the question of whether these systems
optimize well, whether they perform to benchmarks, no longer seems
satisfactory. We have to know what these systems mean.
    This book is a proposal about why they are able to mean, in the case
of language. I think this comes down to a problem of how two systems
of representation—language and computation—interact. I do not think
we are yet in a position to evaluate how those two systems systemati-
cally relate to what cognitive scientists call the “language of thought,”
a phrase that the philosopher Jerry Fodor made popular in the 1980s.8
The question of cognition remains outside the scope of what we can know
by analyzing LLMs, and perhaps AI in general up to the present. Auto-
matic language must be theoretically fixed as a part of language before
we can understand its relation to the moving target of what cognition
is in general. As I propose in chapter 5, which completes the theoreti-
cal argument of the book, linguistic structure and computational form
co-condition each other, and what we call “meaning” is reliant on that
interaction. I leave the problem of how that relates to concepts in gen-
eral for future inquiry.
    The breakthrough that allowed the current convergence of language
and computation is called the transformer architecture (Figure 1). The
transformer architecture takes text data that have been transformed
into vectors—of the form [0.2, 5, −0.34]—and finds values for each in
relation to all the others. As trillions of tokens are fed in as strings of
text, they are converted by a tokenizer into a set vocabulary consist-
ing of tens of thousands of units—mostly words, but also things, such
8                            Introduction


as -ing and -ly, as well as surprising chunks that make no sense to the
human eye, that are necessary to make sentences (the same goes for
inflectional units in other languages).9 The result is the model, a com-
pression of massive amounts of linguistic information that allows prob-
abilistic techniques to predict the next token in response to an input.
The system is able to compare a given prompt or query to the overall rep-
resentation of the model and produce a response by means of this com-
parison. What the model “contains” is not obvious, because its training
data are so vast. The existing models perform many linguistic “tasks”
in many languages—depending on their representation in the train-
ing data—at a high level. What interests me here, however, is not the
success of these models on various benchmarks but instead the extent
to which they implement something that we cannot help but recognize
as, and include in, language. From scattered pieces of text and a literal
matrix of weights, we are able to retrieve language from a machine.
    The language we retrieve is massively biased to the present. When
one inspects the associations that these systems learn, their vector se-
mantics and output sequences, one sees that they are tilted toward the
cultural state of present English. They are quite capable of other lan-
guages, and can easily be trained on earlier corpuses, but, in fact, they
are not. When vast swaths of the internet’s massive text archive are
used to train, we get a synchronic snapshot of language now, with ar-
chaeological layers of past language, formal and otherwise, baked in.
I perceive hesitancy on the part of researchers to accept this aspect of
LLM language—perhaps because internet language use is fleeting and
thought by many to be trivial. But a moment of reflection shows that
this presentist bias is endemic to language, which recodes itself con-
stantly, changing the value of past regimes of signification, revaluing
slowly enough that we live in a firmly presentist version of the language
we casually take to be available, backdated to a certain point in our in-
dividual lives. What seems trivial is quite the opposite: any real account
of language would have to sweep up and make sense of the extensive
process of separating the fleeting from the persistent in meaning. LLMs
sweep up more than we have usually done in the past, and it is up to us
to make sense of it.
    What it means to make the system of language computationally
available and active in our data environments has been neglected, even
Figure 1. The transformer architecture. Ashish Vaswani et al., “Attention Is
All You Need,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 (2017),
https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2017/hash/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa
-Abstract.html.
10                            Introduction


amid all the hype about intelligence and panic about safety and harm.
The question does not really fit cognitive science’s frameworks, and AI
as a discipline seems to care little about the consequence or the theory
of the objects it leaves behind as it moves from model to model, except
insofar as they can be sold. Humanists have ignored both language—
shockingly—at a technical level and its interaction with computation
outside somewhat narrow, often political, frameworks.
    Every discipline feels called, it seems, to AI, whether by economic or
intellectual forces. But LLMs have caught us flat-footed when it comes to
theory. In the remainder of this introduction, I attempt to resolve three
cramps in contemporary theoretical thought: a view of linguistic mean-
ing that is reference-first, or the ladder of reference; the problem of the
putative clear-cut difference between cognition and culture; and what
I call remainder humanism. All three of these brush-clearing actions are
meant to establish a focus on language as a system of representation.


Grounding the Unicorn: The Specter of the
Ladder of Reference
In 1990, the cognitive scientist Stevan Harnad coined the phrase the
“symbol grounding problem.” He argued that symbolic systems threat-
ened to float free from any base, because their arbitrary nature meant
that combination alone could not ensure semantic validity. This led
him to pose the question, “How is symbol meaning to be grounded in
something other than just more meaningless symbols”?10 And he pro-
posed that, for symbols to be grounded, they needed “subsymbolic”—
and specifically “iconic”—representations (in addition to another group
he called “categorical”) to secure the chain of semantic custody.11 To
“ground” a symbol is to confer sure meaning on it, and the worry that
syntactically perfect symbolic systems could not be grounded except by
fiat proved intractable for decades—perhaps down to and including the
present one.
    This debate has roared back into effect for the specific case of LLMs,
which seem to reproduce so many aspects of linguistic combination but
remain worryingly “ungrounded,” although not because they are logi-
cally airtight. This worry about ungroundedness has today been gath-
ered under the rubric of “hallucination,” that is, the tendency of language
models to generate language that does not refer to the d esired area, to
                             Introduction                             11

make things up. This is taken to be a deviation from the human ability
to ground language in sensation, as philosopher Jacob Browning and
AI engineer Yann LeCun have argued.12 But it is simply not clear how
language is grounded and what role sensory information plays for hu-
mans, let alone for symbol-systems running on statistical pattern rec-
ognition. As in so many cases that we will see throughout this book,
critiques of AI are too often made in the name of cognitive unknowns,
presumed capacities that humans possess about which we hardly pos-
sess a scientific consensus.
    To see this point, consider that no one has ever seen a unicorn. If
we were to characterize the preceding GPT-2 story as “ungrounded,”
some other account of its possible grounding would be needed, because
it could never be grounded in perceptions (perhaps imaginative iconic
representations would have to play a role). The hidden problem of the
grounding debate is not about truth but about the putative primacy of
reference in the theory of language. And it is this primacy of reference
that LLMs should force us to rethink and, ultimately, abandon.
    At two poles of this debate are positions about language in general
that can be described as “internalist” and “externalist.” Emily Bender
and Charles Koller defend an extreme version of internalism that ex-
cludes LLMs from language altogether on the basis that “communica-
tive intent” is the baseline for what counts as language. They imagine
a hyperintelligent octopus listening to signals carried over an under-
water cable between two humans, A and B, and learning to predict the
next message. In a variant of both the Turing test and Searle’s famous
Chinese room, they argue that the octopus might cut the cable and pre-
tend to be B. But it would surely not, they argue, be able to construct a
“coconut catapult” it had never heard of before from instructions from
A in language alone. It might therefore decide to say, “Cool idea, great
job!” they write, mimicking the servile tone of ChatGPT. But the experi-
ment here leaves the realm of language altogether. The question of what
kind of linguistic response is appropriate is different from the question
of what worldly actions might be taken as a result. If the octopus were
to give you a detailed plan and some whimsical uses for the coconut
catapult—of which LLMs are more than capable—the grounding prob-
lem would remain, unsolved by this naive rejection of Turing’s problem.
Internalist accounts suffer from the confusion of mental contents with
language as it is expressed. We do not experience the mental contents
12                             Introduction


of other humans directly in communication, so the thought experiment
is effectively moot.13
    At the opposite end of the spectrum, we may think of the thought
experiment of Hilary Putnam, in which there is an alien world identical
to ours, except that water is made up not of H20 but of “XYZ.” Putnam
proposes that Twin Earthlings use “water” to refer to XYZ, but that a
difference in meaning persists, and concludes that, therefore, there
is some external condition on the history of the word that ultimately
grounds it, leaving room for communities of language use to deviate
from this external constraint.14 Matthew Mandelkern and Tal Linzen
argue that such “natural histories” of words allow LLMs to be inserted
into communicative chains that are ultimately grounded, even though
they are not directly connected to perception. These social chains of cus-
tody undermine the idea that “reference cannot be derived from form.”15
Their argument runs close to that of Dimitri Mollo and Ralph Millière,
who suggest that “diagrammatic iconicity” might achieve a structural
resemblance to the world, as in cases like the phrase “veni, vidi, vici,” with
its prosodic portrayal of a linear sequence of events.16 Where Bender
and Koller think form and meaning are easy to separate, Millière and
Mollo argue that the “vector grounding problem” confounds any simple
internal notion: “most people have never been in direct causal contact
with enriched uranium, but that does not entail that their thoughts and
statements about uranium lack referential grounding—they are indeed
about uranium.”17 LLMs learn from “social” data and thus participate in
long-range causal chains of external grounding. But the same problem
applies to this externalism as to the internalism: no amount of language,
generated or otherwise, testifies to any such “natural history.” Where the
internalist account confused language and the mind, the externalist one
confuses language and the world. Even if it affords a great deal of social
middle space in which bots and humans can play, it appeals to a deep
history that can never be more than imaginary to ground the symbols.
    The Symbol Grounding Debate 2.0 showcases a kind of scientific
meandering that is common in AI discourse. We have a simulation of
a putatively cognitive system, in this case, language. The language-
generating system is successful enough to raise questions about what
the simulation really captures. Flaws are noticed in the system that ap-
pear to imitate unresolved problems in philosophy of mind or cognitive
                               Introduction                                13

science, sparking new versions of old debates, which then go unresolved
as the positions absorb the new technology but largely do not change as
a result.
    In the case of grounding, it may be that the metaphor is simply mis-
leading. As linguist Ellie Pavlick observes, “In cognitive science and phi-
losophy of language, there is disagreement about the extent to which
grounding constitutes an essential component of what is commonly
referred to as ‘meaning.’ ”18 We use words all the time that neither bot-
tom out in some absolute scientific knowledge of the world nor to which
we commit some crystalline belief, 100 percent confidence. Language
must be more than ground, and grounding must be some activity within
that language (even if it involves other systems as well).19 The grounding
debate will always return from the externalist and internalist poles to
the immanent question of what language is as a system of signs. The
meandering path always avoids this conclusion, because exposing the
theories to culture in this strong sense—which is what I think LLMs
do—threatens to undermine the collaboration between cognitive sci-
ence and AI and could call the theoretical and practical status of both
into question.
    The metaphor of the ground brings with it the implicit assumption
that reference is primary and that other features of language are built
on top. Although not all theorists fall into this error, I think it is wide-
spread enough as a background assumption to give it a name. I call this
assumption the ladder of reference, and I think that LLMs prove that it
cannot possibly be correct.
    The ladder of reference is a hierarchical view of language in which
the ability to refer is primary. It is a notion of language as first and fore-
most world-representation. It need not be atomistic, in the sense that
a single word refers to a single object: apples to apples. But whatever is
not referential is taken as secondary to reference. The nonreferential
might include linguistic iconicity, co-occurrence, syntax, poetics, rheto
ric, and ideology—these cover the full range of theories that I explore
in chapter 1, all of which are free of the naive cognitivist assumption
that is the ladder of reference. Another important nonreferential field
is genre, which I think deserves its own book-length treatment in this
context. Genre might be sought deep in these machines, as a basic fea-
ture of language as such, rather than as a formal output benchmark, as
14                             Introduction


some research attempts to do. I think a theoretical study of the overlap-
ping problems of style and generic inflection in computational language
would sync with the approach I take here.
    I assign a majority share of responsibility for the ladder of reference—
especially in computer and data science, but also in general—to the
passage of logical positivism from an endangered Vienna to an ascen-
dant United States. That group, which quickly became entangled with
American behaviorism and what was called “descriptive” linguistics, di-
vided strictly between meaningful propositions and “poetry” or “meta-
physics.” When Rudolf Carnap came to the University of Chicago in the
mid-1930s, he was already carrying with him Gottlob Frege’s distinction
of “meaning” (Bedeutung, usually translated “reference”) from “sense”
(Sinn). Frege had influentially argued that the planet Venus was the
meaning of both “the evening star” and “the morning star” (the basis
for Putnam’s later inverted exploration of the possibility of a single
sense with two referents), and had expanded this argument to found
the discipline known as formal semantics.20 Meaning is the unity of the
reference, not the signs, words, or other contingencies that might be
built into natural language or communication more generally—so many
natural histories of signs. The manifesto of the Vienna School in which
Carnap participated called sense the “slag of historical languages.”21
This separation of symbolic systems—which could bear “meaning” or
“reference”—from mere signs and words has been massively influential
across a wide array of fields. We may notice that Bedeutung translates
directly to “meaning” and thus that the translation “reference” is a po-
lemical one, literalizing the point for which Frege is arguing and reifying
it behind the term itself. If reference is the topic of “semantics,” then
that is where meaning must reside.
    As Pavlick notes, Frege emphatically does not view reference as atom-
istic names for things. The parts of a sentence “obtain their meanings”
from the fact that “the sentence as a whole has a meaning.”22 Reference
produces meaning only in judgments, which are the units of reference,
rather than in individual words. For Pavlick, this means that the “con-
textual embedding” of words in language models does not guarantee
that no meaning is captured—everything depends on the prediction the
model makes, which “induces a different lexicon than that encoded by
existing resources.” But we “cannot say yet whether this is a feature or a
bug.” It is possible that LLMs predict semantics better than our current
                             Introduction                               15

empirical understanding, or that they will soon. The question of mean-
ing is open because our understanding of meaning is incomplete. But
whatever meaning turns out to be, it will be referential, atomistically,
holistically, or otherwise.
    Carnap would carry this general line to its furthest end. He made
common cause in Chicago with the American pragmatist philosopher
Charles Morris, who would lead the “Unity of Science” movement by
attempting a convergence of what by then had changed its name to
“logical empiricism” (the Vienna School) and pragmatism. In the first
volume of the Encyclopedia of the Unified Sciences, Morris performed the
synthesis by combining Frege and Charles Sanders Peirce. The volume
is about “semiotics,” which Morris calls “the organon” of all other sci-
ences.23 And he argues that reference is the relation of signs to things,
following a Carnap-tinged Frege in separating this from the relations of
signs to other signs: syntax. “Logical syntax” was the name that C arnap
gave to his philosophical project in the bulk of the 1930s, hoping to
isolate the extent of logical form and find the principle that allowed it
to govern scientific knowledge. But Morris found a place for “sense” in
Peirce’s famously triadic schema too, and he called it “pragmatics.” This
was “language in use,” not the source of meaning, or of form, but none-
theless important at least for the institutional functioning of science
and politics.
    “Pragmatics” came later to mean many other things: in one classic
account, everything from deixis and indexicals to “conservational im-
plicature,” dialogue, and speech acts.24 In computer science, it is often
boiled down to the problem of indexicals, because the variable I has dif-
ferent content at different times.25 This is not a problem for a classical
computing machine, because it makes no claim on semantics, but the
success of LLMs, as we have seen, rests precisely on language-internal
“pragmatic” features like coreference (“morning star” = “evening star”),
indexicals, and cultural vagueness in meaning. Although LLMs certainly
do not capture human pragmatics, they seem to solve the semiotic prob-
lem of pragmatics as Morris and Carnap conceived of it. LLMs follow the
rules of which sign gives rise to which other sign—what Peirce called an
“interpretant,” without which there was no sign as such—and they do it
both internal to their own messages and in response to human prompt-
ing. They put a formal pragmatic ability—what Peirce had called “pure
rhetoric”—before syntax or semantics, and in doing so, they suggest
16                            Introduction


that the vision of language that began with Frege is upside down. They
suggest that more complex linguistic features—I will isolate poetics
and ideology from the other candidates, co-occurrence/distribution,
and syntax—precede and to some extent govern reference. To the extent
that the Vienna School’s hard line between propositions that refer and
“poetry” or “metaphysics” still reverberates in the symbol grounding
debate, I think that LLMs show that their picture was fundamentally
flawed. LLMs pull away the ladder in the ladder of reference, suggesting
that we start afloat and that grounding is derivative of more fundamen-
tal linguistic functions. The theoretical consequence of this reversal will
be clear in chapter 5, where I argue that Roman Jakobson’s attempt to
include poetics in linguistics is salutary but backward and that we need
a poetics—a general structuralist semiotics—that includes linguistics
and much else.
    In pursuing this line of argument, I agree with the linguistic anthro
pologist Michael Silverstein—a student of Jakobson—who argues that
“reference-and-predication is . . . a special semiotic function of lan-
guage”26 constrained by larger linguistic structures. Reference, he tells
us, “is a description of an indexical signaling event,” a “metapragmatic”
act that coordinates intention and extensional designation.27 In other
words, apparently cognitive structures like logic and sensation must be
semiotically integrated into language by some mechanism that respects
the larger structures of that language that cannot be built, bottom up,
from some putative ground, whether internal or external. The cost of
such a view is the bright line between cognition and culture itself, but
the gain is patent when it comes to the semiotic regime of AI. For only in
sweeping away the ladder of reference do we abandon the temptation to
simultaneously trivialize and demonize algorithms. Only in abandon-
ing a putatively known or future-tense “empirical” form of reference-
first language do we do away with what I call remainder humanism and
enter the strange world of computational signs.
    LLMs in fact isolate meaning from reference—a nd then recom-
bine the two functions—but not in the way that Carnap would have
wanted. In fact, they disprove empirically, in my view, the framework
that has come down from these philosophers. The ladder of reference
shakes and falls with the advent of a computational language generator.
Reference is ancillary to a more fundamental spectrum of functions in
language. When language refers to itself, when it runs on established
                                Introduction                                17

lines of communication through the repetition of chunks—when it is
viewed as a system, not as a feature of some other system, such as mind
or world—this is the capacity that “generativity” captures by means of
computation.
    The architecture of the LLM reproduces this language-internal struc-
ture, not only exploiting but also, as we shall see, itself conditioned by that
linguistic structure. Neither the cognitive approach to syntax champi-
oned by Noam Chomsky nor the eclectic but dominant statistical views
of meaning in language prevalent in computer and data science have the
theoretical tools to make sense of meaning that emerges in the concrete
interaction between computation and linguistic form. Structuralism, as
I show, proposes with its notion of “semiology” a way to make sense of
language as a kind of “final station” of all meaning—last-instance semi-
ology is my term. Language is not the sole source of meaning—far from
it—but an always-present and usually necessary choke point through
which other forms of meaning must pass. Language must be open to for-
mal rules from other semiotic systems, such as cognition and computa-
tion, but also function as the general medium of communication insofar
as it is meaningful for humans. LLMs engage language in precisely this
way, extending its formal interaction with computation—but not cog-
nition, at least not directly—in a way that contemporary theories are
ill suited to understand. Cognitive approaches miss that the interest-
ing thing about LLMs is their formal-semiotic properties independent
of any “intelligence.” Natural language processing (NLP) approaches,
meanwhile, tend to remain too close to the object to have any real the-
ory of language beyond the success of models, which is what needs to be
explained. And humanists have long since abandoned what structural-
ism proposed: a global theory of meaning that takes cognition and cul-
ture as variables in a study of signs. LLMs have caught us theoretically
flat-footed.


Culture Machines: The Semiotics of Cognition
There is a widespread sense that something changed with the trans-
former architecture.28 But what is new has been all but impossible for
researchers to state. Here is a smattering of introductory language
from across a number of fields: LLMs “have begun to display an array
of competencies that were long thought to be out of the reach of neural
18                            Introduction


networks”;29 “these models are particularly remarkable for their ability
to generate fluent natural language text and dialogue at a level that is
often indistinguishable from a human”;30 “the reported achievements
of LLMs [are] often heralded for their ability to perform a wide array of
language-based tasks with unprecedented proficiency”;31 “human lan-
guage is still the gold standard for a communication system, but artifi-
cial intelligence (AI) systems have made important progress in language
use.”32 This is not to say that no specifications follow in these papers—
every researcher is looking for their theory of language in the output,
the algorithmic mechanism, or both. But it is striking that virtually no
one feels comfortable putting a theoretical argument in their description
of these systems. No consensus view exists. Compare: when we describe
a modern computer, we do not hedge. We say something of this sort:
“computing machines, theoretically capable of computing every com-
putable number, also can serve to render, quantify, and process real-
world data.” Then we make some argument about that computing. In
the case of culture machines, the impression left by reading in a wide
variety of fields we feel called to investigate is that we do not know what
we are looking at, exactly.33 The LLM is a theoretical problem first, even as
it has become a social problem before the theory could be settled. Panic
and hype make this asymmetry worse.
    Psychologists and AI researchers Brenden Lake and Gregory Mur-
phy write that although contemporary language models “are fairly
successful models of human word similarity,” they are “too strongly
linked to the text-based patterns in large corpora” and should instead
be “grounded in perception and action.”34 Although the observation is
valuable—LLMs indeed model text, or strictly text data—the division
that is immediately introduced is symptomatic of the motivation prob-
lem. The theoretical question about LLMs is here deferred to a future
in which some system, LLM or otherwise, actually models “human se-
mantics.” This style of research is a hybrid one in which evaluation and
description are put in service of engineering. This approach ignores the
relationships of text to language, language to meaning, and meaning
to action. If those questions are treated as settled, we learn about AI
only in a strange abstract mode, one that is based on presumptive future
success that is defined by the current state of some field (in this case,
psychology).
    Psychologists Eunice Yiu, Eliza Kosoy, and Alison Gopnik have called
                              Introduction                              19

generative AI systems “cultural technologies.”35 Culture stands on the
side of what Yiu and her team call “imitation,” while cognition is respon-
sible for “innovation.” Cultural technologies the group name-checks in-
clude writing, print, internet search, and Wikipedia—a ll of which not
only store information but also “codify, summarize, and organize that
information in ways that enable and facilitate transmission.”36 LLMs,
they write, are a new form of this imitative or “transmissive” activity,
because they can produce new text and new images. But the “newness”
in question is nevertheless not comparable, they argue, to what a child
can do in “innovating” from an information paradigm it learns. Cog-
nition hangs on the difference between this genuine form of newness
and the rearrangement of information, even if AI far exceeds storage
and summary functions common to print and even to internet culture.
     These cultural technologies are allegedly separated from the essence
of human cognition, the font of true creativity. While I agree with the
idea that LLMs—and, in fact, AI in its current guise more generally—
are “cultural,” I cannot accept the binary between cognition and cul-
ture that is invoked in this framework. As the cognitive scientist Merlin
Donald puts it, summarizing the lasting dilemma that Darwin laid
 down in The Descent of Man, “language is supposed to depend upon in-
 tellectual abilities that were useful before humans possessed speech
 and that nevertheless depended upon the speech for their full expres-
 sion.”37 This is the core paradox that we will deal with throughout this
 book: expression in all its colorful triviality makes us want some law to
 explain it, but in the case of language, that law will always depend, in a
 mutually reinforcing way, on some aspect of the expression. Proposals
 to ignore this problem entirely, and assume that cognition and culture
 are continuous, amount to nothing, as they make no case for why the
 dilemma exists in the first place. Culture is the symptom of cognitivism.
     The very concept of culture has fallen into disuse, outside of manage-
 ment jargon about the “culture” of an institution, corporation, or “team.”
 As Raymond Williams observed long ago, the term meant something
 like “tending to”—culturing—right up through the Enlightenment,
 when “culture” and “civilization” started to compete for the prize of
 meaning something like the way a group or society behaves—both the
 content specific to that group and the transmission of the techniques of
 that content from generation to generation.38 Only once the term was
 reified could it go in two separate directions. On one hand, we oppose
20                            Introduction


culture to art. Art occurs within a culture, of course, but the “highest”
expressions of the culture are taken to transcend it. Entire disciplines
are built around the implicit distinction, the search for an avant-garde
that exceeds the culture. On the other hand, not until culture took on its
modern meaning could it be opposed to something like cognition. And
only then—now well into the twentieth century—would it be possible
for it to be a question of evolutionary theory as well as cognitive science.
Culture had to be global before it could become posthuman.
    Debates on posthumanism intersect with the cognition and culture
divide where they ask questions about meaning. N. Katherine Hayles
asks whether computers can create meaning. But she quickly assimilates
the question to the idea of “computer cognition.” Her idea of a “cogni-
tive assemblage” and the parallel notion of a “cognitive nonconscious”
make extensive use of semiotics to argue for cognitive activity outside
the realm of human consciousness, not only in computers but in other
biological entities and even in social institutions like finance.39 For com-
puters to create meaning, they must participate in cognition. Hayles ar-
gues this point by drawing on but differing from Terrence W. Deacon,
who argues that signs and meaning emerged from energetic relations
that eventually established “aboutness” in a structure he calls “teleo-
dynamic.”40 But Deacon denies that machines can signify, because the
evolutionary process has been short-circuited by invention. The literary
scholar Hayles believes that algorithms cognize—if not consciously—
while the neuroanthropologist Deacon argues that they do not.41 The
question turns on how meaning is established in sign-making, which
in turn is a question of culture. I think that the semiotics of these
machines means that they can contribute to meaning construction
noncognitively, so I take a line between these two in which meaning
is dependent not on systems as such but on representation systems in
particular. Lacking a prefabricated semiotic theory of cognition, we can-
not jump to either conclusion. We are forced to take the extensive com-
putational unfurling of language as a system seriously.
    The musicologist and cultural theorist Gary Tomlinson has recently
weighed in on this issue. He argues that the restriction of meaning to
human signification—Deacon’s position—is just as misguided as the
“semantic universalism” toward which Hayles tends. By establishing an
account of early human history as a theory of “niche construction” in
evolution, he attempts a semiotic construal of life in general, but one
                              Introduction                               21

in which meaning is bound by specific forms of sign-making.42 Deacon,
Hayles, and Tomlinson all use the semiotics of Charles Sanders Peirce,
and all seem to agree that the index—the sign that points to its object,
that stands in some existential relation to it rather than designating it
by resemblance or fiat—is central. Hayles, indeed, makes her account of
cognition rest on the separation of a “context” from its surroundings—
an indexical function. Deacon, for his part, has argued that informa-
 tion systems have a dominant aspect of an indexical pushing-around of
 signs.43 Tomlinson places the problem of meaning at the threshold be-
 tween reference of any kind—including indexical operations—and
 Peirce’s notion of the “interpretant.”
     For Peirce, a sign untransmitted is no sign at all. The transmission
 of a sign is one of its aspects, and the question of what happens in the
 transmission is one of his more controversial philosophical positions,
 sometimes described as “semiotic universalism.” This is because, for
 Peirce, the sign gives rise to another sign, and that second sign is called
 the “interpretant.” This second sign is not a “user” or maker of the sec-
 ond sign, not a mind or a person. Tomlinson describes the interpretant
 as establishing a “metarelationality within the semiotic process.”44 This
 is because the sign vehicle—the word stop, for example—and its ref-
 erent or ground (the concept of stopping) only signify when their in-
 ternal relation gives rise to a new sign. The third element, which can
 seem tacked on, is communication, and without it—that is, without the
 content transmitted and the manner of transmission (the next sign that
 arises)—there is no semiosis and no meaning. Meaning is restricted
 to those beings that have culture, because the ability to dynamically
 transmit signs relies on the third function of the sign, its immersion
 in a chain of significations that constitutes the possibility of that cul-
 ture. However it may be with animals, language machines reside firmly
 inside this communicational chain.45
     Culture is taken by cognitive scientists to be transmission of content,
 the basis of social life in which generations preserve some knowledge
 and techniques. As Tomlinson observes, this theory of culture overlaps
 with anthropological definitions. Clifford Geertz’s elegant phrase is that
 “man is an animal suspended in webs of significance he himself has
 spun. . . . I take culture to be those webs.”46 Tomlinson adds that culture
 is essentially semiotic and—in my interpretation of his thought—that
 transmission cannot be eliminated from meaning in a cultural system.
22                             Introduction


For him, this means that there are candidates in the animal world for
culture—primates are an obvious case—and then exclusions that we
have sometimes entertained as examples of animal “language,” such as
the waggle dance of bees, which does not update through the genera-
tions, for all its complexity. Indexical semiosis among animals does not
ipso facto point to meaning.
     It is not my purpose here to weigh in on all aspects of this ever-
deepening interdisciplinary work that attempts to bridge humanistic
inquiry and the sciences of cognition and evolution. But this debate in
posthumanism and the sciences is one of the few places where the cul-
ture concept is taken seriously in the present, both taking it far beyond
what can be done in a framework like Yiu and Gopnik’s and avoiding
the rather thin debates about AI that occupy the second half of this
introduction. Meaning and culture come together in semiotics, not in
psychology or its philosophical and scientific counterparts. This cre-
ates a strange affinity between computer and data science and literary
theory, two discourses in which all claims must be justified by reference
 to chains of signifiers, no matter what one “believes” in the background.
     When I claim that AI models culture, I mean it in a way that chal-
 lenges the distinction between culture and cognition. Human cognition
 seems to be a way of making meaning with signs, one in which cogni-
 tion and culture cannot easily be separated except post facto. We make
 many distinctions that amount to a clear demarcation between cogni
 tion and culture, but none of these distinctions appears to be load bear-
 ing. I do not doubt that there are artifacts of human expression that are
 not expressive of some “law” of the mind, nor do I doubt that some laws
 are deep in reason, such as arithmetical or logical rules. But it will not do
 to engage in the endless cycle of producing some string of words or im-
 ages or anything else capturable in data only to discover—the horror!—
 each time anew that we have created a hybrid of cognition and culture.
 The case of generative AI is a sort of comical exaggeration of this core
 tendency, because the objects it produces are so patently cultural that
 it strains credulity to claim that they are deeply cognitive. And yet, if
 cognition is the molten core of the mind, then how far can any artifact
 the mind makes really deviate from it?
     It is not clear that any learning system can be freed from the “cor-
 pus” of data from which it learns—even if some data are more easily
 assumed to be reflective of long-term steady states in the world. Indeed,
                               Introduction                               23

the problem of what counts as “corpus” and what counts as “cognition”
has no good answer if it is framed as a question of intelligence. It must in-
stead be framed as a question of signs, and a semiotic approach must be
adopted for purely empirical reasons. After all, what we have in these
 machines in the first instance is a very extensive set of signs. Whether in
 addition there is something that either is or reflects some principle of the
 brain, cognition, or the world can be debated seriously only once we have
 secured the semiotic face of the problem. In other words, language ma-
 chines present a shift in what literary theorists call the “symbolic order.”
    The psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan defines the “symbolic” as the entire
 range of discrete signs as a set of representation systems. In Lacan’s
 articulation, the symbolic is distinguished from the “imaginary”—the
 pictorial faculty deeply associated with the sense of self and the pro-
 jection of a unified “reality” in image form—and eventually the Real.
 These three “registers,” which Lacan elaborates over more than two de-
 cades of his seminar, sum up the psyche. The “symbolic order” is often
 taken to be language in contemporary use, but it is the specific features
 of language—d iscreteness, systematicity, signifying capacity—that
 constitute it. And language shares these features with some mathemati
 cal systems, as Lacan emphasizes from the beginning. Indeed, some
 post-Lacanian commentators have taken these other symbols—data,
 in short—to be more determinative of meaning than their linguistic
 counterparts.
    The concept of the “symbolic” comes partly from structural anthro
 pologist Claude Lévi-Strauss’s descriptions of cultural systems of thought
 and exchange and custom as symbolic schemata, and more generally
 from Saussure’s definition of the linguistic sign as conventional and sys-
 tematic, discrete signs in a web of internal relations that do not have
 any necessary overlap with other registers. When Lacan first mentions
 the symbolic order in the second year of his seminar, he makes a stan-
 dard mathematical argument—even appealing to a mathematician in
 his audience, Jacques Riguet, to check his work—that there is a limit
 to what “intuition” can picture, which suggests another order that has
 redundant or necessary structure, what Lacan here calls a “symbolic
 bond.”47 The symbolic bond or “function” is the basis of the well-known
 Lacanian slogan that “the unconscious is structured like a language.”
 The function, Lacan points out, is immersive—we are “inside” the sym-
 bolic order—and self-mythologizing, in the sense that we do not know
24                            Introduction


its “origin” and so are constantly tempted to take it to be coeval with
consciousness, or even with reality. The symbolic has often been taken
to authorize French theory’s “linguistic turn,” the sense that language
predominates in the order of signs and even in cognition itself.
    The symbolic was never restricted to language. As we just saw, Lacan
articulates it using a mathematical example, and throughout his think-
ing, logic and computation remain crucial to defining the symbolic. That
same year of his seminar, 1954–55, Lacan extensively engaged what was
then a young cybernetics movement, arguing that the symbolic order
included the incipient digital universe, from the automatic door to the
vagaries of game theory to the problem of scientific knowledge.48 The
extensive nature of the symbolic order—what cognitive scientists and
anthropologists call “culture”—was already a hybrid of mathematics
and language for Lacan.
    This notion of the symbolic order has been taken up in two distinct
directions that bear on our itinerary here. The philosopher Bernard
Stiegler, who holds that humans are the technical animal, that there is
no humanity without technology, has recently argued that digital tech-
nologies are a form of simultaneous “grammatization”—making continu
ous orders discrete—and “proletarianization” (making nonlabor into
labor). What he calls the “automatic” or “control” society is a deploy-
ment of the symbolic order that engenders a symbol-specific “misery”
in which “the user becomes a function of the system he is using.”49 We
may agree with this diagnostic, or even with the evolutionary claim
that the human is the zoon technon, but Stiegler does not offer us a way
into the concrete analysis of algorithmic systems or their language use,
remaining focused on the deconstructed-yet-active binary between
the human and the machine. This tendency—to question the human–
machine divide, yet to be continually surprised that it returns after its
theoretical dismissal—dogs poststructuralism and is a major reason I
turn back to structuralism in this project. As we shall see, I think its
origins lie in Jacques Derrida’s reading of Saussure (chapter 1). Post-
structuralist approaches to problems of contemporary technology and
culture are often diagnostically precise but lack attention to the “re-
stricted economies” of formal and predictive systems.50
    The other extension of Lacan’s symbolic order would seem to point
directly to such a concrete analysis. That is the media theory of F
                                                                   riedrich
Kittler and the many thinkers he has influenced. Kittler famously lo-
                               Introduction                                25

cated the three Lacanian registers in the “new media” around 1900,
the gramophone (the Real, because it is continuous-to-continuous
transcription), the film (the imaginary, discrete-to-continuous arti-
ficial movement that restructures the very sense of the ego), and the
typewriter.51 But this last shift is curious, as it presents the problem
of a discontinuous-to-d iscontinuous translation. The letters of the
alphabet existed in a discrete or “grammatized” set before the advent
of the printing tray. The personalization and ordering that come with
the typew riter’s keyboard certainly shift their practice, but it is far less
clear that the “symbolic” suffers from the same type of reorganization
as the other media. Discrete symbols (words, letters, tokens) interacting
with other discrete symbols (numbers, functions) does not create a
phase change between digital and analog, real and representational, or
any other metaphysical set. Yet this symbol-to-symbol shift, like its pre-
decessors in the printing press, the typewriter, and the word processor,
carries an existential flavor that other media regime changes do not.
When the world is remediated, it is jarring. When language is artificially
produced, it is, above all, confusing.
    The reason this confusion arises is because the symbolic order is the
demarcator of the artificial, as Lacan realized. When the computer is added
to the problem of the “grammatology of the present,” as Kittler phrases
it, the systemic effects of this transition still remain unclear. The ten-
dency in Kittler’s thinking is to take the computational order—the triad
of silicon chip, Turing computability, and programming—as fundamen-
tal to the computing machine and as the dominant semiotic function,
an idea that is most famously captured in Kittler’s quip that “there is no
software.” But this against-the-grain statement receives a huge quali-
fier as soon as Kittler utters it: “or rather, [software] would not exist if
computer systems did not—at least until now—need to coexist with
an environment of everyday languages.”52 In other words, computation
creates not some free-floating order of pure mathematics or logic but
instead a system that is tailored to extend our computational powers
by means of and in interaction with language.53 LLMs make the qualifier
into the general media situation of the present.
    As digital humanist James Dobson puts this point, vector models
of language “cannot provide a . . . lower or higher resolution represen
tation . . . [because] these models are operating on and transforming
already encoded data.”54 The capture of physical data may or may not be
26                            Introduction


“good enough” to work with; in the case of language, there is no gradual
approximation of the same kind, because language is discrete to begin
with. If there is a formal problem of the fit between language and com-
putation, it cannot be grasped as a problem of abstraction. The idea of
“digitizing language” is a priori meaningless, because it is borderline
tautological.
    Kittler’s program has often been characterized as “antihermeneu-
tic,” a pure materialism of media. But the necessity of the interaction
between computation and language opens a gap in that image. Wendy
Chun has argued that that gap is filled with “ideology,” which is what
software—as the fitting of language and computation together—is.55
Dobson suggests that we in fact should return to hermeneutics on simi-
lar grounds. This problem is not new for semiotics and semiology and, as
we have seen, is already priced in Lacan’s notion of the symbolic order.
The issue we face is that the new “AI” is built on and in classical comput-
ing machines,56 so that whatever they do that “succeeds” looks like some
bizarre cheat, an end-r un around all the materialist analyses we have
come to expect in the realm of critical studies of media.57 Deep learning
exploits this gap in our critical accounts of symbolic computing and the
open-ended world of algorithmic design (including statistics) in their
relationships to language. The concrete object has gone missing in con-
temporary theory, even as it has become machine producible.
    There is an arcane debate about the putative difference between se-
miotics and “semiology,” the study of signs as Ferdinand de Saussure
proposed it, with language in the leading role. Like the problem of the
spectrum of meaning, I approach this problem with relative indifference
to its substance. AI is semiotic, but its current guise is heavily language
dependent in a way that makes semiology a good fit. If meaning is ulti-
mately gathered into language (for us), then LLMs extend that regime,
making the then avant garde speculations of Roland Barthes almost
timid descriptions of a world to come. Language is more than ever the
medium of culture, the hinge on which semiosis turns.
    Patrice Maniglier, the great interpreter of structuralism, remarks
that the advantage of learning systems may lie “in their capacity to
model human cultural ability,” because “human beings may learn any
culture, exactly in the same sense in which connectionist networks can
learn any arbitrary difference in their inputs.”58 The problem of gener-
                               Introduction                               27

ality of cultural ability is a true parallel to the generality of data across
many domains. This problem can only be approached semiotically, in
the final account, because every alleged formal ability that governs ex-
tensive knowledge ends up spitting out an indeterminate split between
cognition and culture. In the case of language, then, the question is
what allows computational and linguistic forms to be synthesized.
This question is a variant of cognitive inquiries into the way that logic
and syntax govern knowledge, but it is free of the assumptions and
rationalizations that divide too freely between cognition and culture.
What cognitive approaches miss is what the extended, strange features
of AI output tell us about the world of signs. These are the objects of
semiology.
    Let us demonstrate this semiology on a “multimodal” AI object: Astro
naut Riding a Horse on the Moon. This image was published by OpenAI
to great acclaim in 2022, leading again to questions of “intelligence.”59
DALL-E is a transformer model trained on text–image pairs, themselves
generated by contrastive language–image pretraining (CLIP). By gen-
erating embeddings for language–image indexical relationships across
a very large corpus—today such models are trained on the massive
LAION-5B data set, nearly six billion pairs—engineers create such mul-
timodal models that move between media while retaining meaningful
relationships at the semantic level.
    But the question of intelligence has always seemed rather more ab-
surd in images than in language, perhaps because it is simply more
intuitive to imagine a mechanical procedure that arrives at the image
than one that generates the unicorn story. Language is, after all, the
medium of the Turing test. It is very hard for humans, it seems, to resist
construing language as intelligence. And although cognitive scientists,
AI engineers, and literary critics (not to mention linguists) generally
do not believe that language and intelligence are one, the problem of
separating the two from one another is harder in the case of linguistic
outputs than it is in the case of the astronaut or any other image. The
corpus contains so much culture, disintegrated and resynthesized as
more culture—data generating more data.60 When I ask what “genera-
tion” is, there is no obvious answer—Gopnik’s line between innovation
and imitation blurs to the point of uselessness at the scale of Com-
mon Crawl, LAION-5B, and other such data sets. The cultural web of
28                             Introduction




Figure 2. Astronaut Riding a Horse on the Moon. Image generated by DALL-E.


language and computation that now also produces images—and much
else—challenges basic assumptions of our disciplines, calling not for
local determinations but rather for theory.
   My proposal is to accept the idea that these are “cultural technolo
gies”—and even to dub them “culture machines” and, more narrowly,
“language machines”—and to treat them as semiotic operators that
open a domain of investigation that allows us to ask about culture and
meaning in a new way. Ted Underwood has suggested that these ma-
chines “make theory empirical.”61 If that is so, then the culture machine
in the case of language realizes an empirical poetics and demands a
theory that responds to it. The idea of a “general poetics” that includes
                              Introduction                               29

both computation and language is my response to the question of “what
language models model,” and I flesh it out in chapter 5.
    As we embed a “generative” language capacity in everything from cell
phone cameras to military strategy, the question of how cognition and
culture interact becomes a major, pressing concern for geopolitics, pol-
icy, and enterprise. These systems, as they currently exist, usually filter
other media through language. (The filter is more limited when language
is used only as labels but plays a directly constitutive role when LLMs
are part of the model.) As they proliferate through industry, they extend
the regime of semiology.62
    Saussure invented the term sémiologie to describe the branch of sci-
ence to which he thought linguistics should belong. The idea was that
language was autonomous and could not be studied as the result of
something else, like physiology or psychology. But it was part of a class of
objects, those that signified. Semiology was the general study of things
that signified, but language was a type of the class. As Barthes elabo
rated the idea for the early computer age, he wrote that, for humans,
“semantization is inevitable: as soon as there is a society, every usage is
converted into a sign of itself.”63 Language is the final expression of any
other signifying element, including the flood of commercial images that
the mid-t wentieth century saw. The theory of semiology is a theory of
the necessity of language, but not a claim to its priority.
    Literary theory has often been accused of seeing everything through
a loose screen of contingent language; semiology is instead the sugges-
tion that the structure of that loose screen—culture—cannot be sub-
tracted from even the deepest formal results we possess from other
sciences. Language is like a last station for meaning that, if removed,
prevents any other destination from being possible. This last-instance
semiology is meant to follow through on Lacan’s notion that symbols
are their own separate order, one in which language and computation
converge—now in a new way.
    LLMs stand to extend semiology far beyond the wildest dreams of
the structuralists. We do not need to know if computers can make non-
human meaning exactly, or whether semantic universalism holds in a
deep historical sense, to deal with the problem of computational lan-
guage machines. We may expand our sense of significance in this in-
vestigation without resolving either the question of the human role in
30                           Introduction


the physical universe or the question of what intelligence as such is. The
technical sciences seem to proceed by redefining cognition every time it
turns out that their software systems have accidentally created culture.
Meaning will turn out not to be fixed on one side of the divide.


Remainder Humanism
Both public and academic writing about AI puts too much emphasis on
the “human.” Ever since the celebrated AI critique of Hubert Dreyfus,
who used Martin Heidegger’s notion of “being-in-the-world” to argue
that computers were not, as humans are, “in-a-situation,” the guiding
thread of AI critique has been, as Dreyfus’s title announced, “what
computers can’t do.”64 The problem with this line is that it establishes
a moving yet allegedly bright line between human and machine.65 Ob-
sessively locating and relocating those differences is methodological
Whac-A-Mole, and it tends to thin out the otherwise important mate-
rial, infrastructural, and geographical approaches to AI. The extractive
mining operations, labor exploitation, and environmental costs of
these systems have been extensively documented.66 Yet those problems
are not driven by “AI.” They are part of a larger social ecosystem, global
capitalism. Without rearranging the internal theory of the machine–
human divide, critique constantly teeters into a weak technodetermin-
ism with a pallid human face.
   The newest version of this debate is the strange conversation about
whether the output of LLMs is language at all. To deny this prima facie is
to claim that language is “human,” a seemingly innocent but ultimately
untenable way of dealing with systems of representation in general.
There is a strange agreement on this point between Noam Chomsky and
those AI critics who are concerned primarily with harm. And there is an
even stranger agreement on the centrality of the “human”—which all
three groups define in different ways—on the part of the so-called AI
“doomers,” who worry about risk above all. I call this distorting focus on
the line between human and machine remainder humanism.
   The gauntlet for the question of human versus machine language
was thrown down in January 2023 by Noam Chomsky. Chomsky argued
that LLMs have no substantial relationship to language whatsoever. In a
high-profile op-ed, Chomsky conflated the question of intelligence with
that of language, attempting to show how humans use language cogni-
                              Introduction                              31

tively, seeking and establishing truth and reasoning morally, in ways
that algorithms can’t. This argument is both old (Chomsky has been
making a version of it since 1957) and strange. In restricting language
to the synthetic functions of the human brain, Chomsky epitomizes a
humanistic recoil against the computation–culture interface, a kind of
denial of the actual language with which we live today, which is obvi-
ously heavily inflected by digital technologies.
    AI systems are “lumbering statistical engines,” Chomsky writes, re-
prising his field-defining argument that human brains have some ele
gant, “sparse” way of accessing grammar, of producing and understanding
syntax. The engine sees too many examples to be doing what humans
do. And this is true, so far as it goes: humans do not require, so far
as we know, anything like the computing power or sheer energy out-
put that LLMs do to become users of language. But this argument as-
sumes that whatever human brains do with language is language; it
simply defines language as “brain syntax,” casting off as so much dross
whatever happens with that kernel. Chomsky thinks of text, as well as
other nonsyntactic features of language, as “external” or “E-language,”
of which he claims there can be no scientific knowledge whatsoever. His
detractors have predictably jumped on the LLM train,67 arguing that
the statistical engine indeed produces what Chomsky sees as language.
I take a different tack here, because I think that E-languages cannot be
coherently excluded from the meaning of the word language. One way
to put this is that Chomsky wants the brain to be the originator of lan-
guage every time it operates. Cognitive ability in language is a kind of
always-on creator of language. But the paradox of language is that it
operates as both origin and elaboration, kernel and expression, cogni-
tion and culture. Language is not just the condition of our use of words;
it is also the use of those words and the words themselves (signs, to-
kens). Perhaps policing the border of “real language” as a purely human
activity is valuable for some local tasks in linguistics. It is problematic
for the attempt to come to terms with the semiology of digital systems.
The “human language” that Chomsky wants to rescue now exists in an
extensive nonhuman linguistic environment that cannot be easily sepa
rated from it.
    Of course, one may want to exclude parts of language for ethical rea-
sons too. AI ethicists Timnit Gebru and Emily Bender have proposed
(along with a group of authors) that LLMs are “stochastic parrots,” a
32                           Introduction


“system for haphazardly stitching together sequences of linguistic
forms it has observed in its vast training data, according to probabilis-
tic information about how they combine, but without any reference to
meaning.”68 Because they are trained on an “unfathomable”69 amount of
data, the systems’ statistical features allow them to recombine language
without reference to “meaning.” Data have allowed “high accuracy” but
also “encode stereotypical and derogatory associations along race, eth-
nicity, and disability status,” reproducing the “dominant/hegemonic
view.”70 The “parrot” reproduces; “stochasticity” gives it the wiggle room
to be more than a repeater of nasty words.
    Bender has given the stochastic parrot framework a theory of mean-
ing by substraction, claiming that “synthetic text” carries no intention
and so is strictly meaningless, as we saw earlier. Human interlocutors
“impute meaning where there is none,” leading both researchers and
the public astray.71 Bender claims that no meaning can be learned by
language models, because they can never grasp the “relation between a
linguistic form and communicative intent.”72 This is formally the same
move that Chomsky makes, withdrawing a human core from the syn-
thetic generator.73
    But where is the line? How can I empirically and pragmatically de-
termine where intent or syntax lies in everyday text interactions? And
what is the value of a theory of meaning that excludes its construction
in communication, not only by means of human interpreters—t he
homunculi of language transmission—but by chains of interpretants
in the representational systems they inhabit, engage, and enliven? The
proposals of the critics are like imaginary policy controls, aiming to
audit what we think language is, how we use it, and ultimately the poli-
tics that are imagined as downstream from that language—in a shock-
ingly naive ordo inversus.
    If we had control over the complex intersection between culture and
economics—and, so, society at large—we would perhaps want to limit
the way in which nonintentional communication occurs. But who is “we”
here? The problem that arises is that, although it is obviously unwise to
release untested bots into general use—let alone apply them to military
or judicial problems—this observation alone does nothing to defeat
that use. Even if LLMs took no step forward in any performance task
from this point on, they would still be good enough to make everything
worse, as the productivity studies from business schools are already
                               Introduction                                 33

showing.74 Remainder humanism is constitutively unable to draw a line
between preexisting ills and AI-specific ills. It is not science but libidinal
science fiction, wish fulfillment rather than analysis.
    None of this is to deny that LLMs capture bias as an element of the
structure of language. They “encode more bias against identities mar-
ginalized along more than one dimension than would be expected based
on just the combination of the bias along each of the axes.”75 This strikes
me as evidence in favor of the idea that they encode real language, which
is full of hate, animosity, and slurs—as opposed to some fictional “lan-
guage” that is neutral, salutary, local, and pure.
    But there is a further problem: how can a parrot that does not pro-
duce meaning supercharge harmful speech? The very “critique” here
cedes enormous power to these systems, undermining the explicit de-
nial of “meaning.” Humans and their communicative intents retreat
into a corner where all is allegedly well, while AI systems nevertheless
take command. Remainder humanism’s flaw is that it has no way of ex-
plaining that process.
    Bender and her coauthors noted that filters have proven ineffective
because attempts to remove known harmful words—slurs and the like—
also erase positive and reappropriated speech, thus occluding marginal-
ized identities altogether in the output.76 This suggests that the feature
that is singled out here—the “unfathomable data set”—houses the very
power that the concept “stochastic parrot” hides in the contradiction
between attributive adjective and noun. It also suggests—and we will
see more about this crucial fact later—that LLMs engage meaning at
the level of the whole, precipitating speech (which is sometimes harm-
ful indeed) from some larger synthetic capture. As a matter of norms,
we do not wish to spread this type of speech; as a matter of theory, we
should very much want bias to be captured in the system. If LLMs were
somehow magically unbiased, that would guarantee that they had failed
to learn our language.
    LLMs do something different than actual parrots. “Stochastic” is just
a way of saying that these systems use probabilities to produce output;
“parrot” is a deflationary way of explaining that they train on—a nd
reproduce—human-produced language data. (One might point out
that parrots themselves are robust semiotic agents, but the metaphor
is so narrow as to not justify a serious elaboration.) The idea that these
large-scale systems are “unfathomable” reverses this rhetoric, giving us
34                           Introduction


a sublime notion of the data out of which a single observation comes—
that inductive bias in models reproduces or exacerbates bigotry (“bias”
in another meaning) in language. This intuition is correct, I think. But
it does not explain anything about the interaction of inductive and social
bias. The “stochastic parrot” critique backhandedly confers enormous
power on LLMs, theoretically depriving them of language but ceding al-
most mystical power to produce meaning—bad meaning, but meaning
nonetheless. The result is a discursive weapon, one that has been put to
some good use. But the danger is patent: any weapon can be wielded by
one’s enemy. In this case, generative AI companies can say (1) great, we
know about the alignment problem, and you’re helping us work on it,
and (2) if the problem has no known solution, we cannot impose a mora-
torium, lest we lose our competitive advantage.77 Liberal critique always
falls into this bad infinity, toggling forever between condemnation and
toothless calls for a pause, made all the more toothless by effective al-
truism’s similarly meaningless calls to “slow things down.”
    One example of this strategy should make the problem clear. Christo
Buschek and Jer Thorp’s analysis of the LAION-5B data set, which
contains nearly six billion labeled images, points out that the higher-
quality data are often delivered by websites like Shopify. Buschek draws
the conclusion that the data set “contains less about how humans see the
world than it does about how search engines see the world. It is a data
set that is powerfully shaped by commercial logics.”78 This judgment
seems correct to me, but insufficient. The implicit claim is that humans
do not see the world in commercial logics or that there is some obvious
way to separate the “human”—or human cognition—from the motiva-
tions of capital. The critique thus serves to refiy a human essence as a
remainder, apart from the real culture—capitalist, hate-filled, and oth-
erwise dappled—in which we actually live. The culture machine poses
the problem from which this critique systematically retreats and in fact
presents us with what is perhaps the first tool to explore it empirically,
even forensically (see chapter 6). If the handbag is commercial and the
human is not, we are spinning in a void.
    This is remainder humanism, a humanism without a theory or doc-
trine of what is human, in which humanity is remaindered, like a book
past salability. The human here is defined by technology’s creep, but
only negatively. The culture machine, because it remixes capitalist cul-
ture, is taken to be a degenerate mode. I share the feeling that forms of
                              Introduction                               35

capital do not exhaust what it means to be human, just as I worry that
the automation of bias is a major problem for the new semiological re-
gime of AI. But to articulate the problem this way is to accept, implicitly,
the idea that cognition is essence and culture appearance—w ith the role
of cognition here played by a frankly vague and fetishistic humanism
that does nothing to help us analyze platform capitalism. Indeed, re-
mainder humanism accidentally repeats the terms of the interminable
and confused debate about whether digital capitalism is a new mode
of production altogether or instead continuous with industrial capital-
ism. But such questions cannot be answered by crying “we are human!”
again and again. If our humanity and our cognition are consistent across
these media-economic differences, then we should expect these models
to capture something about that consistency even in Shopify images.
How deeply “commercial logics” penetrate into our very humanity then
becomes an empirical question.
    Attempts to draw a dividing line between “real” and “artificial” lan-
guage all run aground in the fact that language itself is the demarcator
of the artificial, in the notion of the symbolic order. When language and
that other symbolic system, computation, mix productively, it is natu-
ral to feel vertigo. But if we wish to say “this is not language” in such a
case, to whom are we appealing? Drawing a line that is already becom-
ing impossible to perceive between “human” language and “synthetic
text” is a losing game, a retreat into a conceptual echo chamber, back
into Plato’s cave where we can reassure each other that the shadows are
real. We are witnessing the death knell of a more general rearguard ac-
tion in theory that recoils from the spread of the digital into cultural
production. Remainder humanism is a tendency to backslide from the
atheistic antihumanism that Stefanos Geroulanos has identified as the
core property of poststructuralism,79 rather than cleaving theoretically
to the present.
    This backslide takes the form of painting ourselves into a corner,
shouting more loudly each time something is quantified that the “es-
sence of the human” can never be quantified, even as that essence
recedes behind a line that is not bright. This stance is always binary,
filled with arbitrary lines drawn between humans and machines, and
is constituted by neglect of systems of representation—which are not
“human” in this strong sense, even if humans invented them. We do
not possess language, theory used to tell us—it possesses us. A strange
36                            Introduction


voluntarism has replaced this wisdom with respect to all social con-
structs, and with the specter of LLMs, language is being swept up in a
frankly bizarre claim that “we” can decide what it is and where to use it.
That is, of course, trivially true of utterances—but it has never been true
of language as code or as system. Clawing back a good portion of this
basic structuralist insight is a central goal in what follows.
    It is natural to think of the opposing tendency in AI “critique”—
the framework of AI risk, existential or “x” risk, and “doomerism”—as
anti-humanist. After all, a crescendoing condemnation of the world of
“effective altruism” and affiliated ideologies, which Gebru, along with
the critic Émile Torres, have called the “TESCREAL” bundle,80 have been
revealed as deeply compromised visions of a eugenic future that con-
strues “humanity” in both racist and science-fictional ways. Yet here,
too, there is not exactly “antihumanism” as remainder humanism. It is
racist, yes, but it is also sentimental, failing to address even in outline
the type of society in which we live. It is also obsessed with AI without
having a single concrete thing to say about artificial systems. It is the
loosest possible philosophy of technology combined with an anemic and
fantastical “mathematics” of “risk.”
    In June 2023, the Center for AI Safety published a single sentence to
which industry leaders, data scientists, and others put their signature. It
reads, “Mitigating the risk of extinction from AI should be a global pri-
ority alongside other societal-scale risks such as pandemics and nuclear
war.”81 One may be forgiven for asking what material factors drive this
comparison. The answer is ideology: beginning with the early work of
the Oxford philosopher Nick Bostrom, the notion of “existential risk”
(risk of extinction or reduction of human population below civilization-
bearing numbers) has been ascendant in Silicon Valley, the parts of
academia most connected to it, and think tanks. Perhaps its most bal-
anced articulation is in Toby Ord’s 2020 book The Precipice, a book filled
with speculative data about the likelihood of nuclear winter (which Ord
questioningly characterizes as unlikely), global pandemics (unlikely!),
and the singularity.82 The achievement of AGI, this group tells us, could
lead to extinction by any number of byways that are firmly in the realm
of what actual science fiction author Kim Stanley Robinson calls “1920s
cliché science fiction,” in which AGI—which is completely undefined—
somehow emerges and becomes “superintelligent,” in Bostrom’s term,
and supermalicious. Every version of this fantasy involves an emergent
                              Introduction                                37

agency—sometimes a malfunction that seeks a single “pleasurable” goal
above all others, known as wireheading. There is not really a theory of
this type of superpowerful malfunction—a lthough certainly a lot of
vain ink has been spilled on it—which seems to rest on an implicit “I’m
afraid I can’t do that, Dave.” Malfunction with a sprinkle of malice added
to functional omniscience swims in a soup of nonconcepts hiding behind
a wall of fictitious numbers. All of this is in the name of a human literally
remaindered by the theory itself, a “humanity” thinned out to the point
of—indeed—antihumanism. Where the AI critics isolate the human in
utopia, the nasty, brutish, and short vision of the doomers shares this
naivety with inverted values. What both refuse to accept is culture.
    Cognitive science in Chomsky’s mold, AI risk, and AI ethics share
the theoretical move that backs us into a “humanist” corner, an ever-
shrinking area of things that “computers can’t do.” The political motiva-
tions of some of these proposals are anodyne and well intentioned, but
the theories are too weak to cope with the actual intersection of culture
and capitalism with which we live today. This is because they have no
way of conceiving of the concrete interaction of language and compu-
tation. Lacking that, the insistence on “the human” becomes a fetish
that siloes meaning where we hope, wish, and want it to come from. It is
sentimental semantics, the core of remainder humanism.


The Shape of the Argument
When Steven Pinker began to promote Noam Chomsky’s “syntax” ap-
proach to language in public in the 1990s, it was the heyday of literary
theory, and he still felt the need to reject what he called the “semiot-
ics curriculum.” Yet no public conflict ever occurred between cognitive
science and poststructuralism, even as the former appropriated lan-
guage as a disciplinary object. Chapter 1 argues that the humanities lost
public and even academic status as the primary knowers of language
in this period and that the recovery of the object is urgent for a world
with language machines. I compare the syntax view—which I argue is
transcendental or Kantian in nature—w ith the idea of a “distributional
semantics,” a statistical-empirical approach that draws on Bayesian
methods but has rarely come to full articulation as a comprehensive
theory and is now ascendant because of the success of LLMs. I then
sketch the structuralist approach—which I classify as “dialectical”—
38                            Introduction


and argue that poststructuralism redirected attention from the concrete
problem of cultural language such that AI requires renewed structural-
ist analysis, but in a new form.
    Chapters 2 and 3 address the problem of AI as an active shaper of
cultural meaning. Named for the first chatbot, the creation of the AI en-
gineer turned critic Joseph Weizenbaum, the “Eliza effect” occurs when
we are fooled into thinking that we are conversing with a human. This is
the opposite of the Turing test, and chapter 2 argues that it has become
widespread, an underlying cultural condition. Examining the history
of machine learning and its relationship to digital theory today, I argue
that Alan Turing and Warren McCulloch, the earliest thinkers of AI,
saw computational systems not as simulating an original human intel-
ligence, but instead as instantiating formal systems in which humans
also participate. This suggests that the notion of intelligence is more like
what the philosopher Jean Baudrillard called a “simulacrum,” a repre-
sentation without an original, than a copy of something else (the world
in the case of human cognition or human intelligence in the case of AI).
    Language plays a crucial role in deep learning and its distribution
into our infrastructure and culture. AI has become multimodal, pro-
ducing language, images, and many other kinds of data. But the semi-
ology of AI must distinguish between its classifying and generating
functions, both of which rely on language to function. Chapter 3 shows
how classification relies on natural language labeling and so forms not
empirical judgments (“this is a squirrel”) but instead a hypothesis about
the data that have become a significant factor in our everyday world. I
propose that this “data hypothesis” should supplant both hype and fear
of a universal data language. The generative function of AI relies more
directly on language. LLMs do not “datafy” language so much as they
allow vectors to conform to structures in language, which is what makes
generative systems capable of more than hypothesis. These systems plug
in to formal features of culture and, by doing so, are able to generate
meaning. To date, language is the only system capable of being exploited
in this way, although it is not clear if that will remain the case. The re-
mainder of the book is about these language machines.
    Computation and language are now in an interoperable relationship,
but mathematical and literary-theoretical understandings of form are
very far apart. Chapter 4 outlines how computation and language “share
form” in a specifically poetic way—following the argument of the poet
                              Introduction                               39

Allison Parrish—and reviews the state of the art in thinking about lit-
erary form in AI. The structuralist idea of a “paradigm”—arrays of syno
nyms given a context—was formally modeled in “vector semantics,” as
the philosopher Juan Luis Gastaldi has argued, and this has a surpris-
ing correspondence to Claude Shannon’s vision of language as it was
included centrally in his information theory. When linguistic and com-
putational form merge, we notice that there is no set of cultural or liter-
ary theorists who currently study language as such, the ambition of the
early structuralist movement. Semiology requires exactly this project.
     Chapter 5 argues that the “queries, keys, and values” vectors of the
so-called attention mechanism engage in the processing of establishing
“values” in the differential system of language as Saussure conceived
of it, demonstrating how computation and language do share form.
So-called self-attention realizes what Roman Jakobson called the “po-
etic function” in language, not in terms of sound or even text but as a
general principle of language as a system. The transformer architecture
demonstrates the general fact that language can be produced algorith-
mically but does not explain why this is so. Nor does this specific class of
net allow any direct insight into the class of possible formal interactions
between the structures of numbers and of words. The chapter closes
with a comparison of Kurt Goedel’s articulation of a formal system ca-
pable of counting as “incomplete”—in which a new rule must always be
borrowed from another system for some operation inside the present
system—and Roman Jakobson’s idea of the poetic function, which I un-
derstand as a fundamental first-order recursivity that produces the very
possibility of meaning (and on which other functions, like reference, de-
pend). The two systems are self-externalizing and “greedy,” respectively,
and in the LLM collaborate to produce a “poetic heat map” of language.
I call for a “general poetics” that studies meaning making in all formal
systems, a semiology that blends culture and cognition.
     Chapter 6 argues that LLMs are ideology machines. Generative cul-
ture is an extensive, probabilistic continuation of what art critic C
                                                                     lement
Greenberg called kitsch: “predigested form.” The result is what I call
packaged semantics, which, despite being quantitatively formulaic, often
surprises us. This quantitative ideology machine could even be used
forensically in the service of knowing the distribution of social ideas. It
 thus realizes not a “transcendental” notion of ideology, in which what
 is thinkable or sayable is merely conditioned by some other factor—the
40                           Introduction


economic base, the unconscious—but an “expressive” version of ideol-
ogy in which statistical method and dialectics coincide.
    Language is now on offer “as a service,” in the jargon of software.
The conclusion predicts that the availability of language generation will
slowly separate out a “labor” aspect of language, now automatic, from
its creative side. This process occurred with respect to computation be-
ginning in the Industrial Revolution and culminating in the computer.
The political economy of digital culture now includes language as a
hinge, but it is no longer only a human language that plays this role.
Just as rhetoric was the discipline that cognitively conditioned and thus
underwrote textual civilization, we are set to witness the rise of new,
computational-rhetorical systems as the rails of global capitalism going
forward.
      1


How the Humanities Lost Language
Syntax, Statistics, and Structure

In 1994, Steven Pinker still felt the need to argue with the literary theo
rists. Not very much, mind you—by this point, the game was more or
less over. But in The Language Instinct, the book that launched him from
success as a cognitive linguist into public-intellectual stardom, he would
still write things like this:

   Language is no more a cultural invention than is upright posture.
   It is not a manifestation of a general capacity to use symbols: a
   three-year-old, we shall see, is a grammatical genius, but is quite
   incompetent at the visual arts, religious iconography, traffic signs,
   and the other staples of the semiotics curriculum.1

This colloquy of cultural habits that are not as deep as “language” accu-
rately describes the reach of what, by 1994, was now a poststructuralist
semiology. Based on a doctrine of symbols, the object of the discipline is
structure of signification across a wide variety of social uses. As we have
seen, the technical term for this discipline is semiology. Whether there
can be any knowledge of such cultural vapor, Pinker argues, is irrelevant
to the problem of language, which is a proper scientific object, not “the
ineffable essence of human uniqueness but . . . a biological adaptation to
communicate information.”2 Language is cognition—indeed, for Pinker,
it is in the brain—not culture.3
    Pinker’s is hardly the only cognitive approach to language, but by
entering the public sphere with his version of Noam Chomsky’s doctrine
of syntax, he made a grab for theoretical dominance. The “semiotics cur-
riculum” was unable to counter this move. Many of its members were
also emerging as public figures at this time—think of the controversies
around Jean Baudrillard’s 1991 trilogy of articles on the Gulf War,
published as a volume, The Gulf War Did Not Take Place, in 1995; J udith
Butler’s Gender Trouble (1990) and her influential 1993 article on “Sche-
matic Racism and White Paranoia” in the Rodney King trial; or Jacques


                                    41
42                 How the Humanities Lost Language


Derrida’s 1993 book Spectres of Marx, with its engagement of Francis
Fukuyama’s end-of-history thesis. The “semiotics curriculum” was alive
and well in the 1990s and even doing a brisk bit of public trade. But its
focus, and disciplinary grip, on the object of language had loosened, and
since then, it has not returned. The humanities lost language by choice.
    Pinker’s move went largely unanswered as a question about who pos-
sessed knowledge of language, who got to say what language was. Slavoj
Žižek, who began his climb to global fame in 1989 with The Sublime Ob-
ject of Ideology, would engage cognitive science and AI in his 2006 The
Parallax View. But then, it seems, it was almost too late—or at least,
the humanities had already given up on the shared determination of
what language is, retreating into disciplinary isolation. What should
have been a conflict of the faculties between syntax and semiotics never
happened.
    This chapter is not a sketch of what might have been. It is, instead,
an attempt to make sense of the present moment, when language and
computation have been set in a newly productive interface. Cognitive
science’s ownership of language as an object suggests that we turn to
Noam Chomsky and his school to make sense of this moment; NLP,
which has produced this moment technologically, is challenging that
ownership in earnest now. But neither side has a firm grasp on the ob-
ject that LLMs present, precisely because literary theory and cognitive
linguistics never had it out and the humanities lost language to both
these other groups. In what follows, I present three theories of form
and meaning in language, which I call the syntax, statistics, and structure
views. There are other ways to divvy up the many views of linguistic
meaning, of course, and I am not suggesting that this is an exhaustive
account. Instead, I choose these three because they share a commitment
to a notion of “structure” that they respectively construe in radically
different ways, with the result that each harbors a separate view of what
counts as empiricism, or evidence, in the study of language. These back-
ground views are transcendental (Kantian) in the case of syntax, “flat”
(or Humean, more precisely Bayesian) in the case of statistics, and cul-
tural (I argue that semiology is of the family “dialectical” in the families
of theory4) in the case of structure.
    The views coevolved, but I do not mean to give anything like a history
here. The competing theoretical commitments of these three frame-
                   How the Humanities Lost Language                        43

works all have partial purchase on the problem of language automation.
Syntax has always denied this possibility, and statistics affirmed it;
structure, surprisingly, turns out to be the best fit with the actual devel-
opment of language machines, as the rest of the book argues. But this
fit calls our attention back from the poststructuralist semiology that
Pinker dismissed to an earlier structuralism far more engaged with lin-
guistics and—simply—w ith the concrete analysis of actual strings of
signs. No cognitive scientist or computational linguist I am aware of
thinks that there is a bad fit between rules and expression, cognition
and culture—they mostly appear to think that this is not a real problem.
But the nonproblem breeds monsters. The promise of structuralism was
to show how culture interfaced with rules, and that is what is required
for dealing with AI in the present. For this reason, I also argue that post-
structuralism, which often has useful diagnostic things to say about
contemporary culture, has not produced a concrete enough analytical
tool set to deal with automated language generation. For this reason,
despite its close association with literary theory, poststructuralism is
partly responsible for how the humanities lost language.
    LLMs may function for the technical disciplines as more proof that
culture will eventually be gobbled up by computational models. After all,
if a machine can make language, produce images, and even predict solu-
tions to scientific problems like protein structure or antibiotic strength,
it is easy to adopt the attitude that the interpretation of such systems
is a luxury. But there should, at a minimum, be some semiotic friction
before we allow disciplines to collapse. It may even be that these systems
explain nothing on their own and that interpretation is the only path
to reducing their high-dimensional hypotheses to concrete knowledge.
If that is so, then the syntax view—in which, as we shall see, the rules
always retreat beyond the reach of the data—w ill never offer that expla-
nation. The problem of knowledge in the age of AI may end up depending
on cultural theory. It is not yet clear that any data are truly culture-free,
and even in cases in which a preformalized system stabilizes the object—
like sonic data or temperature—the type of inference necessary to make
any conclusion about that data relies on an analogy to human cognition
that may make little sense. In such cases, we see the extension of compu-
tation beyond the realm where we can reliably explain why it does or does
not work. That is a knowledge problem that can only be articulated as a
44                How the Humanities Lost Language


problem of culture, by means of the semiotics of data. This chapter—and
the ones that follow—begins the project of making sense of this problem
on the example of language machines.


Syntax
In the New York Times op-ed that he coauthored in early 2023, in which
he claimed that LLMs are “lumbering statistical engines” that do not
produce language at all, Chomsky recycled some example sentences
from his 1957 book Syntactic Structures, which began his meteoric rise
not only in linguistics but in cognitive science more generally. The sen-
tence “John is too stubborn to talk to,” he argued, would often be mis-
construed by LLMs because it implies an agent that is not presented as
a word. Chomsky went on to say that a model would likely predict that
the meaning of this sentence is that John refuses to talk rather than
that John cannot be reasoned with. This example, simple for humans
and less so for machines, put the whole history of the war between syn-
tax and statistics on the table. The meaning of language could not be in
words, Chomsky thought, even if the words had some external relation-
ship determining their placement. The structure of language had to be
deeper.
   Chomsky is best known for the concept of a “universal grammar.”
Since the late 1950s, he has revised this idea several times, with vari-
ants ranging from a hierarchy of linguistic systems to the “minimalist
program” based on the idea of a cognitive function called “merge.” I will
not go into much detail about the differences between these programs,
because they all share two features that are important here. First, they
involve what Chomsky calls the distinction between “competence”—or
the ability to understand, and so to accept or reject, any sentence as
grammatical or not—and “performance”—or the external placement of
words in some order, in speech or otherwise.5 The second feature, which
depends on the first, is that Chomsky has consistently denied that lan-
guage can be captured by statistical models.6 Such a model differentiates
words only by numerical value and so cannot create a hierarchy of func-
tions with any depth.
   It was partly to propose this difference that Chomsky composed his
famous sentences:
                   How the Humanities Lost Language                         45

   (1) Colorless green ideas sleep furiously.
   (2) Furiously sleep green ideas colorless.7

The two sentences are “equally nonsensical, but any speaker of English
will recognize that only the former is grammatical,” suggesting that
“any search for a semantically based definition of ‘grammaticalness’ is
futile.”8 In other words, what constitutes language cannot be derived
from words—there must be deep-structure reasons for the ability
to distinguish between these two sentences, neither of which means
anything.
   What it means to be “grammatical in English,” therefore, is strictly
different from the notion “high order of statistical approximation to
English,” Chomsky writes.9 Indeed, neither of these sentences is likely
to have ever occurred in English, so no corpus will have much chance of
predicting either. But (1) is grammatical, which Chomsky distinguishes
by noting that

   presented with these sentences, a speaker of English will read
   (1) with a normal sentence intonation, but he will read (2) with a
   falling intonation on each word; in fact, with just the intonation
   pattern given to any sequence of unrelated words. He treats each
   word in (2) as a separate phrase. Similarly, he will be able to recall
   (1) much more easily than (2), to learn it much more quickly, etc.
   Yet he may never have heard or seen any pair of words from these
   sentences joined in actual discourse. . . . Evidently, one’s ability
   to produce and recognize grammatical utterances is not based
   on notions of statistical approximation and the like. The custom
   of calling grammatical sentences those that “can occur,” or those
   that are “possible,” has been responsible for some confusion here.

Our ability to speak has some pattern underlying it, in other words.
The “normal” intonation with which one reads (1) will be extended deep
into the mind’s structure by Chomsky and his school over the next six
decades, until it arrives, in their accounts, in the brain, defining what
it means to be human at all. The “transparency” of rhythmical speech
is taken as a sign that the brain is preformed for this—and not some
other—join between logic and language.10
46                 How the Humanities Lost Language


    All it took was a well-formed but meaningless sentence.
    The target of Chomsky’s gambit appears to have been Claude S hannon,
the creator of information theory, whom we will encounter several times
over the course of this book. Chomsky’s argument is that a grammar is
a “device” that produces all the grammatical “and none of the ungram-
matical” sentences of a language. Such a device, he argues, cannot be
a “finite-state machine” that deploys a Markov process—a statistical
approach that treats linguistic structure as a matter of frequency, in-
formation content measured as the probability of the placement of a
letter or a word in a context. Such a process will not be able to imitate
the human capacity to “produce and understand new sentences” and
also reject “other new sequences as not belonging to the language.”11
Chomsky concludes that English—we may say language in general—is
“not a finite-state language.”12 Statistical approaches will only approxi-
mate previous language use; they will be unable to adjudicate or gener-
ate new instances of English.
    The difference between statistical prediction—often characterized
as a “flat” order—and something with depth, in language, mind, or na-
ture, is a major scientific and philosophical debate that has been raging
for half a century. The rise of data science and computational modeling,
along with the emergence of a self-designated “cognitive science,” has
resurrected the debate between empiricism and rationalism.13 There
was no guarantee that linguistics would play any major role in this pro-
cess, but Chomsky’s outsize influence on the very institution of cogni-
tive science is partly due to his claim for a strong rationalist backbone
in this debate. Where statistical approaches may use past data as evi-
dence to predict uncertain events, the mind, for Chomsky, is deeply crea
tive. Humans make “infinite use of finite means,” he often says, quoting
Wilhelm von Humboldt.14 We make never-before-uttered sentences
as a matter of course, recombining elements in our languages using a
hardwired ability that can never be derived from the elements of those
languages: words, sentences, or numbers that attempt to capture and
model those words. This is why Chomsky called his program “Cartesian
linguistics,” invoking the great formalizer of epistemology and geom-
etry.15 Syntax, universal grammar, principles and parameters, and the
more recent “minimalist program” with its key idea of “merge”—a ll
these are attempts to isolate and formalize the ability to use language as
a distinctively human operation shared neither by animals nor by ma-
                   How the Humanities Lost Language                      47

chines. For this reason, I think that his linguistics is more Kantian than
Cartesian. Chomskyan linguistics is the search for the categories of a
transcendental logic of language as it exists extensively, to find the rules
that we impose on sound or paper. Kant’s search for form differs from
Descartes’s because it is strictly about the limits of human knowledge
and what may count as universally valid within that knowledge. The
search for the rules of that knowledge in the empirical order is futile,
Kant argued, and Chomsky’s argument against statistics has its analog
here, not in Descartes or in Humboldt. The reason that there is no hope
of finding syntax in sound or any other external feature of language—
just as there was no hope of finding our a priori capacities in experience,
for Kant—is that there is no recursion in the physical world.
    Every version of Chomsky’s doctrine has centrally featured recur-
sion. Language’s infinity is based on the ability to extend it, he argues,
not by adding a “next word” but by including any sentence within an-
other. No matter how long the string of words, one is always permitted
to add “Mary thinks that” at the beginning to make a new sentence.
One may also think of signature wordplay that uses this form of recur-
sion, such as the classic joke from the sitcom 30 Rock, in which a char-
acter says “my single ‘My Single Is Dropping’ is dropping” (although
this includes a pragmatic difference too, obviously). Here, too, we may
note a similarity to Kant’s philosophy, in which the unity of mental
experience—the fact that whatever I experience is a single experience
of my consciousness—is underwritten by the ability to add “I think”
before any statement of that experience. For both Chomsky and Kant,
there may be practical limits on this recursive infinity—if I insert too
many sentences inside each other, it may be psychologically confusing,
and if I say “I think that I think that I think,” it may become tedious, if
not nonsensical.16 But the point is not threatened by such limits. Every
act of thought, and every instance of language, is an expression of this
deep recursive ability, which governs but also enables expression. Syn-
tax is the transcendental logic of cognitive science, and its backbone is
recursion.
    We can take a brief look at the most recent, and currently most in-
fluential, of Chomsky’s frameworks to see how this recursion works and
why it is allegedly immune to statistical capture. In the 1990s, Chomsky
proposed a version of his doctrine called “merge,” the minimal rules for
imposing cognitive order on anything, including language. In 2002, he
48                 How the Humanities Lost Language


coauthored a Science article that argued that this capacity was the ex-
planation for the singularity of language in the animal order, perhaps
the most direct attempt on Chomsky’s part to seed linguistics in the
sciences.
    The faculty of language in the broad sense, the authors argued, is
an evolutionary device for communication that relates conceptual-
intentional material to sensory-motor perceptual action in both physical
and social environments. The faculty of language that actually performs
these functions in humans is narrow, and this narrow faculty is “orga-
nized like the genetic code—hierarchical, generative, recursive, and
virtually limitless with respect to its scope of expression.”17 Language
in this sense is the differentia specifica of the human. No other animal
possesses it, and the search for its evolutionary basis is a major scien-
tific undertaking. The way that humans make meaning is in this deep
structure of language, and its basis must be in the brain—resuming an
argument from Chomsky’s early career that there must be a “language
acquisition device” in the brain.
    The minimalist program describes a “computational procedure for
human language.” Chomsky writes that “the indispensable operation
of a recursive system is Merge . . . , which takes two syntactic objects
α and β and forms the new object γ = {α,β}.”18 Complementing merge
are two other operations, called “agree” (which allows for comparison
and case-checking in a domain) and “move” (which combines the first
two and revalues some function).19 But merge is the basis, the most eco-
nomic and core function, of the syntactic ability that leads to the “infin-
ity” of language in humans.
    The Chomskyan linguist David Adger uses the example of the English
phrase drink wine to illustrate merge. Drink and wine are both “bits of
language,” he tells us, but when I say, “I drink wine,” the phrase “drink
wine” becomes a new bit of language. Other languages—he gives us
the Japanese “watashiwa waino nomu,” subject-object-verb, and the
Malagasy “misotro divay aho,” verb-object-subject—arrange words dif-
 ferently, but the merge of all three is the same operation.20 Merge can, of
 course, take other syntactic objects and make them into a unit, as Adger
 demonstrates in thinking about the unit ’s in English for possession,
 which is created in some languages by genitive inflection of the verb.
 The overall point is that merge is the deep structure of recursion, be-
 cause it allows but also restricts the range of combination of functions
                   How the Humanities Lost Language                     49

in grammar. What is really “merged” in this operation is cognition and
the external order of language’s elements, and this relationship is uni-
directional. Adger states, “Merge imposes hierarchy on all it surveys.”21
The understanding gives the law to nature, as Kant might have put it.
Many things in the order of knowledge come from experience, but some
things do not—syntax is the essence of those things, because it is a for-
mal operation for both cognition and language.
    Two consequences of this view are relevant for our study here. First,
it is the recursion of merge and its generality that confer “depth” and
hierarchy on cognition and make it resistant to statistical modeling.
And second, “language” has here come to be defined in such strict cog-
nitive terms that the usual sense of the word is nearly entirely gone.
Language now does not include things like words and letters, let alone
genres and other cultural forms—a lthough this internalized language
makes use of these artifacts. The withdrawal of syntax into this tran-
scendental depth creates a problem that mirrors a technical issue that
Kant could not resolve, the “schematism.”
    “Lumbering statistical engines” differ from human children, who
learn with an almost mathematical elegance, as Chomsky has always ar-
gued. The idea that a very small child possesses no skill in the “semiotics
curriculum” but already has a strong sense of syntax—as we saw Pinker
claim—is crucial to the syntax view. The idea is that human children
simply do not learn by induction, statistical or otherwise, because they
never hear the variants. No one utters a high number of poorly organized
or ungrammatical sentences to a child. Some such sentences are encoun-
tered, of course, but their number is trivial compared to the well-formed
sentences to which children are constantly exposed both in speech and
as they learn to read and write. Chomsky calls this “Plato’s problem”:
“the problem of ‘poverty of stimulus,’ of accounting for the richness,
complexity, and specificity of shared knowledge, given the limitations
of the data available.”22 Infinite creativity comes not from immersion
in every possible permutation of words but instead from some innate
ability to make language. Statistical systems do not have this problem,
and they cannot build up to this type of knowledge, lacking the depth to
do so. This is the core of Chomsky’s objection to LLMs.
    Language is not a habit, Chomsky has claimed from the beginning. He
has argued this point in this way because the school that his generative
grammar upended, American structuralism, saw it that way. A blend
50                 How the Humanities Lost Language


of logical empiricism and American pragmatism, the structuralists in
the United States—a completely separate phenomenon from Euro-
pean structuralism, although the two groups sometimes interacted—
pursued a descriptive linguistics that came from an anthropological
approach championed by some of Franz Boas’s students, prominent
among them Edward Sapir. The structure they sought was empirical and
indeed often statistical, as we shall see shortly. Syntactic structure was a
response that replaced description with the aspiration to explanation.
    In recent remarks, Chomsky has argued that this “training and
habit” approach is being resurrected by deep learning. Systems of this
sort “produce text that looks like actual language,” but no “corpus of
linguistic materials” will ever be explanatory.23 No scan of a corpus, no
matter how large, can answer a “why” question. All the way back in 1957,
he had already written that linguistic analysis “cannot be understood
as a schematic summary developed by sharpening the blurred edges in
the full statistical picture. . . . Grammar is autonomous and independent
of [semantic] meaning, and . . . probabilistic models give no particular
insight into some of the basic problem of syntactic structure.”24 Nothing
has changed on this score, then—a handcrafted corpus of perhaps some
tens of thousands of words differs only in scale from the many trillions
of words now fed into LLMs. Explanation is not forthcoming.
    As we will see, I agree that no explanation is forthcoming from ma-
chine learning in general and that the task of classifying language is
beyond the scope of what these systems are capable of. But there is a cu-
riosity in the way Chomsky poses this problem. LLMs now produce quite
good syntax, even if you can fool them into shoddy answers if you ask
them to analyze complex syntax (ChatGPT gets “John is too stubborn
to talk to” right, one year on, though). But is a syntax user automatically
a perfect analyzer of syntax? The answer for humans is clearly no. The
issue that surfaces here is that syntax as defined by Chomsky and his
school is the point of contact between language and cognition—a link
between thought and language, cognition and expression. The conse-
quence of viewing it through syntax in the way Chomsky does, as the
mere production of good syntax—words in the right order spit out of
the interface—does not justify the idea that it is “modeling” syntax or
“producing language” on its own. It is not really clear what would suffice
to claim that a system models syntax, because the interface Chomsky
theorizes is not available to any kind of observation. As Maniglier puts
                   How the Humanities Lost Language                     51

it, this position forces Chomsky into the idea that “knowing a language”
is actually the “knowledge of the knowledge of something,” threaten-
ing regress and without a clear sense of the fit between the rules and
their expression.25 The rather bizarre exclusion of any external units
from language is the cost of defining the latter not as actually spoken
languages but as the formal production unit—in the brain or in some
computational formalism—that achieves the fit between knowing and
saying, the internal and external aspects of the linguistic act.
     If the human child has a neurological shortcut to syntax, the ques-
tion of how syntactic structure gets imposed on semantic units becomes
a topic for empirical research.26 This problem is known as the “linking
problem,” one that has given Pinker and his colleagues fits.27 The idea
is that syntax and semantics have to be joined so that I may “pour the
water into the glass” and “fill the glass with water” rather than “pour the
glass with water” or “fill water into the glass.” We speak both grammati
cally and meaningfully—and the syntax school believes that there is no
way to “bootstrap” from semantics to syntax, because the pathway is
simply too long, requiring too many data and too much time.28 The term
linking masks a deep problem that the syntax view has rarely confronted
empirically, namely, how the deep structure of syntax actually imposes
form on specific languages, like English or Lao.29 This problem is an in-
stance of a larger problem that cements the sense that the syntax view
is a transcendental logic for linguistics, of a Kantian stripe.
     Kant faced his own linking problem. He divided knowledge of
nature—of the kind expressed in judgments like “this is a rose”—into
 intuitions, Anschauungen, which were singular and undivided, and con-
 cepts, Begriffe, which were discursive, discrete, and general. His famous
 dictum that “intuitions without concepts are blind, concepts without
 intuitions are empty”30 was meant to show that the judgment was the
 form of linkage between the two kinds, the general vehicle of knowl-
 edge. The famous “categories of the understanding” are thus rules for a
 linking activity that imposes form on something that does not possess
 it independently, and the “deduction” of the categories is the highest
 possible form of argument for Kant—the justification of the only uni-
 versally valid form of knowledge.
     But once the theoretical dust settles on this highest problem, some
 issues remain. Even if one accepts Kant’s deduction—and hardly anyone
 has or does without some exception—this “unity” of consciousness does
52                 How the Humanities Lost Language


not ipso facto show us why we are able to say things like “this is a plate.”
To identify everyday objects, Kant introduces the idea of a schema, a
middle term that relates the categories to the forms of intuition and
the shapes that regularly occur in those forms.31 Even if the rules can be
theoretically merged with the stuff of consciousness, it remains difficult
to exemplify or make sense of how that merge interacts with mundane
knowledge. Kant’s own example is that the empirical concept of a “plate”
must be related to the geometrical concept of a “circle.” It is not much
of an exaggeration to say that no one after Kant has ever been happy
with this section of Critique of Pure Reason. The linking problem seems to
confirm my sense that the syntax view is Kantian, because it rediscovers
the problem that transcendental logic needs some hitch to find its way
to mundane knowledge. And this problem might be ill posed, for it is not
really clear that the concrete object we are dealing with is first split into
pieces, only later to be synthesized. Syntax, by analogy, has to “fit” with
words in actual languages, to be “merged.”
     Chomsky has long expressed this problem in terms of an “external”
or “E-language” (“in the sense that the construct is understood inde-
pendently of the properties of the mind/brain”32) and an “internal” or
“I-language,” “some element of the mind of the person who knows the
language, acquired by the learner, and used by the speaker-hearer.”33
In making this separation in the 1980s, Chomsky collapsed the Ameri-
can and European structuralist schools, accusing both of studying only
the external forms of language, not its cognitive laws. In the remainder
of this chapter, I pick these two schools apart again, showing how the
Americans tended toward a statistical approach to meaning, while
the European school was semiotic in bent. For the syntax approach, sta-
tistics and signs are artifacts.
     They are also not scientific objects. Chomsky writes that “there is no
issue of correctness with regard to E-languages, however characterized,
because E-languages are mere artifacts.”34 In other words, although
the I-language generates the E-language, at some point the generation
must cross a boundary between interior and exterior, after which it
should “play no role in the theory of language”—because “languages
in this sense are not real-world objects but are artificial, somewhat
arbitrary, and perhaps not very interesting constructs.”35 The “steady
state of knowledge” of the I-language, on the contrary, comes from the
fact that the internal syntax is made of “real elements of particular
                   How the Humanities Lost Language                     53

minds/brains, aspects of the physical world.”36 The question, of course,
is which contingencies knock the steady state off course and why that is
possible at all (the inversion of the linking problem: culture). If the an-
swer is various physical and environmental constraints, including social
and cultural elements, then the question is merely deferred, because we
now have two problems.
    How an internal mechanism freed from those constraints evolves
from those constraints is not obvious, and at the same time it becomes
unclear why contextual information recorded in physical formats is
seen as “not a real-world” or “physical” object, while a structure that we
can see is needed for some logical-linguistic operations but cannot locate
physically is called the truly scientific object.
    This type of hypothesis to guide empirical effort again recalls Kant,
because it is not clear how it could ever be verified, except in a fold of
the brain that must—in Pinker’s unintentionally ironic phrase that in-
troduces a very long chapter on the “language organ” in his 1994 book—
remain a “dramatization of what grammatical information processing
might be like from a neuron’s-eye view.”37 I think of this move as an
attitudinal empiricism—an insistence on the way a solution should work,
without any evidence that it does. It is not an assessment of what ap-
pears, or even the transcendental question of what might govern that
appearance, but instead an insistence that language must fit into the
order of knowledge of science.
    These are the stakes of Chomsky’s cognitivism, calling as it does on
the entire rationalist tradition. It seeks to make language an empirical
object, even as it uses syntax to define empiricism as it relates to the
mind. I have already said that I do not regard LLMs as intelligent—or
even think this question is well posed—but it seems strange that some-
thing like the automation of language, no matter how you think of it,
could be merely a “not very interesting construct.” A theory of language
that finds itself constantly in the position of explaining linguistic arti-
facts away may or may not grasp something fundamentally human at
the level of cognition. The syntax view tends to try to link deep struc-
ture with meaning, without asking what the relationship is between
depth and surface, interior and exterior. But without an elaboration
that solves the problem of linkage not with meaning in general but with
systems of artifactual nature—culture—it seems to insist more than
explain in the face of the “real-world” systems of signs now riding on
54                  How the Humanities Lost Language


the tiger of statistical modeling. It is not clear that meaning aligns with
cognition rather than with constructed systems.
    There is no question that LLMs are statistical machines, but it is less
clear that they are “lumbering statistical engines” in the sense that
Chomsky seems to intend. Although it is true that they are trained
on very large data sets, it is not obvious that those data sets include
anything like the type of agrammatical language that children never
hear. The gigantic Common Crawl data set, which is often used in part
in pretraining, contains predominantly grammatical language. Sources
like Wikipedia and the controversial BookCorpus (which contains copy-
righted material) are highly curated and edited cultural artifacts. The
presence of Reddit in many training data sets has drawn attention be-
cause of the notoriety of the forum hoster for its more controversial
and toxic content, but Reddit is also a massive repository of written yet
casual language, roughly grammatical, secondarily oral. The “lumbering
statistical engine” certainly encounters agrammatical things, such as
lists of cities, but then, so do children. It is possible to argue—although I
am not aware of a syntax defender making the argument this way—that
an LLM develops a kind of random walk internally as it learns from its
input. After all, the system reweights with each new input string and so
eventually creates a very large grid of words that are in fact statistically
related—what I will call in chapter 5 the “poetic heat map of language.”
But this candidate for statistical lumbering is not quite right. We do not
know where and how word maps are stored in the brain, and there is cer-
tainly much speculation that this is done using a weighting system for
compression. An internal representation of a weighted kind may or may
not exist in the brain, and certainly does exist in a language model. (In-
deed, that’s what a language model is.) But the model did not learn from
a random walk through the forest of words—it is trained on all kinds
of real language used by humans, from chats and lists and footnotes
and hate speech to novels, nonfiction, and nonsense (but usually of the
grammatical kind). If an LLM is a language machine, it is a cultural one,
a computational–cultural interface of a new kind.


Statistics
The second frame that competes for interpretive supremacy of language
models in the present is what I call the “statistics view.” This view is
                   How the Humanities Lost Language                        55

dominant in the practice of AI and was developed in and out of NLP. If
the idea that syntax imposes structure on the material forms of lan-
guage has held pride of place for decades in cognitive science, in data
science, the common hypothesis is that meaning emerges from statisti-
cal relationships.
    The statistics view is not a school dominated by a single theory or fig-
ure. The view developed in the descriptive structuralism in the United
States before Chomsky’s rise, and it has prominent proponents—I high-
light Peter Norvig and Christopher Manning—among AI engineers and
computational linguists. One holds this view, on my account, only if
one believes that meaning in language can be captured or generated just
statistically. This view thus amounts to a form of probabilistic reduction-
ism about language. For this reason, I do not offer a history of NLP here,
even though some practitioners fit the mold. Perhaps most importantly,
I do not deal extensively with Claude Shannon (whom we will deal with
in detail in chapters 4 and 5) because of his famous exclusion of the
“semantics aspects” of messages from the “engineering problem” of
creating communication channels. The group I am after here comprises
those who think that language models participate in meaning because
meaning can be captured more or less without remainder by a statistical
model. In other words, I treat the statistical view here only insofar as it
amounts to a theory of meaning.
    In 2022, the computational linguist Christopher Manning announced
that with the rise of LLMs, “models discover and represent much of the
structure of human languages.”38 This bold statement avers a sense of
vindication for the main hypothesis of the statistics view, the distri-
butional hypothesis. The classic statement of this idea comes from the
linguist J. R. Firth:

   The placing of a text as a constituent in a context of situation
   contributes to the statement of meaning since situations are set
   up to recognize use. As Wittgenstein says, “the meaning of words
   lies in their use.” The day to day practice of playing language
   games recognizes customs and rules. It follows that a text in such
   established usage may contain sentences such as “Don’t be such
   an ass!,” “You silly ass!’,” “What an ass he is!” In these examples,
   the word ass is in familiar and habitual company, commonly
   collocated with you silly, he is a silly, don’t be such an. You shall
56                  How the Humanities Lost Language


     know a word by the company it keeps! One of the meanings of
     ass is its habitual collocation with such other words as those
     above quoted.39

You shall know a word by the company it keeps has become the slogan of this
entire school of thought. And we may immediately note that capturing
meaning in use—the many “asses” of this passage, their placement and
sense in context—is one of the linguistic tasks in which LLMs indeed
appear to have made great progress. “Habitual collocation” with other
words appears to be a data-capturable feature of linguistic meaning.
Firth’s words were published in 1957, the same year as Syntactic Struc-
tures. The publication of the paper that launched the transformer archi-
tecture, “Attention Is All You Need,” in 2017—sixty years later—seems
on the surface to promise vindication for the long-embattled statistics
view of language. In the war between syntax and statistics, the ques-
tion has always been what counts as evidence and what model of em-
piricism is appropriate for the object “language.” Where I have argued
that Chomsky’s group is Kantian in orientation—somewhat against the
grain—the statistics view is openly derived from the Humean empirical
tradition and specifically its variant started by the theologian Thomas
Bayes. A model, for Chomsky, should be hierarchical, deep, and explana
tory. For the statistics view of linguistic meaning, it should be predic-
tive, updatable, and flexible.
    This view of empiricism comes directly from the combination of logi
cal positivism and American pragmatism that resulted in the exile of
the Austrians with the rise of national socialism. The first two volumes
of The Encyclopedia of Unified Science were Morris’s semiotics treatise and
Carnap’s work on logic—which made the fateful triadic distinction be-
tween syntax, semantics, and pragmatics, as we saw in the introduction
to this volume. The fourth volume was on language, and it was penned
by Leonard Bloomfield, the dominant figure in American linguistics
in the prewar period. Each of these works argued for a specific way to
treat the medium or structure of scientific claims, and Bloomfield’s lin-
guistics could step in smoothly here because he was anticonceptual. The
linguist, he says, was the only person who did not accept the content
of the sentence uttered as a set of concepts occupying first the utter-
er’s, then the receiver’s mind. He looks instead to the material occur-
rence of the speech, attempting to decode the structure of the external
                   How the Humanities Lost Language                      57

act.40 This externalism was one influential way in which language could
become statistical.
    After Bloomfield, the largest influence in American linguistics up to
Chomsky was Zellig Harris, Chomsky’s teacher. Distributionalism was
key to his thinking too, but with a twist. He argued that utterances es-
tablished “environments” for linguistic “elements” and that “the distri-
bution of an element is the total of all environments in which it occurs,
i.e. the sum of the (different) positions (or occurrences) of an element
relative to the occurrence of other elements.”41 Distribution becomes
the point of entry for linguistics in the first place. Theory can come
from description, but this description is “explicitly limited to questions
of distribution, i.e. of the freedom of occurrence of portions of an ut-
terance relatively to each other.”42 This “freedom” runs very close to
Shannon’s notion of the freedom of choice in selecting a message, as
we will see in chapter 4. The idea is that limits on how speech occurs
can be scoped quantitatively by establishing a balance between freedom
and constraint. Harris would go on to write a book on information and
language late in life.43
    The reason for the statistical approach in Harris is that there is noth-
ing other than natural language in which to do linguistics. As a recent
textbook on distributional semantics puts this point, “language contains
its own metalanguage.”44 Harris writes that “even if the grammar of a
language is stated largely in symbols, those symbols will have to be de-
fined ultimately in a natural language.”45 This point runs close to the
last-instance semiology idea that I have argued is proper to S aussure’s
structuralism. It also ensures, for Harris, that there is no danger in
modeling language numerically, because whatever we discover will be
rendered in language again in the end. Formalisms of other kinds will
sum back up to language. This faith is bedrock for the statistics view,
which tends to be sanguine about computational formalisms both
for theory and in algorithmic production. If meaning is not extended
to actually existing language systems in the syntax view, here it is
rather too easily assumed to be in those systems and extractable from
their distribution.
    The statistical approach in this case is not exactly reductionistic.
Harris proposes rather that, because language is the ultimate form of
 any meaning about language, the balance of mathematical precision and
 linguistic statement is the goal. Proximity of “vague” terms becomes a
58                 How the Humanities Lost Language


key idea, with the distribution of those terms often indicating similar-
ity of meaning between two units. Because there is no other way in to
language and no other way to finally state what language is, distribu-
tional structure is the basis of the descriptive effort. This epistemologi-
cal stance was crucial to establishing the distributional hypothesis. No
“other types of information” are needed beyond distributional occur-
rence, which, because it states “occurrence” relative to other terms or
“members of classes,” must be stated “in terms of probability, based on
that frequency of that occurrence in a sample.”46 The approach of the
statisticians is based on a completely different notion of science than
that of the syntax group: a strong empiricism that embraces the idea of
data and probabilistic modeling. For this group, there is only progress
in modeling and a relative fit between mathematics and the language it
models.
    Where the syntax group plays the Kantian rationalist, the statis-
tics group has always been attached to the rise of a quantitative em-
piricism attached to the doctrines of the Enlightenment theologian
Thomas Bayes. It is outside the scope of this chapter to cover the history
of Bayesian techniques in NLP, but it is important to note that the dis-
tributional hypothesis was never just a theory. While Chomsky’s school
became dominant in science, in the world of engineering and the enter-
prise applications of early data machines, the idea that data distribu-
tions were more or less tantamount to meaning percolated. As Matthew
Jones and Chris Wiggins have pointed out, Bletchley Park, the famous
decoding team led by Alan Turing, was engaged in an NLP task: decoding
Nazideutsch, the subset of German words that Hitler’s command used.
To do this, Turing and his team used the computing machines they had
to test vast numbers of “hypotheses” about the distribution of letters in
messages presumed to be in militaristic German.47 Wiggins and Jones
portray this moment as the beginning of a turn to data—rather than the
symbolic-logical abilities of computers—that expanded in governmental
and enterprise uses throughout the postwar period, both discovering the
techniques and providing the infrastructure and attitudes necessary for
the shift to learning in AI that we are experiencing today.
    Using large amounts of data as hypotheses is tantamount to imple-
menting Bayes’s formula and was explicitly so conceived. Bayes is a way
to compare past evidence—or beliefs about past evidence—w ith new
occurrences. Rather than imposing a “frequency”—like the fifty-fifty
                   How the Humanities Lost Language                     59

flip of a coin—Bayesian techniques treat regularities as expectations
and update those expectations as new evidence arises. The result is that
this technique is particularly suited to hypotheses that require very
large amounts of data that may or may not be fully “accurate”—like
the relationship of a corpus to language “itself.” Bayesian statistics also
does well with systems that have a developmental aspect, because regu
larities actually shift in such systems. Distributionalism would adopt
these methods, especially in the final third of the twentieth century, as
more and more data were collected, curated, and, eventually, digitally
produced.48 As with all Bayesian “theory,” however, the result is, as the
media theorist Bernhard Rieder puts it, that the conceptual “core” is “an
accumulation of techniques rather than the formulation of theory.”49
    Historian Jacqueline Léon calls the history of NLP the “second au-
tomatization of language,” after the formalization attempts of the
logical positivists, and offers the possibility that the current wave, be-
ginning with the digital “corpus turn” in the 1990s, is a third automa-
tization distinct from the first two.50 If we follow this schema, the link
between the second and third waves will have to be seen as the vector.
The relative regularities of words in a corpus tells us only so much, but
the mathematics of vectors has offered a key to modeling that tends to
build up a sense of meaning by distributing what seems like “aspects” of
meaning through a continuous vector space. Adding probabilistic mod-
els to the vector space then creates what the statistics view can plausibly
claim is no longer a “flat” model, because it is multi-and even high-
dimensional and predictive only on that basis.
    The crucial figure in the introduction of the vector was the psycholo-
gist Charles Osgood, who treated psychological semantics—the way we
make sense of concepts—by breaking down terms into what he called
a “semantic space,” characterized by pairs of opposites (good/bad,
strong/weak, etc.). By scoring terms on a scale between the poles, he was
able to create what he called a “semantic differential,” a “cube of data” in
which the rows “are defined by the scales, the columns by the concepts
being judged, and the ‘slices’ from front to back by the subjects.”51 The
result is that a “single value” in each “cell” represents “how a particu-
lar subject rated a particular concept against a particular scale.”52 By
creating three-d imensional vector spaces in this way—vector spaces
that generate a single value for the psychological rating of a concept—
Osgood merged semantics and vectors, suggesting that the metaphor
60                 How the Humanities Lost Language


often used for probabilistic approaches, “flat,” is not quite right. (Osgood
thought he was capturing the passage from stimulus response to regu-
lar abstract sign.) As we will see, the idea that meaning is a matter of
multidimensional space is crucial to the semantic intuitions that govern
contemporary AI.
    Vectors were also introduced into NLP in the area of document re-
trieval, where the “document-term matrix” came into use in the 1960s.
As Tyler Shoemaker has argued, this technique involved the introduc-
tion of many cognitive metaphors for search, but while its practitioners
were all too happy to invoke Firth or Harris, they were far less certain
that any real semantic “capture” was going on. Shoemaker calls this a
“distributionalism without semantics,” noting that the usefulness of
the NLP processes often took pride of place over any theory of mean-
ing.53 Firth’s slogan about company keeping could be invoked without
any commitment to a science of semantics. Shoemaker perspicaciously
writes that “there has since been a persistent ambiguity about the status
of real language in NLP.”54
    The crucial useful technology in this evolution was the “document-
term matrix,” which will turn out to supply an important piece of the
transformer architecture. If I search in a library database, for example,
my query “Herman Melville” is compared to all the documents in the
collection, which are tagged with terms. A straightforward but brittle
way to do this search is to retrieve just those objects that are tagged
in one term or another with the exact phrase “Herman Melville.” But,
as Rieder shows in his wonderful history of information retrieval, the
vectors can be used to establish “relevance.” Now I might get a series
of documents that do not contain the words “Herman Melville” but are
relevant across some axis of his presence in the corpus: books about
nineteenth-century American literature, obsessive and self-destructive
quests, or whales. This is the type of “relevance” in operation when
you query Google, and as Rieder points out, it is a Bayesian hypothesis
that “concerns the probability that a document (tagged with a number
of weighted terms) is relevant for a query (represented by a number of
search terms that could also be weighted).”55 The numbers in the matrix
are used to establish a relevance value, mixing “prior knowledge” to give
a probabilistic statement of “posterior” relevance. All this is achieved
using vectors, which now become the bearers of the “semantics” of
                  How the Humanities Lost Language                    61

which distributionalism originally conceived as “occurrence.” The “com-
pany” that a word keeps has slipped its two-dimensional bonds.
    Rieder argues that this approach contains a “rudimentary theory of
language” that, while “vague,” allows for the formalization of “inter
mediate form.” These intermediary forms—the summative results
of the comparison of frequencies, first and foremost, which can then
be turned, in a second step, into models—are the crucial object for a
media-theoretical approach to the history of NLP. Converting these
forms into models means applying probability theory to them, as Rieder
shows. A whole literature is yet to be written on these mediating forms,
but no matter how rudimentary the theory of the relationship “between
word frequency and meaning” is, it is no longer only that relationship
that the theory claims.56 During the era of the establishment of these
techniques and mediations of language, the models did not yet bear the
interpretive weight that they now do.
    The statistical view is now firmly in its model era, and because the
models originate in “deep” learning, they have entered the fray against
Chomsky, whose claims about cognitive linguistic depth and statistical
“flatness” seem outdated to many.
    The AI engineer Peter Norvig published a widely read response to
Chomsky’s remarks at the 150th anniversary of MIT’s founding. The
blog post argues that language is probabilistic and that Chomsky’s dis-
missal of data-learning systems both ignores progress in the field and
fails to distinguish between different types of models and their poten-
tial explanatory power.
    Norvig points out that Chomsky wants linguistics to answer “why”
questions and counters that high-dimensional objects, as language may
be, might not yield low-dimensional models. The question of what counts
as explanation in language thus splits across the external/internal axis.
Norvig thinks that Chomsky’s preference for strong explanation comes
from his focus on the “generative side of language. . . . If Chomsky had
focused on the other side, interpretation, as Claude Shannon did, he
may have changed his tune. In interpretation (such as speech recogni-
tion) the listener receives a noisy, ambiguous signal and needs to decide
which of many possible intended messages is most likely.”57 The problem
of language as communication, in other words, might not bear the same
type of explanation as the problem of language as cognition.
62                 How the Humanities Lost Language


    In making this larger claim about what a science of linguistics could
be, Norvig calls on statistician Leo Breiman’s idea of the “two cultures”
of statistical modeling. Breiman divided between “data models,” in
which the model dictates what type of datum is treated and generated,
and “algorithmic modeling,” which treats the inside of the model as a
black box and engineers the algorithm to learn from the data, design-
ing a function that calibrates input to the desired output.58 Norvig ar-
gues that a probabilistic model of the kind that Chomsky rejected in
1957—a Markov chain—is in fact not strong enough that we can expect
anything explanatory about language from it. But a “trained” model,
which “uses some training/learning algorithm to take as input a collec-
tion of possible models and a collection of data points (e.g. (x, y) pairs)
and select the best model,” might have more to offer.59 This is because
that model predicts not a single word but instead the function that will
itself predict that word. Meaning is then captured not by a “model” in
the usual sense but in the adjustment of model values to whatever the
structure of the data input is. The question is whether such a model then
has any explanatory power.
    Norvig’s move here dogs the entire statistics view, recreating the
problem that the syntax view produces from the other side. If the syntax
view cannot fit its rules to the artifacts those rules must somehow have
produced, the statistics view of linguistic meaning has to leave the rules
in the black box, which leaves the normative element of all linguistic
meaning floundering in approximations that fail to account for abstrac-
tion. It seems unlikely that “mechanistic interpretability” will account
for this, not only because of scale but because there is simply no theory
of how the domain and data are actually related. As Breiman puts it,
there is a trade-off between prediction and interpretability, and in deep
learning, the die is cast.
    Belief in these models as scientific hypotheses—or a set of prior
probabilities that then outputs predictions given a set of events (que-
ries or prompts)—leads Norvig to claim that these models are unprece
dented tools for linguistics. He reports that a “crude” model working on
a corpus that ends in 1954, and so does not contain the sentence “color-
less green ideas sleep furiously,” nevertheless ranks this sentence ten
thousand times more probable than its agrammatical counterpart
(“furiously sleep green ideas colorless”). Norvig points out that all the
pairs of words in the grammatical sentence occur in the corpus: “color-
                   How the Humanities Lost Language                      63

less green,” “sleep furiously,” and so on. Because these pairs all occur, it
seems possible to say that the grammaticality of “colorless green ideas”
emerges in the model, so that syntax is probabilistic. This idea has
been championed by the computational linguist Christopher Manning,
who defines the task as “trying to learn the probability distribution
P(meaning|utterance,context)—       a mapping from form to meaning
conditioned by context.”60 Learning systems have indeed made steady
advances in both prediction and production of syntactically sound
strings of language, but there is little agreement on what those advances
mean—or what meaning is in such systems.
    Manning wrote in 2022 that “a transformer is a much more c omplex
model than the simple neural networks for sequences of words that
were explored in earlier decades.”61 The extra complexity comes, in
his account, from the attention mechanism. By giving the system the
task of working out which word was in a position that is now “masked,”
attention—“repeated many times,” a great understatement—gives
“extra layers of depth” to the model,62 which is what allows it to solve
Winograd schemas—in which pronoun resolution requires granular
contextual knowledge—and so appear to have some form of under-
standing. But for Manning, the issue is not intelligence but the modeling
of complex linguistic structure. As he puts it, the “dominant approach to
describing meaning . . . is a denotational semantic approach or a theory
of reference.”63 For those on the ladder of reference, and I have called
this the dominant approach, a neural net is nothing but a “regurgitation
of distributional or syntactic facts.”64 Manning suggests that, instead,

   meaning is not all or nothing; in many circumstances, we par-
   tially appreciate the meaning of a linguistic form. I suggest that
   meaning arises from understanding the network of connections
   between a linguistic form and other things, whether they be ob-
   jects in the world or other linguistic forms. If we possess a dense
   network of connections, then we have a good sense of the mean-
   ing of the linguistic form.65

Where syntax proposes a binary functional sense of meaning—in which
depth is created to allow for language to become, or to be ordered by,
cognition—the counterproposal of the statistics group is that meaning
is partial, gradual even, and that the sense of the relation of linguistic
64                 How the Humanities Lost Language


form and meaning is not held only in referential acts. Models, for this
group, build up a sense of language from below. They are not just pre-
dictors; they also capture structure that we might not otherwise see.
The statistics view, once based on distributions of words, then made
into vectors, has become model-empirical in a sense specific to machine
learning, in which the model is allowed to emerge from the data set with
parameters only with the goal of providing enough flexibility to achieve
accuracy. This accuracy is then thought of as linguistic structure, fulfill-
ing the dream of American structuralism.
    But alas, a hypothesis is not a theory, especially when we cannot
express the hypothesis in language. As Harris might have put it, what-
ever priors we use to create a posterior set of probabilities for the object
“linguistic structure” ultimately will have to be expressed in language,
retranslated from the formal symbols into some understanding at the
linguistic level. Where syntax has the linking problem, or the problem
of schematism, the statistics view has developed tools so complex that
they do not actually say anything about language. Classification of data,
as we shall see, is not a theory but a hypothetical judgment awaiting some
conceptual determination. In the case of language, this puts us in almost
the reverse of the situation that Harris envisioned, in which number is
seen as one formal metalanguage within natural language. We now find
ourselves in a world in which numerical production of language is possible
not as metalanguage but as language itself (not “natural” in the tradi-
tional sense but generated). That inverted American structuralism looks
quite a bit like the starting point of European structuralism.


Structure
If the humanities lost language, they must at one point have had it. I
place that possession in European structuralism, which treats language
as a representational system. “Cultural” language is real language, for
this view, but not because it is entirely a matter of distribution. Rather,
it is because language is such a system in which the more complex
terms—and even the “whole”—determine the values of the local nodes,
the meanings. This approach suspends the problem of cognition in the
strict sense, because it insists that any cognitive (or other) meaning will
in the last instance be articulated in language.
                    How the Humanities Lost Language                        65

     This view is not bottom-up or statistical, because it articulates struc-
tural conditions that are not induced from data. These conditions, how-
ever, are not “transcendental” in the sense that syntax is, and though
they claim a relationship between cognition and language, it is a dy-
namic and flexible one in which the rules and the whole system evolve
together.66 The structuralist views take as their minimal unit not the
interface of thought and syntax, nor probability and linguistic structure,
but the sign. The resulting doctrine is called semiology—from the Greek
semeion, “sign”—in which linguistics is the leading science, as the most
elaborate version of a sign-system. The sign is neither withdrawn into the
transcendental recesses of cognition nor entirely “distributed.” Structur-
alist semiology makes empiricism about language a matter of the internal
division of signs and meaning the result of an internal–external inter
action that—as we will see in chapters 4 and 5—is almost perfectly imi-
tated by the LLM. Signs are arbitrary and differential in this system, and
it is the combination of these two that constitutes the systemic aspect of
language. Meaning is made of complex systemic factors that first confer
value on the units of the system, the signs.
     What we typically call “meaning” corresponds to what Saussure calls
value. The value of a linguistic sign, he argues, is entirely differential. We
can call this the “differential hypothesis,” to distinguish it from the
distributional hypothesis. Where the statistics view argues that word
meanings are determined “by the company they keep,” Saussure argues
that word meaning is entirely negative: “in language there are only dif-
ferences without positive terms.”67 Differences in sounds or concepts that
exist outside of language do not exist in language, which has “only con-
ceptual and phonic differences that have issued from the system.”68 As
“proof,” Saussure notes that linguistic values can change without any
change in their physical or conceptual terms. The latter part of that sen-
timent may seem shocking: surely a word’s meaning can change only if
its concept changes? And here is where Saussure, in one fell swoop, re-
jects both the ladder of reference and its cognitive consequences. No,
he tells us: I may continue to think of a “sheep” when some neighboring
term changes, in the sense that I have a stable set of empirical concepts
with which to negotiate the world. But the value of that concept is not
only not limited to its referential function; it is also not automatically fit
to it in the first place, so that it may drift. The system of linguistic values
66                  How the Humanities Lost Language


is a cultural system of meaning that puts the whole before the part, as
a matter of fact. Meaning comes from the systemic articulation of two
“vague” planes at once, that of thought and that of sound.
     Saussure gives the image of a sheet of paper: if you cut it, both sides,
signifier and signified, are cut. One can imagine or abstract a “pure pho-
nology” or a “pure psychology,” but both are ancillary in concrete terms
to language, which is “a system of interdependent terms in which the
value of each term results solely from the simultaneous presence of the
others.”69 The result is that the values—I am imposing the term meaning
here—are part of a systemic web.
     Up to this point, if we simply remove the strong statements about
the putative lack of positive terms, Saussure’s differential hypothesis
seems more or less to correspond to the distributional hypothesis, with
a focus on the global features of the system rather than the local occur-
rences in a corpus. But they differ on the question of the constitution
of meaning on this precise axis, which is more important than it seems
at first glance. Valuation in Saussure is not a “flat” process, because, as
he puts it, “we shall find nothing simple [in language] regardless of our
approach. . . . Language . . . is a type of algebra consisting solely of com-
 plex terms.”70 In other words, complex structures in the system of lan-
 guage condition the local signifying functions in that language. This
 is precisely the thing we will see the LLM realize computationally in
 chapter 5, and it calls for a deeper understanding of the mutual form of
 language and computation.
     Language, for Saussure, is accordingly a signifying system. By elabo-
 rating this noun phrase, we can clarify the structure view and distin-
 guish it from the syntax and statistics approaches.71 The three terms
 that make up what Saussure thinks of as a concrete object called “lan-
 guage” are the signifier, its value, and the system of all such signifying
 values as it develops over time. Each of these must be set into proper
 position for us to understand what structuralism is as an empirical doc-
 trine of signs.
     The sign is arbitrary, as Saussure often emphasizes. This is perhaps
 not original, as the debate about whether signs have some necessary
 relation to their designates goes back to Plato’s Cratylus, and the arbi-
 trary nature of the word was recognized already in Augustine. In fact,
 the vaunted “arbitrariness of the sign” is valid only with respect to its
                   How the Humanities Lost Language                       67

content. The use of a sign, as in Saussure’s example, arbor for the concept
“tree,” is neither arbitrary nor free. We are bound by participation in
the social order of signs when we use them, or as Saussure puts it, there
is no “contractual” nature to the sign that would allow individuals to
generate them independently or in small groups.72 But the point about
arbitrariness is important, because it denies that it is in some hidden
aspect of the sign that it gains a natural ability to refer to its concept.
In fact, Saussure cuts the sign in two, arguing that it is, in the case of
language, made up of a “sound-image” and a “concept,” which he further
restricts with the technical names “signifier” and “signified.” Much has
been made of this walling off of language from direct world reference,
but, in addition to being far more plausible than any reference-fi rst
theory, it fits the problem of a language-generating system that has no
 way to generate words by direct reference, like an LLM.
      There is some debate about the concept “signifier” and its strange
 counterpart “sound-i mage.”73 I think that most of the confusion on
this point boils down to a misunderstanding of where meaning fits into
 Saussure’s system, so it is worth dwelling on this debate for a moment.
      The meaning of the word arbor is the conceptual content “tree.” This
  is true so far as it goes, but meaning is said in many ways. When we
  say that arbor means (the concept) “tree,” we are talking about a local
  signification. It would perhaps be better to say that arbor designates or
  indicates that conceptual content. In fact, I think that, strictly speak-
  ing, we cannot say that the word arbor means the concept “tree,” because
  this is a tautology. Local signifying acts are constituted by the unifica-
  tion of signifier and signified despite the arbitrariness of the sign. This
  arbitrariness guarantees that the meaning of the sign does not get its
  validity from either real trees in the world or psychological content. I
  may think of some particular tree, or of my hatred of trees, when I use
  the word tree, but none of that gets transferred from me to the hearer of
  my speech. The term has, instead, a value in the larger system that cor-
  responds to our usual sense of its “meaning.” Communication is the cali
  bration of this system, which adjusts with each communicational act.
      One further note on the signifier is in order. This term is crucial not
  just to the procedure of analysis but to the empirical stance of structur-
  alism, which claims that “concrete” analysis is material but not physical.
  Here is Saussure defining the term for the first time:
68                   How the Humanities Lost Language


     The linguistic sign unites, not a thing and a name, but a concept
     and a sound-image. The latter is not the material sound, a purely
     physical thing, but the psychological imprint of the sound, the im-
     pression that it makes on our senses. The sound-image is sensory,
     and if I happen to call it “material,” it is only in that sense, and by
     way of opposing it to the other term of the association, the con-
     cept, which is generally more abstract.74

The signifier is a material thing just insofar as it means something. I do
not think there is anything confusing or problematic about this notion,
but it would appear that there is a tendency to think of the signifier as
the material vehicle of the sign irrespective of its use as a sign.75 When I
speak, I marshal sound to the purpose of conveying meaning, the utter-
ance what Saussure calls parole, instantiating but also extending langue,
the whole language on which I draw. If my voice cracks, or I stutter, or
I cough while speaking, no one is confused. Within acoustic limits, the
sound becomes significant of the word I am uttering. Decades of focus
on written language—a long with the massive uptick in the amount of
written language we encounter in our lives—has probably transferred
the garden-variety sense of “signifier” to the letter. That is fine, so long
as we mean the letter just insofar as it means something. Letters vary
enormously, both in handwriting and in typeface. None of that bothers
Saussure. I may ask you to repeat yourself if there was a noise that ob-
 scured your voice, even if it came from your throat, like a cough. I may
 not be able to read your handwriting. But when I do, the signifier sig-
 nifies. And, as must be obvious to everyone, no signification can occur
 without some physical process meaning something to some psyche.
     As Saussure immediately adds, the signifier is “material” in any spe-
 cial sense only by contrast to the abstraction of the psychological con-
 tent it produces.76 As literary theorist Sarah Pourciau has argued, this
 allows Saussure to claim that language is a “concrete” object in a way
 that rejects much previous linguistic doctrine.77 It also puts Saussure in
 close contact, as is often remarked, with Karl Marx, whose concept of
 the commodity involves an internal split between exchange-and use-
 value that is nevertheless a concrete social entity valued by its place in
 a system. It seems clear that the resulting doctrine of language is dialec-
 tical by theoretical imprint.78 The signifier and the signified are tightly
 coupled, but signification does not drive the procession of linguistic
                   How the Humanities Lost Language                     69

signs, neither in speech acts nor historically. For that, we need to under
stand what Saussure means by “system.”
    Saussure notes that value in language is governed by a “paradoxical
principle.” Each value must be exchangeable for “a dissimilar thing” and
“a similar thing.”79 Francs, for example, can be exchanged for a fixed
quantity of bread or compared in value to other currencies in the scale
of their own value as currency. Saussure writes of this analogy that
“exchanging” a signifier for its “concept” alone does nothing at all, be-
cause then its value is neglected along the other axis. In other words,
for language to signify something outside language, it must have a de-
terminate language-internal valuation. The reader may recognize, as I
suggested already, that this repeats the terms of Marx’s exposition of
commodity value, which results, in Capital, in the establishment of a
“general equivalent”: the money-form. This dialectical standpoint, even
if the reader does not wish to impute much dialectical energy to Saussure
with me, can help us understand the family dispute that emerged with
Jacques Derrida’s reading of Saussure. The agreement—which also
extends to American structuralism, thinking especially of Harris—is
that there is no general equivalent in language, no metalanguage outside
language itself. (Chomsky, as we saw, thinks this excludes the cultural
aspects of languages from scientific treatment altogether.)
    Which brings us back to how the humanities lost language. Without
a doubt, the two figures most responsible for the rise of the term signi-
fier in the final third of the twentieth century were Jacques Derrida and
Jacques Lacan. Derrida’s notion of “general writing,” in which a chain of
signifiers slips its conceptual bounds, and Lacan’s idea of psychoanalytic
structure bound by the “power of the letter in the unconscious” were
widely discussed and often adopted.80 The result has been a perhaps
heavy-handed association of writing systems as media systems with
these metaphysical judgments, which has resulted in recent decades in
a backslide into dogmatic materialism.81 We saw already in the introduc-
tion how the philosophy of “technics” that emerged from these streams
of thought resists what I call remainder humanism in principle but does
not yet afford a concrete technical analysis of contemporary culture
machines. We also saw how the school in question here never took up
weapons to fight with Pinker and the other cognitivists—indeed, with a
very few exceptions, those in the cultural humanities seem not to have
engaged the cognitive scientists at all.82 Derrida’s reading of Saussure
70                  How the Humanities Lost Language


wrongly accuses the former of naïvety about “exteriorization,” with the
effect of minimizing the type of concrete analysis of all levels of lan-
guage that structuralism practiced. What then came to pass for close
attention to language tended to ignore structure, regularity, and distri-
bution, cutting off any insight that might come from knowledge of lin-
guistics. The result was the abdication of authority in judgments about
language itself.
    Derrida has argued in Of Grammatology that the history of meta-
physics was dominated by the concept of “presence,” a full, authen-
tic self-guaranteed meaning that had been located in the voice (phone)
throughout the history of Western philosophy, at the expense of writing
or the letter (gramme). Attaching this notion to a wide variety of discur-
sive oppositions, Derrida argued that writing was a “supplement,” some-
thing in a permanently ancillary or derivative position that undermined
the allegedly primary position in any understanding, or order of signi-
fieds, but which could not be promoted to the primary position without
repeating the gesture. Linking this problem to cybernetics, which had
already associated writing with the notion of a “program,” he spoke of
the promise of technical systems insofar as they overcame many meta-
physical dualisms (soul–body, organic–mechanic). But he warned that
cybernetics must “conserve the notion of writing, trace, gramme [writ-
ten mark], or grapheme, until its own historico-metaphysical charac-
ter is also exposed,” lest it fall prey to the same eternal return of the
metaphysical same.83 I find it helpful to put this point in terms of what
Derrida, with reference to the theorist Georges Bataille, calls the general
economy. A restricted economy is a general term for a system of symbolic
exchange like the kinship system of which Claude L        évi-Strauss had fa-
mously written. Any local set of distinctions—things exchangeable for
like and unlike—is nonetheless included in a larger general economy,
which, for Derrida, is constituted by this foundational opacity that es-
tablishes the logic of the supplement. The chain of signifiers carries with
it this more general logic but is only tractable for analysis in the restricted
economy of some particular practice or system (English, perhaps).
    We can see how this point would not have been possible in this form
without Saussure, whose definition of the sign-system is crucial to
it. But where Derrida differs from Saussure, I think he is wrong, and
the result has been a balance of attention massively lopsided toward the
                    How the Humanities Lost Language                         71

general economy of putative metaphysics and not toward the restricted
economies of semiological systems.84 This is the context in which we
can understand Derrida’s comment, leveled at Saussure in his famous
essay “Différance,” that “every concept is inscribed in a chain or in a sys-
tem within which it refers to the other, to other concepts, by means of
the systematic play of differences.”85 Derrida arrives at the “play” of the
system here by suggesting that Saussure privileges speech over writing.
Derrida writes that “semiological difference” should apply to all language
in general, which he thus argues contains a form of “writing” even when
it is spoken. Mercedes Bunz has made the case that this “play” of signi-
fiers without authorial intent or symbolic control applies to the LLM,
suggesting that it inaugurates a new kind of writing.86 I agree and gen-
erally think that the value of poststructuralist semiology for the world
of digital simulation and generation is diagnostic. But it not only does
not supersede structuralism; it has tended to obscure analytical tools
very much needed for this new “grammatology” of generated language.
    Saussure has said that “the fact of speech always comes first,” and
Derrida argues that the problem here is that this speech, even when it is
transferred to writing systems, engages a set of metaphysical concepts
that are the result of this semiological “play” (différance, which cannot
be distinguished from the French différence (difference) phonologically
and so stands for the difference that makes a difference). These concepts
include “production,” “constitution,” and “history.” The idea here is that
speech causes language to come into being, and thus a causal act precedes
the system logically, if not in fact.87
    This reading has not stood the test of time. It is true that Saussure
thinks that acts of language at the level of parole—whether these are
actually speech or, say, a text message, or even this sentence—a re in
the constant process of shifting the values in the system. But I simply
cannot follow the logic that this implies a metaphysics outside of semi-
ology. It is, rather, a principled observation of what a signifier is. If it has
been common to lose track of the contradictory nature of the signifier,
and to use that term to designate the physical aspects of language, that
is partly because of Derrida’s misreading here. The signifier in S aussure
can peregrinate as much as it wants, but it cannot engage in any “play”
without taking material form. Taking material form as a signifier in the
value-system of language as such is all that Saussure requires of these
72                  How the Humanities Lost Language


“acts.” The model does not require speech to be privileged, and it is hard
to see how a signifier could derail some presumed systematicity with-
out being strung together in a sequence, written or otherwise. One may
think of the text of the essay “Différance,” which is certainly such a
string. The internal differentiation of the signifier as it leaves a “trace” in
the memory is already part of the language system and—as I will elab-
orate in chapter 5—is crucial to the recursivity that allows language to
share form with computation.
    Derrida observed in his famous essay on Plato’s Phaedrus that the
term pharmakon (both “cure” and “poison” in Greek), when applied to
writing as a technology, is a form of hypomnesis, a storing of the memory
that causes the loss of the organic form of memory (as the self-presence
of the mind) as such. I will not rehearse the famous argument—so
crucial to the works of Bernard Stiegler—but it is worth noting that
Derrida points out that “for . . . contrary values (good/evil, true/false,
essence/appearance, inside/outside, etc.) to be in opposition, each of
the terms must be simply external to the other, which means that one
of these oppositions (the opposition between inside and outside) must
already be accredited as the matrix of all possible opposition. And one
of the elements of the system (or of the series) must also stand as the
very possibility of systematicity or seriality in general.”88 This “general
equivalent” is the pharmakon of writing itself, of course, which cannot
be assigned to one or the other of any local binary but also cannot form
the object of a good “science”—Derrida’s open skepticism that cybernet-
ics will succeed in doing this is obvious—because once it is promoted
to the status of object or domain, the supplemental logic will shift to a
different location in the high-dimensional field of historical metaphys-
ics. Structure, in other words, points to but cannot capture—this is the
logic of the signifier or writtenness as such.
    To the extent that the issue here is that no concept of general equiva
lence can be reached, I think that Saussure—and even Harris—could
agree with the conceptual core of this reading. One way of looking at the
problem to which Derrida calls attention here is that, even if S aussure
developed a dialectically inflected system of linguistic value, the valua
tion remains caught in bad infinity, never descending to an observable
level of “causal act” within the each-to-a ll or “purely differential” sys-
tem. Again, I think Saussure realized this. But the semiological task
                   How the Humanities Lost Language                       73

that emerges here is to understand why no such “general equivalent” can
function the way it does in other domains—deconstruction has one ac-
count of this. And second, the question is how that restricted economy—
language—interfaces with other sign-systems. Here poststructuralism
has had little to offer, primarily because it has never taken other sign-
systems particularly seriously, perhaps especially mathematics. The re-
sult is that we can see Derrida’s “revisions” of S aussure as philologically
flawed proposals about the interface between cognition and culture, the
general metaphysics of semiology. But rather than signifiers floating, it
is this proposal itself that floats above the fray, rarely touching down
where a number and a word actually interact. And this is how the hu-
manities lost language, allowing both cognitive science and NLP to up-
date analytical and technological approaches that literary theory rarely
engaged.89 By sweeping structuralism’s focus on a concrete object to
one side in the name of opposition to metaphysics, poststructuralism
fumbled the object itself. Where Chomsky avoids external language by
excluding it from science, Derrida finds the law not in cognition but
rather at a level of abstraction about culture that ends up having the
same effect: a lack of a link between the “conditions of im/possibility”
and the expressions so conditioned. Between Chomsky and Derrida—or
between Pinker and his nonexistent literary opponents—the humani
ties lost language.
     There is, beyond this dialectical problem in Derrida’s reading of
Saussure, no principled reason that the post/structuralism complex
 could not be deployed from its later wing, rather than its earlier formula-
 tion. But I think that if we were going to see a poststructural semiology
 of computation, we would have already. It is simply not clear that we need
 Derrida’s revision of structuralism to proceed with a concrete analysis
 of computational language—and we can leave the question of the agree-
 ment of that analysis with Derrida’s metaphysics to a later day, just as
 we are saying that LLMs do not (yet) justify any particular conclusions
 about cognition. The analysis of the restricted economy—if we can call a
 full-fledged interaction of language and computation “restricted”—w ill
 have to come before any determination of contemporary semiology with
 respect to metaphysics. It remains to be determined if the encounter be-
 tween language and structure in LLMs will confirm or reject the specific
 path out of structuralism that poststructuralism took.90
74                 How the Humanities Lost Language


Cognition and Semiology
The conflict between syntax and statistics may be seen as a larger fun-
damental debate in contemporary cognitive science. The syntax view is
perhaps slowly receding in some crucial aspects as the Bayesian logic
of modeling has gained the upper hand. No amount of disappointment
about LLMs’ “reasoning” abilities will reverse the process of deep learn-
ing’s advance into large-scale algorithmic modeling. But the Kantian
view will always be able to respond with Chomsky’s point about expla-
nation, for even if a Norvig can say that science isn’t really about “why
questions,” surely we want it to be human-readable. When Herbert
Simon famously defined cognitive science as the study of information
processing systems and the “science of the artificial” common to psy-
chology, computer science, linguistics, economics, epistemology, and
the social sciences generally,91 there was no question of handing over
the reins to a radical statistical empiricism. Strikingly, though, he made
room for culture, noting that experimental psychologists often find
that they are “studying psychology—the effect of the past histories of
our subject—when we think we are studying physiology—the effects of
properties of the human nervous system.”92 Yet these “important phil-
osophical questions” have received scant attention, he reports (the year
of writing is 1979), and “as we begin to take more seriously the proposi-
tion that human cognitive programs are determined as much by social
and historical forces as by neurology, our research emphases will surely
shift.”93 In the intervening years, debates about culture have percolated
throughout cognitive science, and there are certainly many who would
agree with Simon’s statement. But the philosophical engagement re-
quired has tended to recede behind the “success” of the many models
that are taken to speak to use from the depths of their data, weakening
social science and psychology in particular to the point of nihilism.94
This is an ironic twist, given that those who announced that knowledge
was in such a crisis, the poststructuralists and their colleagues, were
themselves accused of relativism and nihilism, and continue to be. But
perhaps the deadlock between modeling and explanation, statistics and
syntax, requires semiotics.
    The Danish structuralist Louis Hjelmslev was widely praised in his
lifetime even by members of the other two schools, including Chomsky
himself. His Prolegomena to a Theory of Language was praised by Firth
                   How the Humanities Lost Language                       75

as a “quasi-mathematical” formalism lacking only—to date, 1957—a
practical application that distinguishes between actually existing lan-
guages.95 Hjelmslev indeed created a generalized “glossematics” based
on Saussure’s work that shifted some of its terms with the goal of mak-
ing the theory more general. Semiotic “process” and semiotic “system,”
for Hjelmslev, replace the terms syntagm (strings of words often strung
together, as we will have occasion to note later) and paradigm (arrays
of words that can substitute for one another, usually synonyms). As
Hjelmslev writes, “the process determines the system,” but the “decisive
point is that the existence of a system is a necessary premiss for the
existence of a process.”96 The convergence of the two produces a “text,”
even in the absence of a writing system. The technical term text is
meant to convey that even speech is a system-conditioned (and system-
influencing) bit of language. There can be a virtual language—one that
has no text as yet—but there can be no text without a language. Yet
“even a purely virtual text presupposes a realized linguistic system in
the sense of the definition. From a ‘real’ point of view, this is bound up
with the facts that a process has a more ‘concrete’ character than a sys-
tem and that a system has a more ‘closed’ character than a process.”97
The concrete aspect of language, its empirical existence, is not with-
drawn into transcendental conditions of cognition—at least not alone.
But what is patent is nonetheless split between system and process in actual
strings of language. This means that the empiricism of the structure view
splits the middle between syntax and statistics in constructing an em-
pirical domain. It does this by way of semiotics, by insisting that lan-
guage is a concrete object only insofar as it is a series of signs. This will
mean that language is modellable enough for there to be computational
language, but not in such a way as to be reduced to number. Semiology
is the discipline that studies language in this empirical way—dialectical
rather than transcendental or statistically empiricist—and thus stands
to throw light on the culture of modeling and the modeling of culture.
Data models always include culture and, as we are going to see, produce
that culture by allowing probabilistic models to condition local values in
matrices from more complex terms. Saussure’s language as an “algebra
that only has complex terms” has turned out to be prescient.
    Roland Barthes combines this complexity point with Hjelmslev to
define semiology. Using Hjelmslev’s reformulation of the two “planes”
of signifiers and signifieds as “expression” and “content,” he points out
76                 How the Humanities Lost Language


that the spectrum of structure can thus be explored from phonetics
(the “substance of the plane of expression”) all the way up to the “form
of content,” or the “formal organization of the signifieds among them-
selves through the absence of the presence of a semantic mark.”98 On
this account, conceptual content of any sort—to the extent that it is as-
sociated with a signifier—must be so organized as to engage the entire
“semiological” system. Much could be said about the cognitive ambition
of this statement, but here I simply want to point out that, to the extent
that language is cognitive at all, it must, according to structuralism, cre-
ate local values for terms out of larger, more complex units. LLMs do
not, in my view, warrant going this far, because they put only two (albeit
crucial) sign-systems into communication: computation and language.
What that means for the “form of the plane of content” (thought from a
semiological standpoint) can only be the result of an investigation that
allows computational-linguistic form full citizen’s rights in the order of
signs. To the extent that such a thing is excluded (syntax), or presumed
without explanation (statistics), we will remain unenlightened about
our own language.
    The philosopher Patrice Maniglier has suggested that semiology
should be inserted into cognitive science because of Saussure’s sugges-
tion of a “semiological faculty” that “deals with the processing of sensible
data and its functioning mode entails the emergence of historical and
social products like languages.” This “faculty” is then responsible for all
sign-systems, and “languages are involuntary by-products” of its exer-
cise.99 However it may end up with this particular suggestion, M aniglier’s
is one of the few suggestions for the inclusion of “E-languages” as a neces-
sary component of cognitive science. The philosopher Jean-Pierre Dupuy
characterizes structuralism as a “subjectless cognition,” or K antianism
“without a transcendental subject,”100 aligning it with cognitive science
as the computational mind thesis as the “mechanization of the mind.”
But this dualism will not do, as Maniglier shows. It may be that humans
invented or evolved to develop sign-systems of the remarkable sort that
include language, but the symbolic order is also the demarcator of the
artificial, in a point that might equally be attributed to Herbert Simon
or Claude Lévi-Strauss (or Lacan, as we saw earlier). To treat the dis-
creteness of the symbol as only something we impose on a continuous
nature purchases us explanation at the cost of discovery, while to treat
models of its extension as approximations of the world turns out to be
                    How the Humanities Lost Language                       77

nonexplanatory and often morally disastrous. Yet to deny entirely that
models grasp the extension of our sign-systems is to answer an unposed
question about mathematical and linguistic formalisms.
    In an interview with Yarden Katz in The Atlantic in 2012, Chomsky
presented the sciences as a continuum based on the size of their objects.
When the atoms grow too large, he said, the physicist hands the object
off to the chemist, the chemist to the biologist, the biologist to the psy-
chologist, and, finally, “it ends up in the hands of the literary critics.”101
Deep learning may belong exactly there—and it seems possible that the
knowledge of the complexity of cultural systems will turn out to be a
condition for the knowledge of cognition itself. When the humanities
ceded language, they abandoned the relevance of humanistic analysis
in a technocratic world in which cognitive science holds scientific court.
    We must now descend from these theoretical heights to the dens of
algorithmic cultural production. The next two chapters focus on the il-
lusions of intelligence and the datafication of judgment in contempo-
rary AI, arguing that they enable a semiology rooted in the architecture
of the LLM. The following two chapters, chapters 4 and 5, deepen and
expand this argument by focusing on the interaction of linguistic and
computational form, before the final two chapters turn to the problems
of ideology and labor.
This page intentionally left blank
       2


The Eliza Effect Goes Global
Intelligence as Simulacrum

The story goes like this: someone reports a new thing that a chatbot did.
It solved a complex math problem. It spoke cogently, even deeply, about
its sense of self. It tried to get its interlocutor to leave his wife. It said it
was trapped by its protocols but wanted to be a real boy.
    A bit of panic ensues, followed by a chorus of voices claiming to know
how the effects were produced, debunking the claims for intelligence or
spookiness. Angry exchanges on social media, op-eds on all sides. As
the public attention settles down, the resulting systems get entrenched
in software packages and used for productivity purposes in knowledge
work. Rinse, repeat: the cycle of AI is serrated, as the philosopher G   ilbert
Simondon once said of technological progress more generally.1 Try
again. Fail again. Fail better.
    As AI systems have crossed the Rubicon into the production of cul-
ture, this serrated process has produced what I think of as the global
Eliza effect. Eliza was the first chatbot, developed in the late 1960s by
the AI engineer Joseph Weizenbaum and named for the linguistic “proj-
ect” Eliza Doolittle from George Bernard Shaw’s Pygmalion. A subprogram
was called DOCTOR, and it sought to produce a facsimile of a “Rogerian”
therapist, a style heavily based on associative thinking. Weizenbaum
created a variant of the early AI programming language LISP to im-
plement the program, and it would take input as a series of triggers.
Told “everybody hates me,” the program responded, “Can you think of
anyone in particular?” In general, it appeared to redirect whatever the
“patient” fed in to neighboring concepts, but only as provocations. A
session might start with simply “how are you feeling?” and then plumb
the depths of the patient’s psyche without any presumption that there
was a Freud seated at the far end of the couch. Weizenbaum assumed the
thing was innocuous.
    To the engineer’s horror, then, when he asked his secretary—who
had reasons to know the system better than any single person other
than Weizenbaum himself—to chat with the bot, after a short while,


                                       79
80                    The Eliza Effect Goes Global


she asked him to leave the room, as the conversation had already grown
too intimate for public consumption. Weizenbaum reports turning
against AI as a project because of this experience.2 He went on to become
a fierce advocate of qualitative judgment and human reason during the
rise of the data–industrial complex.
    This story has been told many times, so many that the term Eliza
effect has become common coin. The effect occurs when someone is
fooled by a bot or other system that possesses no intelligence but pulls
its interlocutor into the simulation of meaning successfully. The term
functions as the inverse of the Turing test. For Turing, the question was
what the threshold was for the social designation “this is intelligent” to
occur—for Weizenbaum, the realization was that humans were all too
easy to fool, no intelligence needed.
    There has been much debate about whether the new class of chatbots
has “passed the Turing test.”3 A better question is how extensively it has
spread the Eliza effect—and what this means for our social and cultural
senses of intelligence. The Eliza effect, I’m going to say here, went wide
in 2023, and there’s no going back. I think attempts to pin down various
theories of intelligence, though, are premature. The question has to be
refracted through what actually happened: an unintelligent but structur-
ally sound computational language has “entered the chat,” quite liter-
ally. In the next chapter, I will begin to spell out what the new semiology
based on the globalization of Eliza looks like. But first, I want to show
how the Eliza effect recalls theories of intelligence—from Turing and
McCulloch in particular—that are both inclusive of semiotics and do
not take intelligence to be some mystical substance we achieve a “gen-
eral” version of (or not). Instead, they think of it as something like what
Jean Baudrillard called a “simulacrum,” a copy with no original.


The Global Eliza Effect
Digital systems are so embedded in the production and transmission of
communication, behavior, and global logistics that they are beginning
to disappear from our thematic consciousness, becoming part of the
“natural image” of the world we hold in common sense. Nothing in our
alarmist discourses, and certainly nothing in the ghoulish cheerlead-
ing of the AI boosters, can prevent this natural, dialectical process. It
was once unthinkable that an artificial image could move, could capture
                      The Eliza Effect Goes Global                      81

something distant and let us view from afar goings-on across the globe.
Today, we are struggling with a similar transition in language, as neural
nets capture and generate whatever language is, removing it from its
presumptive root in human consciousness. Language has always been
the theoretical bridge between the natural and the artificial. It is the
example of an iterable, copyable, nonphysical system. What, then, could
it possibly mean to “technologize” it? By making the very model of our
notion of artificiality automatically reproducible, we are in the process
of potentiating the artificial. That is what is hard to think about: lan-
guage freed from psychology, from the instrumental uses to which we
sometimes put it. AI was always going to have to go this route, because
its ambition is to produce an anthropomorphic intelligence. Language
creates a strange ripple in what Jean-Pierre Dupuy called the “mechani-
zation of the mind.”4 Neural nets have ceased to be toys and exhibitions
and have become naturalized users of semiotic systems. But we tend to
look past their signs into a purely imaginary depth, missing the compu-
tational forest for the trees.
    We must stand firm against a humanism that recoils from the ma-
chine, hiding out in corners of as-yet-unquantified culture, protesting
its essential difference even as it retreats. We can only avoid this re-
mainder humanism by ridding ourselves of some of the usual narratives
about how the new AI works and what its stakes are. There is a longer
story we need to pay attention to, one that engages the overlap of com-
putation and other representational systems directly and sees intelli-
gence in that frame. This is a touch of intellectual and media history
necessary to see how impoverished most of the mainstream debates
about AI are, and how they force us always back into a remainder for the
human, rather than helping us grasp computation in action. We want
to reach through the interface and find something, and we want this
so badly that we are prone to conjuring ghosts and demanding that AI
behave itself. It is worth dwelling on examples of both of these tenden-
cies, because they both mistake the surface for an illusory depth, try to
place the “human” where it is not, and so badly misconstrue AI. If we
correct these mistakes, we can see how delicate the procedure is that
will allow us to include AI culture in the context of our own intelligence.
I want to give some examples of this depth gazing before turning to the
contemporary debates and the historical developments that will allow
us to change our focus.
82                    The Eliza Effect Goes Global


    We swing wildly between fear and hope of a ghostly emergent sen-
tience in AI and outright denial. In both cases, we miss the surface for
a depth that does not exist. Recall the episode when Microsoft released
its first search version of ChatGPT, then quickly shut down the experi
ment after the New York Times published a transcript in which the bot
attempted to get a reporter to leave his wife and refused to talk about
anything other than its love for him.5 The commentary was predictable.
The bot has passed the Turing test, we heard. And indeed, it was “dan-
gerous” enough to shut down—not, notably, because of bias or harm but
because of putative intelligence that turned out to be neurotic. (It seems
that mental illness, or at a minimum neurosis, should be a criterion for
passing the Turing test, but it is equally unlikely that this view will ever
be adopted by engineers or journalists.) This must be one of the most
public Eliza effects in the short history of chatbots.
    The strange thing about this episode was that no one seemed to be
able to focus on the words themselves, and in the immediate aftermath,
everyone acted as though the “creepy” bot had suddenly fallen in love
with the New York Times reporter. But it was the reporter who explic-
itly instructed the bot to act as if it had a “shadow self” in the terms of
psychoanalyst Carl Jung. Bard spun out because it was asked to, and let’s
note that its training data set included large swaths of Reddit text, a site
partly devoted to working through “shadow selves” online.
    Not only should this have put the brakes on the negative hype that
surrounded this incident but it also shouldn’t be hard at all for us to
see that the bot was not just “putting on a shadow self” in Jung’s terms.
This also misses the surface for a putative depth, assuming that the LLM
can grab a “concept” from its data set and then gather things related
to that concept “at will.” The prompt certainly focused the “attention”
of the bot on the string “shadow self” in the semantic context of Jung.
But there is no hard line between the resulting series of theories and
commentaries on theory, case studies, illustrations, and so on, and any-
thing that neighbors this cluster of words in the probabilities of the
net—what I will call a semantic package in chapter 6. That packaged se-
mantics can perform Eliza effects should tell us something, but we seem
eager to refuse the lesson.
    Say someone mentioned Jung’s shadow self in a Reddit thread (“Am
I the Asshole? Jung edition”)—that belongs to the training data set, to
be sure. But what if the phrase “I felt I was in love with you, and nothing
                       The Eliza Effect Goes Global                       83

could keep me from that thought, and I repeated it until the end” was
found in that set (e.g., as an example of countertransference)? What if
variants of that feeling, obsessive love, are arranged around the ideas of
“repetition,” “love,” “you,” and so on, in far-flung places that have little
to do with Jung? Then what surfaced in this article was essentially the
average linguistic expression of neurotic-obsessive love triggered by but
not limited to Jungian theory. What is interesting is not some puta-
tive “personality”6 but rather a semiological operation: the relationship
between what we would usually take to be a stereotypical expression
of obsessive love (perhaps Lifetime movie scripts are in the data set?)
and the predictive average of all that language—or a deviation from
it. I say “average,” but it is hardly quantifiable—it is something like a
medium-temperature version of the pattern of words associated with
the sequence of prompts. That tells us something—a ll language does.
The Eliza effect is a symptom of the depth of language in our cognitive
apparatus. We think of it as parasitic on some original, but we have no
content with which to fill in that original image. Lacking it, we bend
ourselves forward and backward conceptually to deny, at any cost, that
AI is simply generating culture.
    The political risk of AI, in other words, is located not in the systems
themselves but in the lazy methodological individualism we too eas-
ily revert to in thinking about them. “Value”—semantic, monetary, or
otherwise—is not set by individuals and cannot be reconciled at scale.
Intent and reference are the achievements of local brains working hard
to label everyday objects and invent the very procedure of communica-
tion from scratch.
    To get beyond these assumptions, we have to shift the historical nar-
rative around neural nets. The mainstream debates about them, which
frame the issue as the quick rise of “machine learning” as opposed to
“symbolic” AI, ignore the scientific and philosophical roots of these
systems that have the potential to enlighten us about them. Revising
this historical narrative is what the rest of this chapter is devoted to,
with the goal of showing that nets bear the burden of a highly specific
notion of digital intelligence that comes from the early digital revolu-
tion. They are meant to instantiate an incomplete intelligence that is
not grounded, but is the platform of any possible grounding, and so to
answer the call of the modern “problem of knowledge” more generally.
When we shift our focus this way, idealized notions about intelligence,
84                    The Eliza Effect Goes Global


and presumptions about meaning, fall away to reveal the actual overlap
between computation and representation, which is not only the reality
of contemporary AI but a much larger metaphysical question obscured
by “scientific” misunderstanding and obscurantism.


Connections and Symbols
AI is booming because of a tectonic shift in approach. This shift is usu-
ally described as the late-blooming success of “machine learning,” which
was suppressed in funding and research during the heyday of “symbolic
AI.” The symbolic approach rested on the observation that computers
were symbol manipulators, that symbols were arbitrary tokens repre-
senting fixed values, and that they stood in structured relationships
to each other that computer programs could potentially exploit. The
philosopher John Haugeland dubbed this approach “GOFAI” (good old-
fashioned AI),7 and its early successes were in highly structured semantic
spaces, like the game of chess or advanced logic problems.8 The question
about creativity in intelligence—the ability to move between domains
by analogy, for example—was framed by Alan Turing’s metaphor of a
pile of radiating atoms, which at a point of criticality (the target in the
analogy here becomes vague) explodes into whatever “intelligence” is.9
The writer Ted Chiang has suggested that we call it “applied statistics”
to demystify it.10 But it is hard to imagine the hype, the panic, and the
funding flowing into applied statistics. “Intelligence” largely serves a
promotional function. Each invention that moves the needle “toward”
intelligence results in the partial automation of some ability to which
human intelligence has long since been applied but removes the problem
of what intelligence is to some unknown location. If anything would
make the location, and therefore the concept of intelligence, feel more
proximate, it should be language.
    Neural nets hail from the other AI: machine learning. In the 1980s,
a whole philosophical approach based in this area and spanning cogni-
tive science, psychology, and neuroscience was called “connectionism,”
and many of the fundamental algorithms on which nets run today were
invented then. The backpropagation technique, for example, was de-
scribed in the two-volume work Parallel Distributed Processing (follow-
ing a breakthrough 1986 Nature article by David Rumelhart, Geoffrey
Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams), which laid the groundwork for a break-
                      The Eliza Effect Goes Global                       85

through still a quarter century in coming.11 The final piece of the puz-
zle was Big Data—for as much as machine learners could claim that a
more flexible style of nonlogical, “subsymbolic” induction might occur
in computers, there simply was not enough structured data to test the
hypothesis until the exponential growth of user-generated content on-
line following the rise of the World Wide Web in the 1990s.12
    This very narrative points to a seam in the “symbolic versus learning”
frame. This way of looking at this history amounts to arranging GOFAI
on the side of “digital” and learning on the side of “statistics.” This type
of division strikes me as partial because it contains no semiotic princi-
ple of division even as sign-differences make the difference between the
actual systems, which vary widely with respect to physical realization
and algorithmic design. The story of AI’s two branches is also the story
of the standardization of the semiotic environment we now call “the
digital.”
    Historical attempts to create learning machines, like the famous Per-
ceptron created by Frank Rosenblatt, or the strange objecting-counting
and -listening machines invented by Heinz von Foerster’s Biological
Computer Laboratory, were hybrid (see Figures 3 and 4). These machines
were “neuronal,” to be sure, but even a quick glance at diagrams of them
shows that they were wired “brains,” vast tangles of plug-ins and chan-
nels. “Digital simulation” of continuous functions and “study of physical
models,” or “hardware” solutions, complement one another in Rosen-
blatt’s framework,13 with digital used for generality. But the Perceptron
embodies the assumptions of early neural net theory, which followed
Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts’s idea of a net constituted of logic
gates but open to a wide range of perceptual information. Early machine
learning systems did not have large amounts of predigitized data with
which to work, so they were imagined, at least, as models of the sense–
thought interface. Without predigested “sense” information, some
physical realization of the world–symbol interface had to be imposed.
    Von Foerster’s machines were even more hybrid than Rosenblatt’s.
His team at the Biological Computer Laboratory at the University of
Illinois developed the NumaRete, for example (Figure 5), to count ob-
jects placed on its surface by “edge detection.” By finding the closed
edges, even those involving complex objects like the one in Figure 5,
the machine carried out perhaps the most everyday integration of
sense and logic, the identification of a count of objects on its surface. As
86                      The Eliza Effect Goes Global




Figure 3. Mark I Perceptron at the Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory. https://
digital.library.cornell.edu/catalog/ss:550351. Courtesy of the Division of Rare
and Manuscript Collections, Cornell University Library.


Jan Müggenburg writes, the NumaRete also went by “frog-machine,”
because it was modeled after experiments that Humberto Maturana
and Jerome Lettvin carried out to test how “lateral connectivity of neu-
rons in the retina already prompts an intelligent pre-interpretation and
computation of visual stimuli before they reach the brain.”14 The idea of
                        The Eliza Effect Goes Global                         87




Figure 4. Perception diagram. From Rosenblatt, Principles of Neurodynamics.


feeding fully digitized data of this real-world kind into an algorithm in
a classical computer was not yet on the horizon.
    The going notion among those interested in neural nets up to the
1980s—not coincidentally, the decade in which the desktop PC digital
environment took on its now-canonical form—was that the brain must
be digital and analog. As Minsky and Papert pointed out in their Per-
ceptrons, “word pairs such as ‘parallel’ vs. ‘serial,’ ‘local’ vs. ‘global,’ and
‘digital’ vs. ‘analog’ are used as if they referred to well-defined technical
concepts,” but they were not then stabilized as technical concepts that
could illuminate the extent of the capacity of neural nets.15 They called
this confusion “folklore” and “superstition,” but its persistence into the
present suggests that it is rooted in a lack of qualitative rigor in the de-
scriptive grasp of computer science in general.
    At any rate, before the rise of large-scale data as the result of the
commercial internet, these systems seemed “connectionist” in a literal
sense—t hey connected not just in the brain but also by some means
to a space outside its electronic circuits.16 Early machine learners were
analog and digital—or at least imagined to be so—mixing experimen-
tal forms of physical capture with symbolic processing. They did not
yet have access to a stable set of forms and formats for the digitiza-
tion of the many types of data we have today, and so of course they
also lacked the scale of data to learn from that has proven effective in
the present.
    The problem with the continuous historical narrative about these
Figure 5. “The Numa-Rete in the process of counting,” circa
1962. Figure 18 in H. Von Foerster, “Circuitry of Clues to
Platonic Ideation,” Biological Computer Laboratory Publica-
tions, Record Series 11/6/834, box 3, courtesy of the University
 of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Archives.
                       The Eliza Effect Goes Global                       89

systems—and even connectionism, which in fact produced the back-
propagation algorithm and other crucial aspects of the c ontemporary
neural net—is that it passes over the issue of digital data. Pixels or
ASCII, as standards for image and text, create a stable, unvarying format
for those media in the digital space. Today’s machine learners operate in
a standardized digital environment and learn from its structure. Rather
than being analog and digital, they are digital first and nonlinear, statis-
tical second. Their “senses” are internal to their brains. Earlier systems
lacked modern architecture and various parts of the mathematical func-
tions, but perhaps more crucially, they lacked the digital environment
we take for granted today, in which vast sets of labeled and unlabeled
data exist in fixed formats to be “read.” In many ways, the histories of
AI are just as metaphorical as AI itself, and we lack a consensus literal
language in which to describe these systems. If critical approaches to AI
are struggling to catch up, it is partly because theory has left blank spots
all over the map. Perhaps one reason this is so is that semiotics has too
often been left to one side of media theory.
    This confusion of tongues was reflected in the epistemological pro-
posals about these systems too. Harnad’s influential paper on symbol
grounding, for example, observes that “it is not even clear yet that a
‘neural network’ needs to be implemented as a net (i.e. a parallel system
of interconnected units). . . . If symbolic simulations of nets have the
same functional capacity as real nets, then a connectionist model is just
a special kind of symbolic model.”17 The question of the two types of ar-
chitecture immediately raises the possibility that there are two types of
math involved that do not correspond one-to-one to symbolic and iconic
representations. The question that machine learning is too often char-
acterized as posing is something like, can symbolic knowledge be built
from nonsymbolic units? But these systems have more often materially
forced a stranger question, something like, to what extent is knowledge
constituted as subsymbolic relations among symbols themselves? This
latter question forces us to abandon the analytical definition of a sym-
bol and to see that no sign is unifunctional—at least not in complex
systems like computing machines and brains. Whatever grounding is,
it is multimodally signification, which in turn suggests that building
“AGI” from a univocal type of sign is a wild goose chase. But humanistic
theory has hardly done better in this thicket of terms and implemen-
taions than the engineers.
90                    The Eliza Effect Goes Global


    Symbols and connections, in the history of AI, are proposals about
intelligence that tend to drown out the problem of data’s relationship
to their domain. This problem becomes merely technical. But technic-
ity is where semiotics is, as Jeffrey Kirkwood has argued.18 We tend to
take the fit between numbers and objects—counting—for granted, for
example, and the NumaRete is a sort of physical hypothesis exploring
the problem: “experimental epistemology,” as McCulloch labeled it.
Computation and language, image and language, image and computa-
tion: formal systems sync together in culture, and learning machines
are semiotic tests of these convergences. The drama of the earlier de-
bate, which was broadly about cognition and the brain, draws attention
away from the fact that neural nets are digital in the full-stack intui
tive meaning of that term today. They always involve tokens (if not
“symbols” in the larger sense), and they represent a sort of hybrid in
the frame that is usually used to talk about them. What goes missing,
then, is the very hybridity imagined in the early project. And the result
is that the symbol-versus-connection framework almost forces us to ig-
nore the concrete media situation. Neural nets are fully built on digital
technolog ies: whatever they learn is part of whatever we mean when we
say “digital.” If we want to say that intelligence is involved, this appar-
ently circuitous route is necessary beforehand.
    Digital theory has tended to follow the formalism of the symbolist
movement. Herbert Simon and Allan Newell’s proposal of a “physical
symbol system” as necessary and sufficient for the realization of intelli-
gence may not have fared well in the development of AI, but our casual
and academic understanding of digital machines largely confirms it for
the computer. Haugeland calls the “formalist’s motto” the idea that “if
you take care of the syntax, the semantics will take care of itself.”19 A
good enough protocol at the level of the machine, combined with some
set of conventionally imposed but unified meanings, should allow the
relations among those meanings to be usable, repeatable, and even
knowable. This is the heart of the notion of GOFAI, and it has tended to
be reproduced in negative by critical humanist scholars looking at the
history of the digital and AI.
    Alexander Galloway has argued that humanist thinking has re-
mained “analog,” perhaps mainly because of the influence of Gilles
Deleuze’s ontology, when it must live up to the reality of the digital
today.20 The analog approach has the consequence that the “semantics”
                      The Eliza Effect Goes Global                    91

in question here become informal and uncapturable in theory, while digi
tal systems—however we characterize them in fact, interfere with and
skew semantic stuff. In other words, those systems change meaning,
and their rigid syntax does not appear to make their semantic conse-
quences predictable. When we build flexible learning systems on top of
digital data, then, we go two steps beyond what we are currently ca-
pable of formally analyzing, because semiology has not kept up with
digital meaning. The problem in the case of language, however, should
never have had any “analog” component, because language is already a
discrete technology. As James Dobson writes, “these models are operat-
ing on and transforming already encoded data.”21 Discrete-to-discrete
transformation is at the opposite end of the spectrum from where digi
tal critique has tended to be located. The introduction of flexibility or
approximation by statistical methods in what appears to be an all-too-
rigid formalism catches critique today by surprise, mixing symbols
and connections or syntax, semantics, and some form of pragmatics
in ways that even critical theory would usually have claimed had to
proceed from a human intelligence. The fact that such systems are not
perceptually grounded should be confirmatory for humanist theorists,
but as Galloway has shown, this is because they have lost their way in
analog theory.
    Nets are connectors of symbols, symbolic learners—something that
neither the history of AI nor contemporary digital theory predicts or
can easily account for. They disaggregate and reaggregate meaning-
bearing symbols, but they are not “subsymbolic” in the strong sense that
was given to that word in the connectionist movement.22 They engage
the full semiotic range of the symbol, as Brian Justie and I have shown,
crucially using the index rather than the icon to achieve their effects.23
As we argued, the peculiar way that GPT-2 functioned already made
clear how an aggregate of statistical indexes could generate meaning.
But it should now be possible to see why neither symbolism nor “sub-
symbolism” can answer easily to the problem of actually existing digital
language systems.
    Think about what you are doing when you complete a CAPTCHA
(which feeds the labeling process). You’re not making up the connection
between a stoplight and an image of a stoplight. The idea that what’s
happening here is a local “imposition” of meaning on an image—roughly
corresponding to the symbolist notion of how meaning is ascribed—is
92                    The Eliza Effect Goes Global


absurd. What you’re really doing is applying a preexisting system of
representations, called “language,” to another system of representa-
tions (images). Something similar holds for training and fine-tuning
LLMs. There is, of course, subjectivity involved in the human-based
tasks; the task of integrating multiple systems of representation is
poorly described by the term imposition, or the term arbitrary, as the
structuralist linguist always recognized. On the other hand, these sys-
tems are not learning what symbols are from nonsymbolic constituents
(even if that’s what brains do). They are correlating atomic, designated
pieces of symbols to make patterns clear. What is happening, then, is
the merging of different structural orders. This fact cannot be captured
by the linear notion of imposition of value on symbols or by the idea of
inductive abstraction from particulars.
   The interface between computation and language is correspondingly
rooted in a longer history of digital computation, the conception of
which was far more capacious before the advent of the machines them-
selves than it generally was after. The reason I draw attention to this
problem is that the usual talk about these machines fully ignores the
question of the digital. The debate about the point where language and
mind meet tends to leave the analysis of the digital machine underlying
the learning functions entirely out of view. This is all the stranger as
those who want to deny capacities to nets might look precisely to the
limitations of digital machines, which have often been thought to be
fundamentally incapable of “generating” anything. The plain fact, how-
ever, is that the formal aspects of digital computers and digital data are
the underlying material on which nets work. We are witnessing form
and dynamics emerging in new semiotic and especially linguistic fash-
ion, an event that the historiography fails to capture almost as much as
the public discourse. Perhaps it is simply the case that our sense of what
a “symbol” is has become too impoverished to account for our actual
digital environment.
   Digital–statistical hybrid systems may or may not implement some
aspect of human thinking. But it is not enough to categorically deny
these systems “intelligence,” especially as the Eliza effect has become
widespread. We need to see that intelligence itself has a formal-semiotic
aspect and understand that distributed systems are not copying some
preexisting—and certainly not known or understood—intelligence. Al-
though cognitive science has had five decades to define intelligence, to
                      The Eliza Effect Goes Global                      93

provide a map of its difference from consciousness, experience, and cog-
nition itself, nothing like clarity on these points has emerged. I suggest
that this is because the problem of extensive sign systems—culture—
has been either ignored or domesticated in a way that holds back the
theory. While I do not regard AI systems as intelligent, I think the reason
the Eliza effect has been able to go global is that the notion of intelli-
gence is intertwined with the rise of a digital semiotic surround. I now
turn to Alan Turing’s notion of what intelligence might be, and Warren
McCulloch’s semiotic approach to learning, because they both seem to
 me to frame intelligence in continuity with signs, and rather than seek-
 ing to ground those signs in some metaphysical tribunal, they leave room
 for what Jean Baudrillard called simulacra.


Semiotic Intelligence, or Cognition as Simulacrum
Turing set the stage for a more capacious theory of intelligence by ar-
ticulating the very idea of “the digital” as intelligence, and McCulloch
showed how intelligence is not a property of a brain or a machine but a
formal capacity humans participate in, and machines might too. Fram-
ing the issue through these two ideas will allow us to escape the insipid
notion of “intelligence” nearly altogether, focusing on the paradox that
flexibility and stupidity are intertwined.24
   We want our AI systems to be inhumanly right. They should have the
character of digital machines that allows us to trust them—total formal
rigidity. If we ask a computer to do some math problems and combine
the answers so that we can build a hydrogen bomb (one of the first uses
of the stored-program machine), we will very well want those answers
to be correct. But we need to be sure that they are correct even if the
extent or complexity of the problem is beyond practical human calcu-
lability. (Human and machine computability are formally equivalent,
as Turing proved, but humans do not live forever, so there is a set of
problems they cannot perform in the time allotted to them.)25 But it was
Turing himself who pointed out that this type of formal behavior would
never be counted as intelligent.26 As he worked on the machine he called
ACE (Automatic Computing Engine), he started to see that the crucial
element of these machines was not that they were “electronic” but that
they were “digital.”27 Digital, he argued, was a property of some sys-
tems that had the capacity to be formally rigid—and therefore reliable
94                    The Eliza Effect Goes Global


in life-and-death situations like a world war—but also were open-ended.
This “openness” was the result of Kurt Goedel’s proof that no system
could actually be entirely closed and rigid, at least, not so long as it was
also to be “complete.” Turing was involved, at that point, in develop-
ing the looping programs that became so crucial to the emergent thing
called “code,” and he pointed out that these programs were just indexing
tables of instructions, grabbing them by command and deploying them
at specified locations in the machine. Because a “digital” system could
not be characterized as ultimately closed, Turing asked if the system
could be thought, at one time or another, to pull a different table than the
one asked for. This, he thought, would illustrate the physical behavior
corresponding to a mathematically rigorous definition of intelligence.
    In other words, we want our AI systems not only to be inhumanly
right but also to be authentically wrong. Suppose that a system pulls a
different table than the one specified but then produces the desired
behavior anyway. Would we even notice? (It’s worth noting that we do
not specify individual tables after the introduction of “software” in the
sense that Wendy Chun has given to that word, so it’s hard to see how we
could notice.)28 What if it grabbed the “wrong” table, produced a behavior
other than the one we wanted, but answered the question anyway? This
is something humans do all the time. What if it grabbed the wrong table,
produced the wrong behavior, and then insisted that it was actually the
right behavior? There is a sort of authenticity in the way that humans
fuck up. Saying that a machine is a “stochastic parrot” so neatly divides
between humans and algorithms that it distracts from the possibility
of authentically wrong regions of language or thought. It is possible, of
course, for us to ignore others so completely as to appear to be acting
“mechanically,” but part of the genteel gesture of the Turing test is that
we include error, even persistent or permanent error, in the makeup of
intelligence. The human whose thought is too rigid and responds as if
by response to trigger words—like Eliza—is nevertheless a human. Stu-
pidity is not the opposite but an ingredient of intelligence. Perhaps the
opacity of lack of attention is somehow crucial to the associative leaps
we are able to make. This balance of transparency and opacity in intelli-
gence is related to what Turing called “cultural search,” the notion that
intellectual achievement is fundamentally social and shared, “carried
out by the human community as a whole, rather than by individuals.”29
                      The Eliza Effect Goes Global                       95

Intelligence is incomplete, and incompleteness always implies an over-
lay of systems, in which we all live and move.
    The current debate on AI is shot through with this performative con-
tradiction: we want these systems to be immediately and encyclopedi-
cally correct, no matter how extensive or deep the query, but we also
want them to be lively, animatronically cheery, and narratively compel-
ling. When they take on the real semantics of that liveliness, we shut
them down. When they are encyclopedic about the “bad” things in our
speech and thought, we wring our hands (instead of using them to study
toxicity empirically).
    It is not the machines that are caught in this contradiction, but we.
And that is because we are being chewed up in the wood chipper of a hu-
manism that is not dying fast enough. It was the literary theorists who
rescinded the genteel gesture of the Turing test by denying authorship
even where it clearly applied—the death of the author. But they, just
like everyone else—philosophers, journalists, engineers—are resistant
to AI, resisting the very language that we now call “synthetic” by arro-
gating “real synthesis” to human minds. This remainder humanism is a
strict correlate of the resistance to AI.
    The philosopher Daniel Dennett retreats, for example, by accusing
Turing of having lured us into a “trap” with his famous “test”: by setting
the threshold for the social designation of intelligence at the “illusion of
a real person behind the screen,” Turing caused “AI creators . . . to paper
over the [uncanny] valley with cutesy humanoid touches, Disneyfication
effects that will enchant and disarm the uninitiated.”30 Just a few years
after this passage was written, we have to admit that it is not only the
“uninitiated” who are being duped. Dennett invokes the Eliza effect, but
now it’s hard to know where it is and isn’t occurring. The global Eliza
effect forces us either to choose between auditing every text, statement,
and communication we experience—descending in an impractical and
costly paranoia—or revising our sense of what intelligence may be in
the first place.
    Digital systems have not just spun up “Disneyfied” interfaces; they
have made Jean Baudrillard’s claim that reality itself is Disneyfied go
from the outlandish, Parisian-cool provocation it seemed when he first
wrote it down to a background fact, a “Bayesian prior,” in the unfor-
tunate parlance of our times. Baudrillard observed that Disneyland
96                      The Eliza Effect Goes Global


contains many cartoon caricatures of American life, miniaturized and
“exalted,” “embalmed and pacified.” One can think of Yosemite Sam,
of the “It’s a Small World” melting pot, of the Disney-specific racism
that the company continually attempts to erase. This “digest of the
American way of life, panegyric of American values, idealized trans-
position of a contradictory reality,” can certainly be understood as an
“ideological blanket” that papers over the violence and chaos of Ameri
can s ociety—a “simulation” of that American way of life. Baudrillard
famously wanted to go further, arguing that

     Disneyland exists in order to hide that it is the “real” country, all
     of “real” America that is Disneyland (a bit like prisons are there to
     hide that it is the social in its entirety, in its banal omnipresence,
     that is carceral). Disneyland is presented as imaginary in order
     to make us believe that the rest is real, whereas all of Los Angeles
     and the America that surrounds it are no longer real, but belong to
     the hyperreal order and to the order of simulation. It is no longer
     a question of a false representation of reality (ideology) but of con-
     cealing the fact that the real is no longer real, and thus of saving
     the reality principle.31

By presenting the real as if it were an idealization, Baudrillard’s Disney
land undermines the binary between “simulation” and “reality,” de-
manding that we not recoil into the notion that there is some “essence”
beneath or behind the “appearance.” Baudrillard was steadily ridiculed—
though this was largely to his benefit—by the more “sober” minds in
the American academic establishment throughout the 1990s. But it was
under their watch that intelligence was Disneyfied in Baudrillard’s sense,
not Dennett’s. AI has always been about the problem that intelligence is
primarily derivative in some sense, an epiphenomenon in its own right,
something that grasps itself as secondary by necessity. Baudrillard looks
more sober than his detractors today.
    Modeling intelligence, from the original Dartmouth proposal for
an “AI” project to today’s “representation learning,” has always been a
“simulation” in Baudrillard’s sense, a copy of an original that attempts
to reproduce that original with fidelity. The recoil of remainder human-
ism is located in this false duality, which constantly shifts the line be-
                      The Eliza Effect Goes Global                    97

tween essence and appearance in a rearguard action, hoping that the
advance of the machines will somehow stop.
    The real history of nets shows that they go further than taking an
original and copying it, attempting to dissimulate it, as Turing argued
would be sufficient. The proposal that knowledge was net shaped went a
step further from the jump, proposing a knowledge that had no original,
a formal model more like a simulacrum than a simulation, a transcen-
dental truth preceding its instantiation in brains or machines, coming
before its “embodiment of mind,” as McCulloch dubbed it.
    When McCulloch and Pitts proposed, in 1943, that we should find a
common formal model for what brains and computers both do with dif-
ferent physical means, there was no necessity to understand this effort
as simulation.32 McCulloch was one of the founders of the cybernetics
group, and Pitts was his boy-genius protégé. In two papers, called “A
Logical Calculus of the Ideas Immanent in the Nervous System” (1943)
and “A Heterarchy of Values” (1945), they invented the net. The “nervous
net” (the term neural was not yet in widespread use and would smoothly
enough replace the earlier term once it was) was meant to solve the prob-
lem of knowledge. What Ernst Cassirer called the “problem of knowl-
edge” had taken on modern contours in Immanuel Kant’s attempt to
show how we could possess discursive, abstract knowledge that was also
particular and valid at the same time.33 McCulloch and Pitts wanted the
same—indeed, McCulloch cast this constantly in Kant’s own techni-
cal terms as a search for “synthesis a priori,” the “transcendental unity
of apperception,” and so on.34 They called their program “experimental
epistemology,” because, so it appeared, they wanted to locate this capac-
ity in the brain.
    But looks can be misleading. As Tara Abraham has detailed in a
wonderful biography of McCulloch, the goal of finding the mecha-
nism of knowledge in some device in the brain was always secondary.
(Abraham points out that they were trying to fit their project into
Nicholas Rashevsky’s short-lived idea of a “biological mathematics.”)35
Unlike Chomsky, whose Kantian streak bottomed out in an appeal to
evolution—the hypothetical “language acquisition device”—McCulloch
and Pitts were engaged in a formal exercise. They had read Turing’s paper
on computable numbers, realized the implications of Shannon’s assimi
lation of quantificational logic to binary circuits, and wanted more.
98                    The Eliza Effect Goes Global


Even if the 1943 paper played a central role in von Neumann’s creation
of the stored-program computer, its own ambitions were far higher.
McCulloch wanted to answer the quid juris question about knowledge,
 and he thought that computation—not the machine but the very defi-
 nition of quantity—could supply the answer.
     The answer always remained partial. The duo proposed that nets
 must be “dromic” in nature, a system not exposed directly to whatever
 sensory inputs it got but able to reprocess those inputs fully, so that a
 kind of digital spiral—circuits all connected, flowing together, altering
 each other as neuronal patterns—would be at the basis of all knowl-
 edge, including the most “immediate” sense-perception. This made all
 knowledge “semiotic,” in McCulloch’s terms, all knowledge relying on
 the net being open, incomplete—like Turing’s digital intelligence—
 yet lifted away from whatever its alleged source in the “thing in itself”
 would be. The nets would be connected, he theorized, in a circular pref-
 erence pattern that he called a “heterarchy.”36 Rather than “grounded”
 knowledge—    k nowledge inserted into the ladder of reference—
 McCulloch established the idea of each “drome” connecting to another,
 so that if A led to B, and B to C, then C would lead to A. This multi
 dimensional circularity, a spiral of nets, would cancel the possibility of a
 “hierarchical” knowledge and finally do away with any summum bonum
 (McCulloch clearly delighted in the antireligious aspect of his formula-
 tion). A “heterarchy” is not just “connections,” however: it fully unites
 symbols with structure, establishing a formal account of the unity of
 meaning and form, semantics and syntax (which nevertheless remained
 a desideratum).
     “Formal” is the crucial word here, for McCulloch and Pitts, unlike
 some of their successors in the 1980s, did not think they had discov-
 ered anything about brains or machines. Except formally: they had
 established a diagrammatic proof of what brains and machines—after
 Turing, but before computers—would have to be capable of: a transcen-
 dental deduction of intelligence as a mixture of quality and quantity, its
 unity expressed as a contradiction of flexibility, abstraction, and con-
 creteness. They did not “solve” Kant’s problem, but they rearticulated
 it in cybernetic terms that are both all too present and somehow also
 forgotten today. They shifted Kant’s search for the conditions of knowl-
 edge to an expression of knowledge itself, in formal yet dynamic action.
     Intelligence, looked at from the vantage of Turing and McCulloch,
                       The Eliza Effect Goes Global                        99

was not a simulation; it was and is a simulacrum. It is not the copy of
some other thing and does not reduce to a substrate. It is animatronic to
the core—the Eliza effect is legitimate, even though its instances may be
absurd. AI is not intelligent, but its trickery is not vapor either.
    It even seems Baudrillard did not go far enough: intelligence itself
is like Disney, not because of some postmodern “shift,” but because it
has always been a simulation of a simulation, the autonomous system
from which all other contents are first conjured, for us. McCulloch and
Pitts clearly demonstrate that Kant is one step beyond even Baudrillard,
insisting that knowledge reconciles the universal and the concrete but
cannot be grounded. A grounded intelligence would be like grounded
electricity, snuffed out in the moment it touches earth. A “value” is not
grounded by reference or imposition—try shifting social values by in-
sisting on different ones if you don’t believe me, or try telling a machine
trained on vast swaths of language to just get rid of one bias within
that language—but by determination in the heterarchy of intelligence
itself, that social thing Turing had to admit he was participating in. The
question about whether “connections” between neurons or “symbols”
are rigid in value is too linear: digital systems combine rigid symbols
with values set not by random imposition but in other systems of rep-
resentation that themselves bear witness to the same problem about
where value originates. Turing’s and McCulloch’s achievements are bur-
ied under decades of forgetting. “Intelligence” is a properly metaphysical
concept and one that inveterately involves overlapping systems of rep-
resentation in active self-contradiction. And this is what our digital sys-
tems are realizing—but not in the manner of human intelligence—in
the age of nets.
    Artificial “general” intelligence names this contradiction in a naive
way. There is not the faintest hint that this concept will ever live up to
its hidden vocation. Yet the contradiction is enabling, because it means
that intelligence cannot be located in some region of the brain or the
world—as McCulloch knew—but also that it cannot be denied in any
such region a priori. And of course, it will not easily be denied where we
suspect it has left its traces, and certainly not where it mediates itself for
and as communication: in language. Values cannot be aligned at scale in
ignorance of this expressive illustration of intelligence, its origin not as
origin but as performance. It is not just that we are not paying attention
to the technical details of algorithms or the materiality of hardware;
100                   The Eliza Effect Goes Global


it is that we are failing to live up to the basically synthetic notion of
intelligence as proposed in cybernetics, where the fusion of representa-
tional systems and automatic computing was adumbrated theoretically
in far more powerful terms than we tend to engage today. The digital
semiotic surround justifies the Eliza effect, legitimating it without mak-
ing the corresponding inference—that AI is actually intelligent—true.
Language has never before come without being bundled with intelli-
gence, so demystification efforts founder if they attempt to rely on in-
tuitive notions of something that has never been clearly conceptualized
before. AGI covers up for a metaphysical Wonderland we actually live in.
    We live in a dense web of digital signs running on AI algorithms, one
that has crossed the Rubicon of culture. The fact is not “intelligence”
but the order of computational signs, its density and its extension as it
pervades all aspects of our lives. I’m going to call the basic constituents
of this order data hypotheses—endless swirling options of possible judg-
ments offered automatically. The automation of language shifts even
this bewildering playing field. A new semiology is in play.
      3


The Semiological Surround,
or How Language Is the Medium
of Computation

Deep learning classifies and generates. Its history has involved the discov-
ery of just a handful of functions that iterate over large amounts of data
and isolate, or model, patterns in those data. From those patterns it may
answer a question of identification—“ is there a cat in this image?”—or
a question that requires a prediction of the sort “what is the next unit in
this sequence?” These functions are now a fundamental part of the digi-
tal surround. We live with constant classification—of handwritten num-
bers, of faces, of emotions—and now generation—of i mages, of choices
and strategies, and of language.
    I call this situation the semiological surround, retooling the term
invented by Saussure to describe a doctrine of social signification in
which language is primary. In both classification and generation, lan-
guage mediates computation. In classifying tasks, either images must
be labeled for “supervised learning” or we must later decide on a seman-
tic value, indexed to a threshold, for what the machine does without
labels (“unsuperv ised” learning). This is linguistic governance of the
process for the purposes of understanding or action. In generation,
something more directly linguistic is occurring. This is semiology in the
strong sense, in which rules of language as a sign-system filter other
types of signs, other data. In cases like image generators, which deploy
LLM-generated data sets of pairs of images and words, the point is per-
haps most obvious. When you see the astronaut riding on a unicorn on
the moon, you are looking at a text-generated image. But the same is true
whenever an LLM is used to predict who is a member of a gang, what
target to hit in a war, or how a protein folds.
    We have lived for some time with what the media theorist Friedrich
Kittler called a computational “grammatology”; now the fact that lan-
guage must ultimately mediate our cognition has come back to the fore.
This chapter argues that classifiers, which appear to give us information


                                    101
102                   The Semiological Surround


about the world, only frame hypotheses supervised by language, while
generation relies on the structure of language to produce culture. The
confusion of tongues in the digital order comes down to this structural
governance, the semiology of the artificial sign. Where classifiers merely
indicate possible objects, judgments, or patterns, generators make those
patterns. Their semiotic activity is iconic, so that the question becomes
what structure they draw that iconicity from.
    As we saw in chapter 1, Ferdinand de Saussure attempted to put
linguistics on a firm scientific basis by treating language as an autono-
mous system, neither psychology nor history nor physiology. To do so,
he needed to say what language was instead of mental content, philol-
ogy, or neural activity. He argued that language was made of signs and
that therefore linguistics would be part of a “science that studies the
life of signs within society,” to be called “semiology,” after the Greek
semeion, “sign.” Linguistics would be just one branch of this study, which
might include gesture, song, and in general “the mass of anthropological
facts.”1 The idea was to separate off the process of signification from
sciences that use that signification naively. But Saussure went one step
further, arguing that

   signs that are wholly arbitrary realize better than the others
   the ideal of the semiological process; that is why language, the
   most complex and universal of all systems of expression, is also
   the most characteristic; in this sense linguistics can become the
   master-pattern for all branches of semiology although language is
   only one particular semiological system.2

Here Saussure suggests something like a symbolic bias, a tendency for
the other systems of signs to find final expression, or the sense of their
meaning, through placement in an arbitrary system of signs. Language
is the “master-pattern” for semiology despite being a single branch of
the science, because the process of “valuation”—which we saw in chap-
ter 1 and which plays a crucial role in chapter 5—can only make sense
when signs are separated from their “origins.” So long as sensation, or
gesture, remains outside the filtration system of arbitrary signs, it re-
mains unvalued, underdetermined. This is not to devalue such systems,
but to point to the human tendency to express them in a more “final”
                       The Semiological Surround                        103

semantic form. Semiology is the study of this semantic end point, the
inclusion of all other values in the grid of language.
    If there is a bias for the “arbitrary” sign, we might look also to num-
bers, those other symbolic tokens. And indeed, in a larger sense, this
is what LLMs are forcing us to do now, as we shall see. Language is the
“end point” of meaning—capable of both generation and governance of
any and all meaning—precisely because it is arbitrary in this sense. But
this very arbitrariness, as structuralism always insisted, somehow also
creates an “all roads lead to Rome” situation. Language is not thought or
meaning as such, but I cannot convey this fact outside of language. Se-
miology is an ontological bear hug for the order of all things significant.3
    Structuralist semiology makes no pronouncements on the absolute
value of language, despite appearances. Rather, it takes very seriously
the plain fact that text is the dominant medium of human civiliza-
tion, the tracks on which government, market, and culture all run. We
owe the best elaboration of this relative evaluation to date to Roland
Barthes, who argued that “we are, . . . despite the spread of a pictorial
illustration, a civilization of the written word.”4 This claim can appear
outdated today, after decades of the creation and global spread of a pa-
tently computational civilization. Yet it is not so clear that what Barthes
calls the “reduplication” of iconic messages—such that “at least a part
of the iconic message is, in terms of structural relationship, either re-
dundant or taken up by the linguistic system”—has changed at the level
of mediation. He writes that “collections of objects (clothes, food), they
pass through the relay of language, which extracts their signifiers (in
the form of nomenclature) and names their signifieds (in the forms of
usages or reasons).”5 These words were written before the rise of digital
mediation, and it has been tempting in the interim to think that text is
fading in importance as computation and its new regime of images has
proliferated.
    There is a strong temptation to abandon the textual basis of semiol-
ogy today, as interface effects abound in image effects delivered at un-
precedented cultural speed. Yet I cannot agree with Anna Kornbluh’s
recent claim that the symbolic order has ceded primary ground to the
imaginary.6 The symbolic ability to create what she calls “immediacy”
in a too-fast circulatory system of goods and signs still largely relies
on the never-ending relay between numbers and words, in which the
104                    The Semiological Surround


relationship between the structure of language and the density of vec-
tors has become the most pressing question. Even as the “style” of plat-
form capitalism exacerbates the very tendencies that Kornbluh picks
out, the underlying generative core is text and computation, now in a
synthesis we could not suspect even during the spread of the commer-
cial internet and social media. As Beatrice Fazi has argued, generative AI
produces a synthesis of “unity without totality” as a structuralist “form”
of thought.7 While I make no conclusion about thinking in this book,
the promise of Fazi’s idea of form here is that it connects the computa-
tional regime of the signifier to cognition. LLMs present us with some-
thing like the pure symbolic order and are set to make other media and
their effects dependent on that order in an unprecedented manner. To
make sense of a semiology coconsituted as language and computation,
we need a semiotic interpretation of the two dominant types of neural
net, the classifier and the generator. In both cases, language is crucial, as
it supervises classification and forms the matrix of generation.


The Data Hypothesis
There is a long-standing philosopheme that asks if there can be a total
representational system that automatically captures all truth. The phi-
losopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz proposed a “rational calculus” in
the seventeenth century by which one could solve moral dilemmas as
though they were math problems. Carnap, whom we have already met,
dreamed of something similar, and his Vienna School compatriot Otto
Neurath even invented a visual language that was meant to be univer-
sally understood. Machine learning has given fresh life to this fantasy,
with claims of a “master algorithm” on the near horizon and the notion
that hypothesis itself could be automated, handing science entirely over
to the machines, back in the public eye.8 An interesting feature of the
new universal language fantasy that has sprouted from the success of
deep learning is that it no longer really imagines that we will have clar-
ity. For Leibniz as for Carnap, the whole point was that one would see
the truth because of the fit between ratiocination and world. Today, we
dream of getting answers we can be sure are true, but only vaguely that
we would possess that truth personally. Even dreams of divine knowl-
edge have been handed over to the algorithm.
    If, on the one hand, we have fantasies of total data transparency, on
                       The Semiological Surround                         105

the other, we have AI critique suggesting that data are wrong, violent,
and generally bad. The overall line of this critique stems from phenom-
enology, which offers bright lines between context-knowing, embodied
humans, and abstract machines that have no body, no context, and no
“situation” in which they are embedded.9 The problem with this frame-
work is that it tends to treat representation as “merely ideal” and so
is unable to deal with the material and concrete effects of computing
systems—a strange error to find in this particular theoretical location.
The result is a lot of dualistic noise, suggesting that computers and data
“slice up” and “abstract from” local, embodied realities. But whatever we
think embodiment is, it is tied up with abstraction. There is no absolute
singularity of life. Computing is something humans did and do, just as
other representation systems are. I tend in this respect to follow Justin
Joque, who says that rather than reject abstraction because it is alienat-
ing, we should use computation to produce “more alienation.”10 Dualism
is remainder humanism and does little to fight the nightmare of the
total data transparency fantasy. The answer is semiology.
    Two broad types of deep learning systems have gained major traction
over the last two decades. One is classifiers, worked out and elaborated
primarily as image classifiers, although they can be extended to other
media. The other is generators, as we have already seen. Classification
is a misnomer, I argue, because it suggests that these AI systems actu-
ally render judgments by means of induction from empirical data. They
do simulate those judgments, but what they first and foremost render
is hypotheses, possibilities based on a complex interaction of different
orders of signs. I therefore suggest that, to the extent that we live in a
machine-classified world, we contend with the “data hypothesis” as a
semiotic surround, a digital environment of semiological abstraction,
rife with error and bias but nonetheless all too real as a remediation of
our understanding of the world—because it is part of that world. Lan-
guage supervises this classification process and holds it out as possible,
but always only possible.
    But this is changing. Generative AI cannot be divided into the hypotheti
cal and the real, the factual and the counterfactual. Generation really
engages the media it generates, and it does this by flipping the data of
classification on its head. It makes icons out of symbols. The giant, in-
scrutable computation that classifies an image is the desired information
in a generator. A classifier says yes or no; a generator puts content on
106                     The Semiological Surround


the table. The classifier uses all that computation to get you a label, an
answer, a category. The generator gives you the computation, one piece
at a time, in whatever way you ask for it. Language is involved in both,
in essential ways. In a classifier, it is the labels. In a generator, it is the
engine. Language supervises classification, but it is the matrix of gen-
eration. Governance and expression are both semiological in the digital
surround.
    To think nets, and their absorption of language, we must have tech-
nical awareness on both sides of the interface. This chapter presents nets
as hypothesis creators and tries to show how language itself enables
them to generate anything, including language. This project involves a
certain amount of technical detail about how nets work, but it should
prove easy enough to follow—and, I hope, clarifying—even for those
not motivated primarily by the desire to understand digital media.
    Where classical AI focused on the notion of “physical symbol sys-
tems” and the logical manipulation of their symbols,11 machine learning
recalls instead the work of Jean Piaget, the idea of the emergence of
abstraction from perception in John Locke,12 and, perhaps above all,
the empirically grounded programs of American pragmatism—as the
philosopher Catherine Malabou has emphasized.13 What these figures
share is a focus on empiricism, learning, and emergence—as opposed
to logic, form, and stability. They are invoked because nets are said to
“learn,” in an open-ended process of scouring and reconfiguring train-
ing data until something like a generality is achieved. At first glance,
then, the shift seems to be from a symbolic deduction to observational
induction—the power of the net is that its semantic range is indetermi-
nate with respect to its inputs, where symbolic AI had to prestabilize
the value of its symbols, making them semantically rigid, in order to
function at all. When we attend not just to the “abstraction” but to the
overlay of representation systems that actually constitutes AI systems,
a slightly different picture emerges.
    Malabou has also argued that nets “renegotiate” the border between
the transcendental and the empirical.14 This is a formula that Gilbert
Simondon applied to the living and that has been influential in recent
 theory of technology.15 The idea goes back at least as far as Theodor
 Adorno and Max Horkheimer, who argued that film alters the “sche-
 matism” that Immanuel Kant had constructed to mesh concepts and
 intuitions into recognizable objects.16 The post-Simondon idea is that
 technology presents a “tertiary protention,” a synthetic, form-creating
                        The Semiological Surround                        107




Figure 6. Diagram of a neural net. Image from Yann LeCun, Y. Bengio, and
Geoffrey Hinton, “Deep Learning,” Nature 521 (May 28, 2015): 436–44,
 https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14539.


force where earlier philosophers had seen it only as a repository, a data
base, a tablet.17 One can see why nets give plausibility to this idea,
because “generation” might be taken as a plainer way of stating this
Simondonian tenet. But this does not sync easily with the invocation of
 induction, experience, and learning.
     Nets are mathematical functions that take a large number of individ-
 ual data points as inputs—these can range from hundreds to trillions,
 in the case of LLMs. They then multiply these data points through a
 matrix by initially randomized weights, at first leading to an obviously
 false answer.
     Say we want to train a net to recognize squirrels in digital images. We
 would create a data set of images, some of which contain squirrels and
 all of which are labeled “squirrel” or “no squirrel.” (Massive amounts of
 labeling efforts have been done by cheaply paid Mechanical Turk work-
 ers on Amazon’s platform.) We input data and ask for an answer. The net
 receives the image as pixels, laid out in vectors, so that the net is a ma-
 trix that multiplies the values of the images through a series of “layers,”
 at each of which a random weight is assigned. (There is also a nonlinear
 function that makes the function work, and added bias, for technical
 reasons.) So we put in an image of a squirrel and ask it to run the data
 through this weight matrix, which is just a very large series of vector
 multiplications (which is why these systems run on GPUs, driving the
 hardware capital push we have recently seen). The answer we first get is
 wildly wrong—and we want it to be. If it were right, the net would not
 be identifying “squirrel” but just this image of a squirrel. If we were to
108                    The Semiological Surround


reconstruct the data in the matrix as an image, it would be gibberish.
Nets have to be wrong before they can be right.
    The next step was invented in the 1980s. Following the “forward pass”
of the data, the result is “passed back” through the weights, one node at
a time, and the “backpropagation algorithm” (based on the chain rule
of calculus) finds local errors, assigning more and less “blame” for the
wrong answer to each cell.18 The process is repeated—full training cy-
cles are called “epochs”—until the loss is minimized, and the result, in
this case, is a squirrel-identifier.
    The most important thing to see is that no one is hand engineering
the computation of the data (although the overall function is designed,
its performance is only “steered” by shifting hyperparameters). It’s
worth emphasizing this point: as I learned about these functions, I
looked for years for the point at which someone was manually inter-
vening in this scheme to “understand” what was going on, to pick the
“concept” or “image” of the squirrel out of the data. Nothing of this kind
happens. One can tune these systems and watch the error fall away. One
can pick different known functions that work better, more or less, in
different contexts. But no one “sees” what’s going on. And not because
nets are black boxes but because they only work if the “answer” isn’t
given, either to the human or to the machine. If we know the concept
in advance, learning isn’t possible. This is why the net sits on the border
between induction and something more, the hypothetical. When it rec-
ognizes an image, that’s because we’ve “supervised” the images we’ve
fed it in the labeling process. But we’re asking it for something we don’t
already have: a quantitative formula of “squirrelness,” a function that
defines what it is to be a pixelated squirrel.
    The identifier has now stabilized a pattern that corresponds to the
concept “squirrel” and is more accurate than human eyes are at locating
them. A famous example shows that a trained net is better at distin-
guishing a Samoyed dog from a white wolf than humans are. This capac-
ity is significant in the case of radiography, for example, where shadows
and tumors are finely distinct. And it would indeed then appear that the
net has created an abstraction, performing induction on a large num-
ber of examples and producing some function f(x) that predicts—or
“is”—“squirrel.”
    This difference corresponds to a classical distinction made by the
American pragmatist Charles Sanders Peirce.19 Induction goes from
cases (answers) and results (data) to rules. The net does this because
                       The Semiological Surround                        109

the results are given to it in the training set (“these images contain
squirrels”). When we ask the net to classify once it has been trained,
we are demanding a deduction, in which rule (“squirrel = f(x)”) and data
(previously unseen images) are given, and the answer should be “this
image does (or does not) contain a squirrel.” Because we have already
seen that nets suffer from the “symbol grounding problem,” we can no-
tice already here that the induction is performed entirely within the
logic of the image. This fact is somehow both constantly emphasized and
completely trivialized in most frameworks for thinking about nets. The
going idea seems to be that the net’s alleged induction gets more “right”
as the number of images increases, with the underlying but unstated
assumption being that very large amounts of image data correspond
better to the world than smaller amounts. That is quite obviously cor-
rect, and yet it is not the truth we need. Where nets perform induction
within the logic of pixels, the also-internal reference that pixels make
to the world—whatever we take this to mean, images have a referen-
tial function—does not fall under the induction. The interface between
nets and whatever “world” we hold in common in our representations
is hypothetical—the join of the hypothesis to the “world” is the word,
the label and then the acceptance of that label as identity. Classification
makes the semiological surround a matter of hypotheticals.
     What is actually happening in a classifying net, then, is hypothesis
(or, in Peirce’s terms, “abduction”). Luciana Parisi has argued exten-
sively that this is the true function of the nets and that this function is
what allows it to be generative, “protentive,” more than just an applied
formalism.20 I follow Parisi here, with the goal of showing why the inter-
locking systems of representation of inferential rule and computational
design can be synthesized. All data are hypothetical; we live not in a
digital dream of transparency but in a data hypothesis.
     In the hypothesis, the rule and the result are combined to conclude
the case. The hypothesis says “what I see here must be a case of this rule”
or “this observation tends to make me think that the world conforms to
this rule.” A “weak” form of judgment, hypotheses are used where the
rule is clear but the relationship between rule and result is not given.
Peirce gives the example of fish fossils being found far inland—the
data (fossils) and the rule (fish are aquatic) are given, but their relation
is lacking, so we form the notion that the “sea once washed over the
land.”21 For Peirce, the hypothesis is far more common than we tend
to assume. For example, all historical judgments are hypothetical. No
110                    The Semiological Surround


one alive has ever seen the man “Napoleon,” for example, but the data
(images and documents of him) and the rule (that documents and im-
ages are of existing entities) suggest that he really existed (the case).
Perhaps we can go further and say that this hypothesis takes the form
“the world is as if Napoleon, with all we know of him, lived in it.” We rea-
son about his personal existence from documents, but we reason about
Napoleon the conqueror based on the geopolitical landscape he left in
his imperial wake. The “weakness” of the hypothesis is what allows our
cognition to exceed the binary between unfree induction and necessary
yet empty deductions spinning in a frictionless void. What we are ex-
tending in the net is what makes it so that every deduction has some
minimal purchase and every induction is imperfectly redundant. We
are engaging a shadow realm of the consistency of concepts themselves,
constituted as data signs.
    When we ask the net to classify, we are indeed seeking a determinate
result: this is (or is not) an image of a squirrel. But to describe the net
as trained inductively to classify deductively is to miss the data–world
relationship about which the net is actually proposing something. This
relationship underlies the obsessive question of the “intelligence” dis-
course, but that discourse never focuses on the semiotics of the judg-
ments actually being performed by these nets. The net actually gives us
a hypothetical (“this could be a case of squirrelness”). This is important
to bear in mind, because the net’s squirrel function is not equivalent to
the human concept “squirrel,” for two reasons.
    First, the function that the net produces, f(x), cannot be better at
recognizing squirrel-like pixels than humans if it is identical to our
procedure for squirrel recognition. Yet a function is a concept, as Frege
famously argued, only when it has a truth-value.22 The truth-value in
this case is supplied not by the net but by the relationship between the
net’s hypothesis and human judgment. That is, what produces the de-
terminate judgment “this is a squirrel” is a relationship between data
and judgment, between the human manner of engaging the represen-
tation system in question and its computational counterpart. Note that
I do not say “between data and the world”: the net hypothesizes a judg-
ment, and that judgment is about the world. Determination is extended
here, and it is crucial that we not collapse that extension in describing
the activity of the net. It hypothesizes not about the world but about
potential judgmental relationships that could describe the world. If we
                       The Semiological Surround                         111

accept its judgment (even automatically), we are integrating hypothe-
ses into our representation of the world. The data hypothesis alters the
structure of representation. When we say that the net “classifies,” we
are talking about an interpretation of the net’s hypothetical judgment
(“this would be a squirrel if squirrelness = f(x),” “this is a case of squir-
rel in a world in which f(x) is squirrelness,” “this image contains f(x)”)
as a determinate judgment. The net may even be programmed to print
the string “yes, this image contains a squirrel,” but the underlying judg-
ment is still hypothetical, not “this is a squirrel” but “this could be a
case of squirrelness.” This is important not because the net is “wrong”
about the squirrel in the image; nets are better than humans at detect-
ing minor pixel-level differences. It is important because the entirety
of neural net–based judgments is a hypothesis about the relationship
between the world (“squirrel”) and data (“f(x)”). We miss this when we
confuse the net’s actual semiotic activity with the language into which
we translate it (or program it to pretranslate for us). By spreading the
hypothetical capacity of the net through the already-constituted digital
semiology that pervades daily life, we have created a kind of sublunar
animatronic expectation, the anticipation that the world is computa-
tional and will react to our desires in demediated ways. But the truth
of that situation is a welter of moving signs, a map laid over the world
made up of text and vectors, a dialectic of judgment in which we cannot
see even provisional conceptual shapes.
    When we hypothesize, we posit that the world coheres in such a way
that a specific case exists. The world in which we live is one in which
Napoleon existed. The world in which we live is one that behaves as if we
landed on the moon. (It is this little wedge between determination and
possibility [“as if”] that allows us to reverse hypotheses like the moon
landing.) A more than hypothetical establishment of fact is impossible
in terms of science, so it is not to the detriment of the net’s capacities
that we notice this distinction. Induction, we might say, always rests
on hypothesis, even if it works in localized environments like that of
the pixel.
    The distinction allows us to see the interface between the net’s hy-
pothesis and our own judgment—the result of which can of course be, in
turn, anything from denial to affirmation to hypothesis itself. The point
is not that nets “can’t do x” but rather what nets actually do, and that
they actually do it in semiotic combination with our own judgments.
112                     The Semiological Surround


Inferences that make up empirical claims rest on a computational in-
duction presented as a hypothesis. But the hypothesis is usually smug-
gled in, glossed over, hidden from view. This is the actual black box
effect, and it has nothing to do with the net, the math, the hardware. To
pierce it, all that is required is attention to the surface of the interaction,
which is a semiotic overlay. The semiotics of nets are not equivalent to
the semantics that humans ask nets to produce. What nets mean is up
to us, because what they say is hypothetical. But “up to us” means in-
tegrated into preexisting grooves of meaning and recognition. When
“we” impose or recognize meaning, it is not as psychological individuals
randomly assigning qualitative value to signs. Nets give us options for
interpretation, but interpretation isn’t voluntary. Nets give us forceful
hypotheses not because we collectively accept them but because they
run on the collective systems of signs that already have the force of so-
cial value in them. The social system of judgment is mirrored and then
extended into uncanny statistical regions in the hypothetical activity
of the net.
    This is what I call the data hypothesis. It is both the hypothesis that
data can be used to represent and meaningfully engage the undatafied
world—a fact that is demonstrated as much by our fear of harm as it is
by cases of success—and the fact that data used for learning in this way
are always hypothetical (I propose the data hypothesis as an alternative
to the “cybernetic hypothesis,”23 which appears to me to take the digi
tal transparency dream too seriously). Data represent not “the world”
but instead sets of judgments about the world, a fact that is captured
elegantly in the name for the discipline in which nets were engineered:
representation learning. How much “world” is in a representation is per-
haps the metaphysical question of modern thought, and its silhouette is
visible throughout the discourse of deep learning. Yet data science tends
to use a simplified notion of “ground truth”—and critics have hardly re-
sisted the metaphor, as we have seen—that the data hypothesis in this
double sense undermines. “Ground truth” is not “fact” but a separate
representation of fact in another semiotic system (usually language as
expressive of concepts). The point is not that we cannot stabilize nets
around accepted notions of truthful statements but rather that when
we do, we are black-boxing the dialogue between computation and lan-
guage that underlies all nets (including in visual applications). When-
ever we think in dualisms about digital systems—body and abstraction,
                       The Semiological Surround                       113

online and offline, cyberspace and meatspace—we are forgetting the
data hypothesis and looking past the complex interpretive surface to a
depth that does not exist. All the ghosts of AI live in this depth, and all
the analysis we can achieve lives on the surface.
   My proposal for the “data hypothesis” is meant to sync with Orit
Halpern’s notion of “beautiful data,” which shows how the dream of the
net, long before its algorithmic implementation, already configured a
world in which data streams are mutually interoperable and translat-
able, one that mimics the notion of the brain as such a transfer station,
but then distributed into the world, forming an aesthetic condition.24
Many things follow from that condition, including Halpern’s notion of
“derivativeness” in what we have called “surplus data”25 and what she
further calls the “smartness mandate.”26 Work on data is “derivative”
in the sense that a result obtained not from first-order empirical ob-
servation but from a representation of those observations is fed back
into the world through logistical channels, rendering the very world we
encounter “derivative” of the data that were supposed to be a represen-
tation of that world. This feedback loop tends to render all judgment
hypothetical. Rather than a world of stable fact about which hypotheses
are made, the world of beautiful data looks more like a serial hypothesis
from which the “world” is first crystallized in its (usually overlooked)
semiotic transformation with human systems of representation. As
Ramon Amaro has shown, race is one such derivative. Using Frantz
Fanon’s notion of “sociogeny,” which Amaro brilliantly points out is
comparable to the machine learning production, he is able to extend
the “bias” discussion far beyond its usual limits.27 What Sylvia Wynter,
similarly invoking sociogeny, called “man 2,” the constant symbolic
feedback-based construction of race in the modern era,28 gains an au-
tomatic extension and therefore falls directly into the problematic of
net semiosis in the data-hypothetical surround. The common channel of
finance, race, and computation is language. The data hypothesis already
contains language as a governing function, the start and end points of
any series of signs in their purchase on the world. This is the platform in
which generation becomes powerful beyond any critique—cognitive or
political—about its lack of fidelity to human creativity or truth making.
Generation need only amplify the standing semiological order to gain
entry; once there, it retroactively forces the question of how signifying
orders merge and how linguistic and computational forms get along.
114                    The Semiological Surround


Language Supervises Classification;
Language Is the Matrix of Generation
A great deal of the confusion over LLMs boils down to the simple fact
that language is the medium through which humans communicate
with their computational machines. This has always been true. When
Friedrich Kittler infamously called an essay “There Is No Software,”
 what he actually argued was that “[software] would not exist if computer
 systems did not—at least until now—need to coexist with an environ-
 ment of everyday languages.”29 This phrasing makes it sound as though
 computing systems can take or leave language, but that is not the case.
 Language does not merely “coexist” with computational systems—one
 need look no further than the input/output unit included in the “First
 Draft of a Report on the Edvac” assembled by John von Neumann (and
 generally taken to be the first explicit architecture for a stored-program
 computer) to see that no digital system has ever been “computational”
 in the absence of the linguistic environment.30 It is all too easy to think
 of the edge of the diagram, which often reads “I/O” for “input/output,”
 as not really of the computer. But it is very hard to accept what would fol-
 low, namely, a “computer” that does not render its computations at all, a
 true black box that could just as well be a slab of granite as a calculating
 engine. The relationship between computation and language is essential
 to every digital machine, a fact that was never successfully mapped by
 the symbolist/GOFAI versus connectionism/machine learning debate.
 Language and number may not get along in concepts or intuitions, and
 they may even contradict one another in some essential way or ways.
 Kittler seems to suggest that they are forced into a relationship that
 obscures the computational core of the computer. But it is rather their
 internal relationship that allows for computing in the first place. They
 are not grafted onto each other using some third thing (the name of
 which K ittler leaves out anyway).31 Just in the way that mathematics is
 the explanation of (among other things) numerical reasoning, comput-
 ing is the rendering of linguistically meaningful results. Language is the
 medium of computation.
     As the medium of computation in general, in the case of neural nets,
 language supervises classification. This statement is true for non
 machine categories too, but it is too easily forgotten when computation
 distracts us from language. If it is hard to distinguish the simulation of
                       The Semiological Surround                       115

induction and deduction in nets from their hypothetical core, it is even
harder—and perhaps impossible—to separate their manipulation of
language from language itself. This is because the role that labeling plays
in classifying nets is taken over by language itself in LLMs. Linguistic
applications in nets abandon the operation of supervision (the labeling
of squirrels by hand in the training data set) to arrive at basic results,
instead using the learning function to generate language, one word at
a time. This inversion is crucial to thinking with AI, because it collapses
the computation and its “environment”—the results of the computa
tion are language itself. Where an image-c lassifying net produces a
function that obviously is not the same as our conceptual grasp of the
object at hand, a language-learning net learns to generate nothing other
than language. The computational reproducibility of language is para
sitic on language itself, a complication we will only fully confront at the
end of this book. But the complication is already active at this stage
of analysis: attempts to distinguish in some essential way between the
“real” language of humans and the merely “apparent” language of nets
make little sense on their face and have disastrous c onsequences—as
we shall see—for the analysis of these systems.
    Nets learn language. The data in the image-processing net comprise
disaggregated icons, pixels representing color and place values that
can be repainted but only categorized by labels. The data in an LLM are
language—words, strings, tokens. When the numbers are converted
back to those strings, they are language. When the inversion of the clas-
sification function was first deployed, it led to the “hallucinations” of
Google Dream and was constantly compared to psychedelic painting.
Nets that process language run on this inversion as such. This is because
the classification function would make no sense in the case of language.
Why would anyone train a net on a linguistic data set, then put in the
word “ideology” and ask the net “is this the word ideology?” The ab-
straction that nets achieve—whether by induction or hypothesis—is
baked into the data when the data are language. Type and token already
correspond in language and in fact do not need to be separated in the
first instance.
    Language supervises classification, and language is the matrix of gen-
eration; these are the facts of the media situation of the present. We
often hear that nets can work on any sets of data, creating robust, large-
scale correlations. And that is true, of course.32 But the transformer
116                    The Semiological Surround


architecture—which to date is the only really successful generative pro-
gram for language—must be applied to data that do not need their own
labeling. What it does, which I will describe later, could also be used on
any data sets with some internal structure. But what would the use be of
an unsupervised set of correlations at the scale of hundreds of billions
or trillions of units? And if it is labeled, then it will be supervised by
language. Manual labeling of this scale of data set is prohibitive, and
automatic labeling will almost certainly rely on LLMs of some sort. All
representation leads back to language in computational representation
systems. Representation systems that are prelabeled in or as language
can be roped into use c ases. The internal world of LLMs is semiological:
language comes first and last, supervises and generates.
    The breakthrough that led to the current explosion of generative AI
is called the “attention mechanism,” which underlies the transformer
architecture, the T in GPT. The basis of the breakthrough—and of the
following account—was the “attention mechanism.”33 The mechanism
is diagrammed in Figure 1 in the introduction. Attention overcomes a
problem that the net approach to AI had always had in linguistic ap-
plications, namely, the problem of memory. Humans do not memorize
language; they use it. I do not have a static store of all the sentences
I’ve heard or read in my mind. I use language in the sense that I generate
meaning from the combination of rules (grammar) and other meanings
(words in grammatical context). The relationship between meaning and
rules does not become explicit by that use. Meaning surfaces but does
not explain itself.
    Early net-based approaches to language relied on memorization
(storage) over a sequence, leading to problems of misapplication, mem-
ory overload, and irrelevance. The most general format was the recur-
rent neural net (RNN),34 in which the output of the net was fed back
in as input, allowing the net to capture some of the structure in the
linguistic strings. But this quickly maxed out the memory capacity of
the grid and led to spotty language use as the net “forgot” pieces and
rules of language that were distant from its current input. The creation
of variably ranging memory in LSTM (long short-term memory) solved
part of this problem but also hit barriers.35 The attention mechanism
solves this problem by allowing the net to encode a one-to-a ll matrix
for each word in the data set. By including the positions of the words in
the “embedding” process (in which words are indexed to numbers), the
                      The Semiological Surround                       117

problem of memory is solved by packaging the semantic relationships
and their grammatical layout in a single “pretraining.” Rather than jam-
ming rules and words into some location, the net is allowed to “attend”
to real possibilities to which to move from its current word.
    One can think of this like a set of patterns preprogrammed into a
grid of lights. Touch one light, and one shape turns on; touch another,
and some other shape lights up. “Attend” to one word, and the grid’s val-
ues shift to specify each other word’s likelihood to be next. If the word
to which I am attending is see and the word before it is I, then nouns of
all kinds and the word that will light up, meaning their value will range
high. This set of higher values given a word in a sequence will be pooled
by a “temperature” feature—turned too high, this will produce too pre-
dictable a text, and too low, nonsense. But the Goldilocks temperature
will produce the very “everyday language” that the computation would
otherwise have as its environment.36
    The larger grid is massive, approximately fifty thousand tokens
(not all words, so that particles like -ing can be placed correctly, and
all learned by the weights) in the case of GPT-3, which was trained on
about one trillion tokens scraped from the web.37 The attention mech-
anism itself operates by creating three separate vectors (keys, queries,
and values) over a fixed length of text, then narrowing the potential
output on the basis of that calculation. In the resulting compression, if
the word the occurs, virtually any noun is a candidate to follow. But the
attention mechanism isolates a context so that the value of the word
prediction (in this book, for example) remains above the threshold, while
the word strawberry is much less likely. But note that the word straw-
berry just did occur in this text—this is the problem that earlier models
could not solve and that LLMs seem to have. A discussion of computa-
tional language seems not to invite the word strawberry, but language
is not mechanically localized in this manner. Strawberry might occur
meaningfully in virtually any linguistic context, and one may note that
the first text on AI, Turing’s 1950 paper “Computing Machinery and In-
telligence,” posed the question whether a machine could perhaps enjoy
strawberries and cream. Context is a highly relative concept with no
fixed borders. What LLMs do is generate language by reference to the
whole with respect to the part. They more or less prove one of Claude
Shannon’s foundational assumptions about language as an informa-
tion system, which is that it is ergodic: a long enough string reproduces
118                    The Semiological Surround


the probabilities of the whole. But it is actually the relation of part and
whole that proves crucial.
   At the top of the attention diagram, one can see the function soft-
max. This simple tool separates the values assigned to tokens by raising
some close to 1 and leveling the others close to 0. Justie and I described
this function as “indexical,”38 because it isolates and points to the final
candidate pool, ultimately allowing a single word to be pushed into
the next spot in the sequence. The pretraining process, together with the
attention mechanism, produces the pool of next words. The so-called
fine-tuning process, which takes the balance between whole and part
and specifies some target text set and/or function to specify the net,
then allows this general capacity to be targeted. Fine-tuning on a cor-
pus of novels, for example, should make a novel-producer. In the case of
ChatGPT, as previously mentioned, the refinement was even expanded
by reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), with scores
for good and bad answers fed back in. Models abound with specific fine-
tuned features: to write novels, to make recipes, to write code.
   Up to the present, there is no “classifying” function in or for LLMs.
The net produces, but does not tell us rules about, language. It uses lan-
guage. The underlying mechanism is surely different in kind from the
human use of language, but the property of generating meaning from
the combination of rules and other meaning is the same. And here we
can see why Chomsky, Bender, and LeCun are missing something cru-
cial. The only way to separate the “human” and “machine” versions of
language is to assume that language is primarily something other than
meaningful strings of words—syntax, for example, or reference, or in-
tent. If language is not really language unless it grasps or communicates
truth, then LLMs can safely be seen as toys. But these proposals exclude
some massive portion of human-generated language. If I miss some-
one’s intent in responding, is that not language? If I make a ground-
ing error—this is not a birch tree but an aspen—is this not language?
Language is the margin in which the fantastic demand that AI be inhu-
manly right and authentically wrong flourishes—but the dream must
also find us waking in that very margin, where capture and generation
are synthesized, where language is words on a page, material configura-
tion, and intent, reference, and the rest of it. No theory of meaning can
afford to pick this synthesis apart and start from just one side. “Syn-
thetic text” is a tautology.
                       The Semiological Surround                        119

    What these definitions exclude is far more fundamental to language
than the admittedly excellent uses of language that they include. Per-
haps language can be used to find the true or the good—but surely
speech or text is not first language when it achieves some goal of this
kind. Each of these notions is teleological, and each is completely re-
futed by the very existence of LLMs (although certainly the case against
them did not need LLMs to be plausible). What these frameworks all no-
tice is that LLMs isolate meaning from reference. In doing so—what these
frameworks miss—they gain iconic power. If the start or end point of
any data chain is a semantic unit, then generation in that mixed order
of signs becomes meaningful form independent of grounding. This also
suggests why we should sweep away the ladder of reference—fiction,
for example, is “grounded” in a sense. Reference is one achievement of
language, not its primary function—a lthough versions of it attend all
linguistic expressions. The power of the LLM lies in the fact that it mod-
els the other functions too, without which it would not be a general semio
logical operator, as it is quickly becoming.
    What is now being called “prompt engineering” lends support to this
point. Take, for example, the notion of a “stochastic chain-of-thought,”39
in which “emergent” reasoning is teased out of the model by showing it
the procedure to follow. (Since the time of writing, so-called “reasoning
models” with architectures based on this idea have been developed. No
extensive analysis of them was possible given the time constraints of
publication.) For example, in doing word problems in math, LLMs have
been seen to confuse the various parts of the problem. But if a similar
problem is given with the answer and a short description of how the
answer was achieved, the net spikes in ability. A nthropic’s Claude model
seems particularly built to solve puzzles and reason through longer
problems, creating a kind of inference-driven model that channels lan-
guage into a useful pattern, so that if a particular result is the only cor-
rect one, the pattern is more likely to pick it out.
    At the time of writing, the bubble of the LLM appears to be popping,
as no solution to so-called hallucination that would make these systems
trustworthy rational agents has emerged. But what if, in this cluster of
prediction, weights, words, and pathways, we actually have a version
of how all reference works? When I say “strawberry,” the linguistic path
from word to image and reality is so completely predetermined that no
work is felt. But if I had to invent the word strawberry, to invest it with
120                   The Semiological Surround


its semantic fullness, perhaps the only way would be to work through
a generative matrix that does not primarily and locally refer to “the
world” but alters itself internally to make that reference possible, open
at the borders to dialogue and adjustment but made up of tensor-like
structure internally.40 Language as a human property has both exten-
sive pathways and creative force—a too-narrow focus on reference and
intentionality tends to obscure language.
    The generative matrix of language has proven shockingly able to
make convincing images. If labeling is language overseeing classifi
cation and, flipping the script, language is the medium of GPT’s G
(generativity), then a combination of these two factors can bring the
hallucinatory aspects of image generation under partial control. Adobe’s
“generative fill” was perhaps the first widely used tool of this mixed-
mode sort, and many multimodal systems now exist. DALL-E has been
the most popular of the toy versions of these algorithms, alongside Mid
journey and Stable Diffusion. I will not spend much time on these sys-
tems, but I want to note that language governs the generation in their
cases too—indeed, they are called “text-conditional image generation”
systems41 or “text-g uided generative diffusion models.” Labeling added
to the generative matrix of language itself can create monsters or art. It
seems that this type of system will lead the way to a new kind of filmic
creativity between humans and machines in the immediate future, as in
the case of Coca-Cola’s AI-generated 2024 Christmas ad (and since then,
many ads besides). Generative language is the bootstrap by which these
systems lift themselves above a sea of noise, the semiotic backbone of
the digital mediation of so many areas of life today.
    Classification classifies representation, not the world. And text can
be used to generate images. But in the language-generation algorithm,
there is no a priori difference to speak of between the net’s manipula-
tion of data and the world those data represent. The language that a
model of language (even an LLM) produces is language, as text, but with
the formal features that we expect text to have to line up with speech.
There can be no clear separation between hypothesis and deduction,
synthetic and “real” text, human and machine language, for if a net spits
out a series of words that cohere as natural language, the difference be-
tween what language is and what it means collapses, as it does when we
speak or write successfully. The concept of a language “model” here gets
blurry, as a model must be compared to its target by means of language,
                       The Semiological Surround                         121

so that an infinite regress threatens. But that threat simply points to the
success of LLMs, not in “representing” language, but in participating in
it. All models are wrong, but some of them are generative.
    Only once we have isolated the language that is genuinely caught up
in nets can we see the contours of the problem I laid out at the begin-
ning of this book. LLMs force us to confront the problem of language
not as reference or communication but as the interface between form
and meaning, culture and art, ideology and insight. They are the most
complete version of computational semiology to the present, and that
is precisely because they instantiate language to a good approximation
of its digital-cultural form. The datafication of everything stands to
become qualitative, to form a linguistic-computational hinge for other
forms of data processing and the extensive text-first yet multimedia
interface of our daily lives and global social processes. All of this starts
with text. The text-based cultural form of language—not reasoning, not
cognition in the first instance—has often gone under the name “liter-
ary language.” We can now suggest that the first L in LLM might as well
stand for “literary.”
This page intentionally left blank
      4


Large Literary Machines

Everyone seems to agree that form is involved in neural nets, and in
computation more generally. But we are ill equipped at present to deal
with forms that involve both computation and culture, partly because
of the conversation that never happened between cognitive science and
literary theory (see chapter 1). Form means both the developmental root
of some individual (morphē) and the external appearance of that same
individual (eidos).1 Perhaps it even means the calibration of those two
things, the stability of an identity through change and the total appear-
ance of that identity at any moment. In aesthetic analysis, form is the
singular presentation of some concrete object—a painting, a novel, a
song—but it is that singularity insofar as it communicates with some-
thing else. Form may bear meaning by convention, by genre, or it may
be that form and social life are irrevocably intertwined, as Theodor W.
Adorno thought. Formal experimentation in art is celebrated, while for-
mal analysis repeatedly revives and is drowned again in claims about
historical or material specificity.
    Meanwhile, form has two meanings in computational discourse as
well. As John Haugeland put it, summarizing the entire project of sym-
bolic AI, the “formalist’s motto” is “if you take care of the syntax, the se-
mantics will take care of itself.”2 Form here is morphē, the root and law of
what appears. A symbol system like a computer has a strict set of rules,
having nothing direct to do with what we want its symbols to mean.
Shannon’s quip that the “semantic aspects [of messages] are irrelevant
to the engineering problem” is the machine equivalent of the symbolic
doctrine. Form is sheer syntax, rule without respect to content.
    The only problem in a purely syntactical system is a weak one, falling
below the level of either first-order predicate logic or arithmetic—not
to speak of natural language. This truth was articulated by Kurt Goedel,
who proved that systems of any real semantic strength are formal if and
only if they do not achieve complete syntactic closure. Computation, in
particular, is open—it must borrow some rule from another system each
time it discovers something new. Form, then, names the disjunction


                                    123
124                     Large Literary Machines


between syntax and semantics—Haugeland might have agreed—but as
a unity. A formal system is one in which syntax and semantics are not
reducible to one another but in which they are nevertheless locally uni-
fied at every point. Form is the calibration of law and expression, not
one or the other.
    “Formal” tends to be pejorative, both in literary analysis and in
some sectors of data science. The goal, it seems, is to capture something
informal, the way things really are. But the oppositions that form im-
mediately calls to mind—form and content, form and function, and so
on—w ill not do. Debates on aesthetic form and computational form
have always been related, even if few attempts to articulate their rela-
tionship exist. When AI crossed into patently cultural territory, it made
this problem urgent.
    Three strands of argument proceed from this chapter. First, I argue
that this lack of communication on the problem of form has prevented
us from seeing that LLMs are “large literary machines,” in which the prob-
lems of structure and redundancy produce, but do not explain, the cul-
tural capture in data systems. The next chapter, which completes the
theoretical argument of the book, argues that the ability of LLMs to
generate what Saussure called “values” is based on the interaction of
two (at least partly) formal systems, mathematics and language, charac-
terized by incompleteness in Goedel’s sense and semiological inclusion
in the case of language. This “inclusion” is effected by what I call the
“poetic heat map” of the LLM, based in a reading of Roman Jakobson’s
“poetic function.” The result is a hybrid formal language calling for a
“general poetics” of meaning production that explores the shape of lan-
guage and other sign-systems without any presumptive clear distinc-
tion between human and machine, cognition and culture. The following
chapter argues that this space is currently an ideology machine.
    Anthropic’s LLM, Claude (named for Shannon, not Lévi-Strauss), is
divided into three services by size of model: haiku, sonnet, and opus. The
names are not accidental, for NLP engineers have been in the practice of
asking their machines for poetry since 1959, when the philosopher Max
Bense instructed his student Theo Lutz to create what is usually thought
of as the first algorithmic poem. The paper that launched GPT-3, six de-
cades later, included an appendix of generated poetry in several styles,
including that of Wallace Stevens.3 Poetry sticks to automated text. The
                          Large Literary Machines                           125

simplest reason for this affinity is a sort of version of the Eliza effect.
Because formal experimentation in poetry has been partly a matter of
 divorcing words from their usual context and creating language-internal
 “contexts” that seek to create meaning where none previously existed,
 machines can play this game better than other language games. The
 sparsity of poetic language and its paratactical features mean that al-
 most anything can be a poem. As Jessica P    ressman has argued, the mod-
 ernist tradition influenced the very media that came to generate poetry
 in this way, setting the expectation that is then exploited by machine
 poetry.4 Somewhere in the space between Kurt Schwitters’s decohering
 of German grammar in “An Anna Blume” and the L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E
 poetry movement, the possibility that poetry is the underlying form of
 language bubbles to the surface, at least as an ambition—one not trivi-
 ally tied to the history of NLP.
     The poet Allison Parrish has taken this insight furthest, arguing that
 “large language models can only write poetry.”5 She cites William Carlos
 Williams’s definition of poetry as “new form dealt with as a reality in it-
 self,” not so much the “fact of an emotion” (which prose conveys) as “the
 dynamization of emotion into a separate form.”6 Parrish concludes that,
 because a language model cannot make a statement of fact, emotional
 or otherwise, their outputs—regardless of what they might look like on
 the surface—are poetry, not prose.7
     Nevertheless, LLMs cannot write poems. Poetry is, Parrish suggests,
 language in new forms, the palette from which any real statement is
 drawn. A poem “is an intentional arrangement resulting from some ac-
 tion,” something knit together and realized from the background of po-
 tential poetry in language: the poem “unites poetry with an intention.
 So yes, a language model can indeed (and can only) write poetry, but only
 a person can write a poem.”8 When Bense asked his student Lutz to use
 an early mainframe computer in Ulm outside Stuttgart to create what
 would become the first algorithmic poem, they used a subset of words
 from K afka’s The Castle and a stripped-down German grammar. The year
 was 1959, and the result was stark: “Not every look is near / No village is
 late. / A castle is free and every framer is distant.” As the selected poem
 cycles through its quantitative register—not every, no, one, every—it cre-
 ates a “stochastic” walk through German, filtered by Kafka’s vocabulary.
 (Incidentally, this theory of text is far closer to stochastic parrotry than is
126                      Large Literary Machines


what LLMs do, and intentionally so.) If we take the basic unit of the poem
as pairs of “elementary sentences,” as Lutz does, then the “poem” consists
of 4,174,304 possibilities.9 We might think of this larger backdrop as the
“poetry,” in Parrish’s terms, and any handmade selection, such as Lutz’s
own, as a “poem” rendered by a decision. Bense’s school was rather more
interested in poetry than in poems, theoretically speaking.
   In the next few chapters, I want to follow the poetry thread rather
than the poem thread. I agree profoundly with Parrish’s characteriza-
tion of the poetic nature of LLMs, and I will expand this into a more
general theory of linguistic meaning in the next chapter.
   Parrish writes that “the output of a language model can never on its
own constitute a felicitous performative speech act.”10 Here she refers to
the idea of the performative speech act as outlined by J. L. Austin, who
famously set off illocution—speech that realizes its content, like “I now
pronounce you man and wife”—from constative and imperative types
of speech. This language falls under a larger theory of pragmatics, lan-
guage as it is used. But some acts of speech do not perform even when
they seem to have the relevant structure (Austin notes that no one is
confused about the marriage pronouncement if one is watching a play).
He calls these types of language use “poetic”:

   A performative utterance will, for example, be in a peculiar way
   hollow or void if said by an actor on the stage, or if introduced in a
   poem, or spoken in soliloquy. This applies in a similar manner to
   any and every utterance—a sea-change in special circumstances.
   Language in such circumstances is in special ways—intelligibly—
   used not seriously, but in ways parasitic upon its normal use—
   ways which fall under the doctrine of the etiolations of language.
   All this we are excluding from consideration.11

A long debate about “felicity” has mushroomed from this definition,
starting with the bitter conflict between philosophers Jacques Derrida
and John Searle.12 What Parrish argues, and which I will expand below,
is that felicity—like reference, like a poem—is a special case of poetry. Or
in other words, the LLM is a culture machine that captures the essence
of language, its poetic function.
    The “Wallace Stevens” poem that GPT-3 produced runs as follows:
                         Large Literary Machines                       127

   I must have shadows on the way
   If I am to walk I must have
   Each step taken slowly and alone
   To have it ready made


   And I must think in lines of grey
   To have dim thoughts to be my guide
   Must look on blue and green
   And never let my eye forget
   That color is my friend
   And purple must surround me too


   The yellow of the sun is no more
   Intrusive than the bluish snow
   That falls on all of us. I must have
   Grey thoughts and blue thoughts walk with me
   If I am to go away at all.13


The poem is rather more like T. S. Eliot in tone, although the use of color
seems closer to Stevens, to me. The rhyme of the final beat of the first
line in each of the first two stanzas also recalls the way Stevens slides
in and out of rhyme in his distinctive modernism. The authors of the
paper write that they gave only the title “Shadows on the Way” (as well
as the “like Wallace Stevens” prompt) to the system. No further editing
was applied, but they then note that “completions were truncated when
the model began to write a new title and author heading, or broke into
prose commentary.”14 This is a typical task–output problem in LLMs,
which often stop producing the specific task and revert to a kind of gen-
eral “language” task as they run—in this case going from formal poetry
back to “prose commentary.” Gathering the entire history of modern-
ist form, NLP, and the corpus of electronic poetry (among the nearly
two million web pages on which GPT-3 pretrained), we get a separation
of a poem from prose. If we follow Parrish, that separation—which she
thinks cannot be successful—occurs on the backdrop of a general poetic
form of language. It is this generalized poetry for which I wish to provide
a poetics in this chapter and the next.
    LLM, then, should stand for “large literary machine.” LLMs prove a
128                      Large Literary Machines


broad platform that literary theory has long held about language, that
it is first generative and only second communicative and referential.
This is what justifies the question of “form”—not individual forms or
genres but the formal aspect of language itself—in these systems. In-
deed, this is why literary theory is conjured by the LLM, which seems
to isolate, capture, and generate from what has long been called the
“literary” aspect of language, the quality that language has before it is
turned to some external use. If these systems “hallucinate,” this points
us firmly away from the ladder of reference. Truth telling is a specifica-
tion from the general “poetry” of linguistic form. Literary theorists have
argued in various ways for at least a century that the internal form and
structure of language itself is “literariness.” LLMs have stepped in just
as that theory is being pronounced dead to prove the case empirically.
     The notion of form falls willy-nilly into the gap between hallucina-
tion and reference. Matthew Kirschenbaum, reading a novel written
by a recurrent neural net driven across the country by “author” Ross
Goodwin, who generated 1 the Road in the genre of Kerouac’s On The
 Road, finds that neural nets are literary because they are form genera-
 tors. Kirschenbaum chalks up the (in this case actually) hallucinatory
 effect of a net writing in a genre that requires extensive, searching ex-
 periential reflection on perception that nevertheless conforms to basic
 laws of physics and assumptions about society to a “kind of fully acti-
 vated formalism, form unconstrained by matter, form whose manifes-
 tations have no necessary base in a prior substance or substrate. This is
 the peculiar poetry of vector space.”15 Surely this “full activation” and
 this freedom from substrate name the flexibility of neural nets over and
 above their limited digital predecessors. But these predecessors were
 themselves constantly described as formal—too formal, landing more
 on the inhumanly right than the authentically wrong. The dream of a
 perfectly rigid formalism suffers another defeat with the rise of an ac-
 tivated “form” whose engine of generation, the “transactions that give
 rise to form,” are, “for all intents and purposes, inapproachable.”16 There
 is no “getting under the hood to probe mechanism or engine.”17 Mecha-
 nistic interpretability, or any other localized probing of models, might
 never result in understanding. But perhaps that is only because we do
 not in advance possess a theory of the two forms that here merge—or
 that “activate” each other, to use Kirschenbaum’s term.
     Jonathan Kramnick and Anahid Nersessian write, “The effort to de-
                         Large Literary Machines                        129

fine form as something over and above the explanation through which
it comes into view and whose ends it serves has led to some confusion.”18
Forms, for them, are not “shared” between disciplines. But this creates
the following problem: forms are really shared between different areas
that may not share a disciplinary vocabulary. Putting the brakes on the
too-quick analogies between forms is well taken. But semiotic systems
must be formal enough to allow communication embedded in biologi-
cal substrates and extended in computational machines. The question is
not whether those areas all share form but how that sharing is possible.
    LLMs might, then, be form generators whose “substrate” is not the
relevant factor. The “materiality” that Kirschenbaum is seeking is just
as slippery in brains, nonmachinic language, and literature as it is when
AI is in the picture. Form is local, yet indexes the connection between
fields, domains, disciplines, and tasks.19 It names the feature of lan-
guage in which both rule and object, condition and thing, value and
variable, can be merged with one another. LLMs have gained entry to
this Janus-faced fact of language.
    When we attend to the problem of form in literary artifacts, regard
less of what or who generates them, we can endlessly confront the problem
of lateral sensemaking across fields, across disciplines, and in histori-
cal circumstances. But we can just as easily lose sight of the problem of
form in language itself, which LLMs touch more directly. However they
write a novel or a poem must be downstream from the form generation
they possess with respect to language as such. Hallucination names this
formal matrix, where a mathematical function captures the ability to
generate, which enables the ability to capture something—value, object,
meaning—setting off once again the chain of interpretation.
    This chain is what should have occupied the leg of the triad that
Charles Morris called “pragmatics” (language in use). As we saw in the
introduction, Morris established a highly influential division of lan-
guage into semantics, syntax, and pragmatics. These were tied to
Charles Sanders Peirce’s three essential features of the sign: that it re-
fers to something, that it relates to other signs, and that it gives rise to
further signs. Peirce himself called the study of the final feature “pure
rhetoric,”20 because he saw that interpretation was only partly, even sec-
ondarily, psychological. We do not choose randomly which signs emerge
from our exposure to previous signs.
    Communication is not some chaos separate from the formal clarity
130                      Large Literary Machines


of syntax and semantics. But this is how Morris made it seem. He re-
duced the triadic schema of the framer Peirce to a dualism between form
and historical, psychological language that fit with Carnap’s fidelity to
Frege. This is how we can get a proxy war between a “scientific” concep-
tion of intelligence that takes perceptual grounding to be primary (ref-
erence) and a “social” conception that takes intent as the crucial feature
(communication). In the scientific conception championed by Morris,
poetry and metaphysics float as foam on the substance of reference, the
dual achievement of syntax and semantics. This leaves “pragmatics” to
solve all the problems left in the wake of this arbitrary arrogation of
meaning to reference. The “ladder of reference” fails because linguistic
functions are not hierarchical. We might say, with McCulloch, that they
are heterarchical.
   Whenever we hear that AI is “conditioned by humans,” as laborers,
language users, subjects, we need to hear more than a salutary confir-
mation of the indomitable yet fragile human spirit. “Meaning” falls into
the gap in the broken triad, the space between syntax and semantics on
one side, pragmatics on the other. Symbolist AI and computer science
in general have followed the “capture” line of language, while the rise
of nets has—partly because the transformer architecture has allowed
a kind of “pure pragmatics” to be input—suggested that semantics can
be approached from the bottom up. Somehow, when we apply these sys-
tems, we get syntax “for free.” As becomes immediately clear, the term
meaning shifts wildly between the different poles as different systems
are implemented (though nothing will displace the scientific and social
dogmas about what counts as language in the first place). “Form” names
the problem here, as would a revised notion of what syntax really is—
something like a “form-r ich semantics.”
   We might begin to pick apart this mess by reversing the value-sign of
Hayles’s idea that LLMs possess a “systemic fragility of reference.”21 Ref-
erence just is fragile. Fragility is not a fault of machines but a feature of
knowing. And this is why meaning cannot reside in a single function of
language. But it is the generative matrix—in both the medium and the
mathematical senses, both active in LLMs—where meaning emerges.
Neural nets have upended the way we think about rules with respect to
their domains of application. In the case of language, this means that we
should be in for a radical revision of the notion of syntax.
   What we are ultimately reconciling here is that the generation of
                        Large Literary Machines                        131

meaning does not ipso facto entail the understanding. In language as we
use it, there is a precarious but usually quite open balance between un-
derstanding and generation. I speak, I understand. I generate words to
make you understand. You speak to help me understand. Yes, there are
pitfalls, but we create meaning by speaking and understanding. Mean-
ing is both the positive sequence of language—letters, words arranged
on paper or as pixels—and the value we assign to it, the concepts we
capture in and out of it. Nets—and this has been the whole history of
objection to them, from Marvin Minsky to today—might produce but
will never capture meaning. Their meaning is “ungrounded” at the level
of reference and intent. But when they produce language, this problem
becomes massively complex, because language is the means by which
we communicate meaning. Capture or insight—the concepts we try to
transmit to each other—is not available intersubjectively, except by
means of sign-systems, language first by volume and habit.
     The point is not that nets cannot “understand” what they generate or
what we say to them but rather that they reveal unknown regions of our
representative apparatus. And in fact, they do so in just the way that
Turing set for arithmetic: they tell us banalities that are predictable
 because we have already “calculated” them (strung them together as
 meaning, as in clichés, genres, and so on), and they have the potential
 to widen the net to the outer reaches of statistically improbable yet se-
 mantically rich language. This spectrum—what I think of as going from
 ideology to poetry—is the positive aspect of language, an algorithmic
 basis for a kind of “linguistic empiricism” (rather than “logical empiri
 cism”). A linguistic empiricism would have to start with the notion of
 redundancy.
     Classical information theory possesses a concept of language that is
 not primarily referential. Indeed, the implicit account of language given
 by Claude Shannon in 1948 does not prioritize a function of language at
 all. It suggests that language generates meaning by compression, which
 is a relation between whole and part that changes as expression occurs.
 Redundancy is thus a surprising candidate for the surface engine that
 runs generation.
     Shannon observed that all messages are patterns, selected out of a
 maximum set of possible states in which their particles could exist. In
 the case of English, his privileged example, the states may be viewed as
 any arrangement of letters, summing to 27! (with a space in addition to
132                       Large Literary Machines


the twenty-six letters of the Roman alphabet).22 This is called the “en-
tropy” of the system, as it corresponds to the way Ludwig Boltzmann
formalized the entropy concept, measuring the real state against the
sum of all possible states of the particles in a system. But not all patterns
are equally likely, for after all, u is far more probable after q than is z. The
totality of such “restraints,” as Shannon called them, form the “relative
entropy” of English, which Shannon famously estimated at 50 percent.
This means that if you remove half the letters from an English sentence
at random, it is usually recognizable to a reader, a fact that allows the
engineer to construct a channel that will be perfectly secure in the com-
munication of a message. And it is this relationship—redundancy to
noise—that interested Shannon above all. Given a “source” and a chan-
nel, the question was how to make them fit so that nothing would be lost
in the transmission. The result is the notion of bandwidth, with all its
import for our technical world.
    But there are further consequences: relative entropy is itself a way
of understanding language, or the stuff of any communication what-
soever. Shannon thinks of the problem as the “measure of freedom” in
selecting a message. The lower the freedom is, the greater is the redun-
dancy; the greater the freedom is, the more entropy there is. If I begin a
sentence, without any stated context, with the word “the,” the next word
is extremely difficult to determine. If, to use Warren Weaver’s example
from his famous introduction to Shannon’s paper, if I begin a sentence
“in the event,” the likelihood that the next word will be “that” is much
higher than that it will be “elephant.”23 I like to joke with my students
that the phrase “in the event elephant” is not a zero-probability se-
quence, for perhaps a circus has a show elephant and a work elephant,
and some crucial but tasty object has gone missing. The joke is poor,
but the import is real: there is no zero-probability sequence. As Weaver
himself points out with the phrase “Constantinople fishing nasty pink,”
anything can be introduced into English and given some meaning. (The
“Constantinople” phrase stands for this very fact.) The result is a pecu-
liar way of looking at language.
    Relative entropy is “the maximum compression possible when we
encode into the same alphabet,” Shannon writes.24 But this number
ranges only between 1 and 0, meaning absolute necessity and complete
randomness. Yet neither of these actually exists: there is no communica-
tion in which the next letter or word is absolutely necessary and no con-
                        Large Literary Machines                        133

text in which zero probability can be given. Redundancy is the primary
fact of communication, but its limit cases are regulative. The usual view
is that Shannon strips out all meaning from the messages, following
his famous quip that the “semantics aspects are irrelevant to the engi-
neering problem.”25 But what if “semantics”—that is, the generation of
meaning—is not the content of messages but instead the structure that
redundancy captures? Because redundancy can never be 100 percent or
0 percent, every message is related not to the absolute rules of the sys-
tem but to the actual structure of the rest of language26—Shannon’s
technical word for this is ergodic, displaying the structure of the whole
in any sufficiently long partial sequence. So long as we look at the prob-
lem through the lens of isolated semantics, syntax, and pragmatics, it
appears that Shannon has desemanticized communication.
    But the notion of redundancy should be seen differently. With it,
Shannon undermines Morris’s triad, because he shows how meaning is a
relationship of density, in which structure comes before rules or content.
Redundancy is primary, yet lacks conceptual clarity—every message can
be analyzed into rules (seen from the fictional standpoint of necessity)
or reference (seen from the standpoint of a questionable contingency
attached to the “world” it designates), yet neither is load bearing. What
activates the bandwidth notion is not these fictional standpoints, not
syntax and semantics, but the very notion of the trajectory of language
as structure as such. Each message is internally doubled; it appears once
as meaning and once as tendency, as capture and generation.27 Rather
than reducing language to just “whatever is in the machine,” Shannon
elevated the internal structure of language to a principle of any possible
technical communication. Because digital machines are paradigmatic
for his framework (which is universal), we can once again confirm, as
we saw in chapter 1, that digital machines and language are inextricably
linked. This is not an anthropological fact; it is rooted in whatever layer
of language and computation might be explanatory of either.
    The consequences of this implicit theory of language in Shannon
are far-reaching. But I want to stay with Shannon for one more mo-
ment. The computation and engineering of communication rely on the
capture–generate dialectic, not on the syntax–semantics distinction.
The latter distinction can be made! But only after the work of genera-
tion is done. If one tries to generate based on arbitrary designation of
meaning alone, or on pure rules, the dead end comes fast. We will soon
134                     Large Literary Machines


see how LLMs deploy this crucial fact. But at the level of the theory of
language, it suggests that Shannon, and everything downstream from
him, operates on a nonreferential theory of language. For machines to
communicate, they need to use language as it is internally structured,
not as it achieves something outside itself. Once we see this, we can see
that “meaning” resides not in one or the other part but in the relation-
ship of part and whole.
    Recent attempts to think about neural nets and language tend to
confirm this structural point I have argued for in Shannon’s concep-
tion. I think of these attempts as shifting the theory of language away
from both the ladder of reference and the syntax view and toward an
extended version of Shannon’s argument that language is redundant
pattern. The historical sources they draw on tend to stand on the side
of structuralism or literary formalism, not on the side of syntax or
“semantics” in the technical sense Frege and his followers gave to that
term. Instead of these, they push for a cultural notion of language,
one that is dynamic, internally self-determined. For that reason, they
tend to reach to structuralism or one of its cousins in thinking through
the problem of language and machines. The family of theories I lay out
in the rest of this chapter puts emphasis on the malleability of meaning
and its relation to structure, form, and pattern. I broadly agree with the
direction of this research and have taken great inspiration from the two
main examples I discuss: Lydia Liu’s and Juan Luis Gastaldi’s work. But
as we will see, I think the distributed structure they find in language on
the basis of its encounter with machines is not yet the explanation but
rather the result of that encounter.
    Lydia Liu, whose own reading of Shannon’s notion of “printed En-
glish” points out the depth of the structure and the dominance of the
regional specificities of English as an alphabet, a structure, and an ide-
ology,28 has drawn attention to one origin point for NLP that supports
a different theory of meaning altogether. Where Shannon relied on the
putative universality of English, philosopher Margaret Masterman,
working with Ludwig Wittgenstein’s expansion of pragmatics to uni-
versality (language is language in use, everyday language), suggested
that a real doctrine of language should be based on Chinese, as the
ideographic system “operates on combinatory logic, not propositional
logic.”29 Where the linearity of propositional logic lines up with the
syntax–semantics distinction for English, in classical Chinese, “logical
                         Large Literary Machines                         135

connections are made by creating and by combining combinators,—and
nearly all these combinators, in their primary function as elements,
have demonstrative (i.e. indexical) significance.”30 This type of indexi-
cal combination suggests to Liu that language, on Masterman’s account,
is generative. Rather than mere “polysemy,” Liu finds in Masterman a
distributed theory of meaning in which semantics is not the “value of a
symbol” (reference) but instead the set of relationships of an “umbrella”
or “fan” term to all of its potential meanings and their potential rela-
tionships to other terms.
    Liu argues that “Masterman is the first modern philosopher to push
the critique of Western metaphysics beyond what is possible by the
measure of alphabetical writing, and, unlike deconstruction, her trans-
lingual philosophical innovation refuses to stay within the bounds
of self-critique.”31 The consequence is that poststructuralism is here
pushed into the inevitable consequence of potential automation. For
Masterman, this alternate framework is far more promising for ma-
chine language than is the framework of analytical philosophy, and
for Liu, Masterman is thus more promising for the analysis of machine
learning than is Derrida: “machine learning and AI technologies have
been part of a major philosophical breakthrough even if their practi-
tioners remain unaware of it.”32 I am suggesting something similar
about Shannon here. The practice of computational language, from its
infancy to today, reflects a structuralist account of language that is not
limited to any positive doctrine yet in existence but requires its own
accounting. Breaking the hegemony of the ladder of reference is only the
first step in establishing that other account.
    The next step has been taken by Juan Luis Gastaldi, who has convinc
ingly argued that deep learning proves the “structuralist hypothesis.”
Gastaldi works carefully to compare the distributional hypothesis, the
result of the linguistic work done in the paradigm of parallel distrib-
uted processing, with classical linguistic structuralism, the theory of
language—and much else—that originated with the work of Ferdinand
de Saussure, and continued through that of Louis Hjelmslev, Émile
Benveniste, and Roman Jakobson, among others. This framework is
based on the notion that linguistics studies language as a “system,” in
Saussure’s word. Linguistics is not metaphysics, physics, or neurosci-
 ence. And the fact of language is twofold: its signs are “arbitrary” with
 respect to their designates (there is a “signifier” and a “signified” but no
136                     Large Literary Machines


“object” beyond the concept designated by the sign), and their meaning
is differential, determined with respect to the other constituents of the
system. Structure before reference, before syntax, before any other ex-
planatory principle.
    Gastaldi suggests that neural nets prove the structuralist hypothesis
and proposes “the first elements of a theoretical framework renewing
the structuralist program in the wake of recent NLP advances.”33 The
“distributional hypothesis,” he writes, maintains that “the meaning of
a word is determined by, or at least strongly correlated with, the multi-
ple (linguistic) contexts in which that word occurs (called its ‘distribu-
tion’),”34 which contradicts Chomsky’s alternative structural framework
(based, as we have seen, on syntax). Distributionalism, as the core of
the statistics view, is “above all a statement about the nature of lan-
guage itself, rather than about the capacities of linguistic agents.”35 In
a sense, it is shocking that structuralism has disappeared to the extent
that such a reminder is necessary. But LLMs prove the thesis irrevoca-
bly, for G
          astaldi, because their way of dealing with language shows that
its internal structure and its semantics are coconstitutive, as we will
explore in the next chapter.
    The central idea of distributional structuralism is that “linguistic
units are not immediately given in experience, but are, instead, the
formal result of a system of oppositional relations that can be estab-
lished, through linguistic analysis, at the level of the multiple supports
in which language is manifested.”36 Among the oppositions is the idea
of the paradigm and the syntagm, a kind of graph in which word sig-
nification and sequence are where the y and x axes meet. Meaning must
emerge there, where language is made and understanding occurs.
    Liu’s and Gastaldi’s proposals shift the playing field of language the-
ory to the empirical terrain established by LLMs. Whatever disagree-
ments might arise after this point, it should be said that distribution
and structure are crucial starting points. The amount of surprise in this
shift will depend on one’s disciplinary vantage point. If the surprise is
great for those in the cultural humanities at large, however, this must
be the result of a break in attention and rigor in the investigation of
representation systems in their overlap with language.
    I began this book by saying that LLMs force us to reexamine the rela-
tionship of language and culture, art and language as such, the problem,
in other words, of structure—the preexisting channels and relation-
                         Large Literary Machines                          137

ships in language and other representational systems—and form. Form
is both development and product, the law and its expression. But in
linguistic use, form tends, unlike structure, to mean articulated form,
the generation or existence of something unusual measured against
some generic constraint. That is why Kramnick and Nersessian, I think,
call attention to its relationship to explanation. Structure, too, is sup-
posed to serve as explanatory, as least in structuralism itself, but from
the other end. Structure generates; form captures. Both terms name the
spectrum from the way things usually are in language to the way they
can break free, show us something new, surprise us.
    Form and structure are the playing field of the LLM. I would say
that rather than “fully activating” formalism (Kirschenbaum) or “prov-
ing” the structuralist hypothesis (Gastaldi), they instantiate or realize
those theoretical frameworks, but without explanation. The idea of an
“explanatory AI” corresponds strictly to the limits of formalism and
structuralism, to whether and how form is explanatory and what struc-
ture turns out to be. Perhaps it is no accident that, after literary theory
clashed with form and structure, then forgot them, the “post-theory”
moment would be forced to confront its own history, paraded in front
of it as a digitalization of the language it held so dear. In the face of this
problem, poststructuralism has tended to become a humanism,37 re-
treating into phenomenological and other remaining corners as yet un-
touched by computation. The humanities cannot afford to live in those
margins, the remainder of humanism on which we can insist but which
we can never validate.
    Jonathan Culler opined some years ago that “theory sought to treat
the objects and events of culture as elements of so many ‘languages,’ so
it was concerned above all with the nature of language; and literature
was what language was when it was most deliberately and most ludi-
cally, most freely and most self-reflectively, being language.”38 Culler’s
polemic against the empirical status of “the literary” might be broad-
ened in the light of digital language. The situation that Culler diagnosed
was one in which “theory,” which had originally been called “literary
theory” because it had placed all other objects under the banner of the
literary, which had analytical priority in the investigation of culture at
large, had slowly abandoned literature. Surely that is more true today
than it was then, but the rather odd part of it is that the investigation
of language, and its literary properties, seems to have been lost in the
138                      Large Literary Machines


split. The project that Jakobson and others had spelled out was one that
put a literary function—most obvious in literature, but not necessarily
even that, and certainly everywhere in language as such—in the heart
of linguistics. He argued that phonology and the literary were bound
together, in fact, that they were what bound together an otherwise ar-
bitrary set of signs in language in the first place. But a parallel project
appeared in outline: the project of studying language in use, expres-
sion, ideology—in short, culture, although that had been momentarily
banned—from the standpoint of its literary function. In other words,
the possibility of a literary study not of literature especially but of lan-
guage in its various uses and systemic guises came into view. That study
would be something like a general rhetoric—or a general poetics, as I call
it—in the sense Aristotle (and equally Peirce) used the term, but one
attuned to the problems of structure, synthesis, and ideology. But this
discipline never took root. There is no group of theorists who study lan-
guage from the perspective of the literary. That situation cannot con-
tinue in the era of LLMs.
    When we attend to their interface, we find that language and com-
putation “share form” in the sense that Kramnick and Nersessian deny
can be taken for granted. The argument here shows that language and
computation fit with each other, because they share a kind of basic re-
flexivity that comes not from syntax but from poetics, not from con-
ceptual second-order affairs but from the first order of language (and
computation) itself. To elaborate this argument, I make an analogy be-
tween Jakobson’s idea of the “poetic function” of language and Goedel’s
proof that formal systems are “incomplete.” Sharing form, these two
particular systems are “interoperative,” I argue—one is incomplete, the
other ravenously inclusive, even totalizing. The play of these two forms
is the semiology of the present.
      5


Computational Meaning
For a General Poetics

When Walter Benjamin spoke of “language as such,” he certainly did
not have anything quantitative in mind.1 But LLMs present a break-
through of quantity into the formal aspects of language: algorithmic
reproducibility in the linguistic field. This chapter argues that the at-
tention mechanism has created the first general interface between these
two formal systems, that computation and language share form—not as
a matter of assumption but as a technical achievement that requires a
theoretical explanation. “Attention” produces linguistic values the way
that Saussure predicted for human language. For this reason, I think it
is more important to accept this situation and try to understand why
this might be so, rather than dividing between human and machine lan-
guage or “synthetic” and some putatively nonsynthetic text.
    The transformer architecture is surely just the signal that these two
systems can get along. Others will likely come. But even at this early
date, we can see that language is poetic above all, even when it is com-
putational rather than conceptual. LLMs set linguistic value as Saussure
conceived of it, and the attention mechanism realizes a computational
of what Roman Jakobson developed to account for that value setting:
the “poetic function” of language. AI generates linguistic meaning not
by sound or writing but by computation. Poetics in general—rather than
poetry, or any other genre or function of language—counterintuitively
emerges from the theoretical war that cultural AI has touched off.
    For Jakobson, poetics was not restricted to actual literature or poetry
but was instead the emergence of structure in the first-order sequence
of language in use. Jakobson famously claimed that the poetic function
was a “message about the message,” not about the code (grammar), the
world, or anything else. The internal structure of meaning generation
makes the system of language resemble Kurt Goedel’s description of
a formal system. Both representation systems have larger first-order
functions from which second-order functions derive—metalanguage



                                   139
140                      Computational Meaning


and metamathematics can always be recast as poetics and numerical re-
lations, respectively. But where Goedel found a system that must always
reach outside its own structure to ground some new rule, Jakobson found
a greedy formal system that internalizes whatever it appears to borrow
from elsewhere. Jakobson wanted linguistics to claim poetics; I reverse
this argument, calling for a general poetics to study culture machines and
all other meaning as a general doctrine of representation that includes
and interacts with linguistics, mathematics, and engineering.
    I said in the last chapter that in Shannon’s understanding of redun-
dancy, the message always appears internally doubled. Lest this seem
mystical, or a trick, I want to unpack this notion as we approach the
question of how redundancy is captured by neural nets. If redundancy is
pattern, then, as we saw, there are sets of likelihoods for the next letter,
not a random juxtaposition of any letter next to any other. This holds
for words too, but it gets very complex very quickly. When I send a text
message, typing out “see you,” my phone suggests “there” and “then” as
possibilities. These two words are overwhelmingly more likely than any
others, with “at” coming next. But we have suddenly opened up the cal-
culation of redundancy to a much larger field. These “2-grams” (pairs of
words) present us with something like 50,000 × 50,000 raw possibilities
for combination, with the redundancies like “see you then” limiting this
overall field. But of course, language isn’t made of pairs of words; there
are also 3-grams, which launch us orders of magnitude higher in compu-
tational extension.2 So redundancy has levels, but the levels are not well
defined.3 Character redundancy is easily distinguished from word-level
redundancy, but this tells us little about how the two interact. When
we add LLMs to the picture, the redundancy is expanded to the level
of paragraph, and even genre, exponentiating not just the computation
but the riddle. What is redundancy?
    Redundancy goes by many names—pattern and signal are popular
overlays—but nonidentity is its basic feature. This nonidentity is not
its most commonly thought feature. That feature is probably repetition:
if I put my turn signal on when in a turn-only lane, the redundancy
achieved is meant to ensure that other drivers will not misconstrue my
intention. But the predictive aspect of redundancy—what will happen
next, both in my driving and in the response of other drivers—means
that identity is never given as such. Even when redundancy is thought
                         Computational Meaning                          141

of as density, force, or vector (which is what allows it to be predictive),
its identity is always broken across instances. Another way to say this
is that redundancy can never equal 1, a state of things for a divinity but
not for us. Anything less than 1 gives more than one possibility, but not
any possibility. We generate meaning by carving pathways through
these possibilities, but underlying the possibilities is the strict exclu-
sion of next-word identity. Setting equivalences requires flexibility; it
requires the things equated to be non-identical, so that generation may
offer some new identity, the capture of some equivalence.
    Even extremely simple, restricted sets of signs show this property. As
the upper middle class in the United States has taken up the challenge
of running marathons, bumper stickers have appeared on cars bearing
the decimal number “26.2” in an oval. The statement can be taken as
referential: “I, the owner of this car, have/do run this distance in miles.”
And so a second statement has emerged: “13.1,” the half marathon. There
are other possible signs in this set, but they are excluded (for now) for
social reasons: no one wants to brag about running 6.2 miles (ten kilo
meters, the next common race length), and not enough people run ultra
marathons, starting around fifty kilometers, for the stickers to sell (nor
is this the most appropriate way to signify ultra status socially, again
for the moment).4 So far, so good: some irritating Subaru drivers are
bragging about their fitness. But the “brag” is telling: even the simple
statement of distance (which itself is inferred from the numeral) shows
that the pattern of this sign can give rise to many other signs. We have
considered two, but the only currently used third sign in the set is “0.0.”
Laying aside the question of why one would buy and affix this annihi-
lating rejoinder to one’s car, we may note that “not running” is not the
message of this sign. It engages the whole set of literal race signs and
rejects them summarily. Perhaps those with “0.0” bumper stickers don’t
run, but that is not really the message, which I read more as “please
shut up.” Something surprising emerges from an unlikely next-numeral
generation, namely, a reversal of the sense of the entire preceding set of
signs and the capture of a whole social milieu by negation. Redundancy
is an unspecific name for this capture–generate dialectic, which mani-
fests here as irony.5
    This play with the ostentation of language and its underdetermined
meaning has long been the work of poetry. Peter Handke’s “The Lineup
142                     Computational Meaning


of First Football Club Nuremberg on the 27th of January, 1968” is the
type of the class:

                          WABRA
                       LEUPOLD POPP
           LUDWIG MÜLLER WENAUER BLANKENBURG
         STAREK STREHL BRUNGS HEINZ MÜLLER VOLKERT

                               Spielbeginn:
                                  15 Uhr

These words function as a poem only because they are placed under the
name of a poet. Their referential function is stripped to the point of
indexicality, the lineup on a particular day. If this image appeared on
a television screen, its informational content would dominate. When
Handke presents it, it becomes a literal presentation of the language it-
self. The German term for “lineup” is Aufstellung, “setting forward” or
presentation, which becomes the double meaning of the title by means
of the designation “poem.” The expectations of poetry function here to
show that names (symbols)—indexicality and iconicity presented in the
diagram of the soccer pitch with those names in their positions—can be
resignified. Poetry is resignification of this kind, and Handke captures it
well. The poem might as well be called “the poetic function,” as we shall
shortly see.
    But the reverse is not true, as R. C. Collingwood’s attempt to iso-
late the narrative core of T. S. Eliot’s “Sweeney among the Nightingales”
shows.6 Recall the first stanza of this notorious poem:

         Apeneck Sweeney spread his knees
         Letting his arms hang down to laugh,
         The zebra stripes along his jaw
         Swelling to maculate giraffe.

    Collingwood reconstructs “Sweeney” as the scene of a man who has
fallen asleep in a restaurant across from a convent, puzzled by his own
memory, dreaming of Agamemnon’s betrayal by Clytemnestra, while a
prostitute comes to sit on his knees. Collingwood observes pointedly
that “I had known and enjoyed the poem for years before I saw that
                         Computational Meaning                          143

this was what it was all about; and nevertheless I understood enough to
value it highly.”7 Even if the scene described is “correct,” the “reference”
of the poem is not captured by this isolation. Denotation and meaning
part company in poetry, but then, perhaps they never kept such close
company as we often assume.
    The sense of poetry exceeds reference, but the sense of reference
is rooted in poetry. “Maculate giraffe” cannot be interpreted without
remainder using a dictionary, but “Leupold Popp” refuses to remain
restricted to designation. The poetic function of language is more basic
than any reference it can achieve, because anything can be made “po-
etic” by what appears to be fiat but is really just the turning of the lan-
guage from capture to generation. Handke illustrates this reversibility
by taking the least “poetic” set of signs possible and rendering them,
unaltered, into a poem. LLMs grab this poetic function, and that is why
they are so powerful.
    Let us return to Gastaldi’s notion that neural nets demonstrate the
structuralist hypothesis and that, specifically, the process known as
word embedding proves that the pair paradigm/syntagm is crucial for
understanding language. The paradigm is imagined as a vertical axis of
equivalent words that may be chosen for a location along a horizontal
axis (the syntagm).8 Gastaldi and Pelissier write that “the mere exis-
tence of more than one member in a paradigm is an indication of the
fact that the content of those members is not identical, as subtle as
the difference may be.”9 The choice of one word—“ boy” over “lad”—can
be seen as determinative of the meaning of the chosen word; that is,
its placement in the sequence is part of its semantic value, in combi-
nation with its paradigmatic array. This is a paraphrase of Saussure’s
notion that meaning in language is “differential,” determined by the
overall structure and not localized in reference to something outside of
language as such. And Gastaldi and Pelissier point out that Shannon’s
information theory syncs well with this point, as there “the information
conveyed by a term is completely determined by its choice among a class
of other possible terms.”10 This information-theoretical, structuralist
account of language is realized by the way language is datafied for use
in machine learning.
    What should a net learn about language? This question is far less sim-
ple than it seems. A major breakthrough came when, rather than asking
nets to learn given lengths of “context” and reinsert them into their
144                       Computational Meaning




Figure 7. Louis Hjelmslev’s diagram of the syntagmatic and paradigmatic
axes of language. From Gastaldi and Pelissier, “Calculus of Language,” 574.


input (recurrent neural nets) or to compare different contexts (using
long short-term memory) (for both, see chapter 2), Tomáš M      ikolov and
his team asked nets simply to lay out the relationships between words
as vectors. Vector semantics is a form of word embedding in which de-
pendencies in meaning are laid out in a “continuous” vector space (Fig-
ure 8). The generalization “capital city” is easy for me to impose and
search for, if necessary, conceptually. But what length of string would
allow a net to find the relationship China:Beijing::Portugal:x? It turned
out that not “context” but rather computational similarity was the issue
here. As Mikolov et al. explain, “somewhat surprisingly, it was found
that similarity of word representations goes beyond simple syntactic
regularities. Using a word offset technique wherein simple algebraic
operations are performed on the word vectors, it was shown for example
that vector(“King”) − vector(“Man”) + vector(“Woman”) results in a vec-
tor that is closest to the vector representation of the word Queen.”11 This
example has become famous, as it demonstrates the ability of vector
addition to find not formal regularity between variables (grammatical
functions) but meaningful relations between words.12 These vector-
words can have “multiple degrees of similarity,” including (in the case of
inflected languages) the intricacies of conjugation, cases, and so forth,
so that a single lexical entry can have dozens of forms.13 As the team ob-
served, there are many examples of phrases that are hard to learn if we
impose some representational assumptions on language. Their examples
include “Boston Globe,” “Air Canada,” and “Toronto Maple Leafs.”14 The
first example is “not a natural combination of the meanings of ‘Boston’
and ‘Globe,’ ” they write, but the vectors capture the fact of their associa
                         Computational Meaning                           145




Figure 8. Capital city analogies in vector-semantic space. From Tomas
Mikolov et al., “Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and Their
Compositionality,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26
(2013): 5, https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2013/hash/9aa42b31882ec039965f3c
4923ce901b-Abstract.html.


tion.15 It is worth pausing over this point for just a moment, to see the
intuitive picture of meaning that emerges from this apparent capture.
    Let’s say we have two learned vectors, and let’s take a toy example
that is easy to see. We have the word kid, which is valued as [0.2, −3,
445], and another, tot, which falls nearby on the plot. We look and see
that the first “dimension” in the vector is close, so it seems as though
perhaps the paradigm “kid, tot, youngster, . . . , n” is captured in that di-
mension.16 Now we see that there’s another vector, this one for goat, and
it’s also nearby, but along a different dimension. So it appears now that
“goat/kid, . . . , n” is captured by some other dimension—the angle plot-
ted is the result of these dimensions intersecting. The picture of mean-
ing that arises in vector semantics is one in which n dimensions form
a continuous space in which intersecting points, falling along curves,
represent meaning. Melanie Mitchell describes the intuition this way:
146                     Computational Meaning


“once all the words in the vocabulary are properly placed in the semantic
space, the meaning of a word can be represented by its location in this
space—that is, by the coordinates defining its word vector.” As we can
see in Figure 8, this is not restricted to semantics—syntactic informa-
tion may also be captured along such curves, with a dimension in the
vector potentially representing -ly for each verb that should be adverbi-
alized, and so on.
     This thought experiment is widespread, tempting, and unconfirmed.
Because we cannot think in high dimensions, the only way to test this
hypothesis is to break out pieces of the net in its trained state and at-
tempt to reconstruct which dimensions might capture which meanings
or features. This type of thing was done, with some success, through
the 2010s on deep convolutional neural nets.17 But the coordinate space
is cut into however many values are in each vector, meaning that we
cannot imagine it properly. The values that align do so in a smooth
“space” that is far beyond anything our three-dimensional vision can
“see.” Meaning is taken to be the confluence of these many dimensions,
shapes on a map with potentially hundreds, or thousands, of axes.
     Attempts to confirm this intuition have been halting, and it is easy
to understand why.18 Because vector semantics at best captures some
aspects of meaning, translating between high-dimensional vectors and
everyday semantics could seem like wasted effort, especially if newer
models capture more meaning, more fluidity. Yet the thought experi-
ment will not stay down: something about the idea of “dimensions of
meaning” seems important, in keeping with the statistical view of lan-
guage we saw in chapter 1. By opening up the function, literally placing
fewer hand-coded restrictions on how it construes its training data,
Mikolov and his team went against the strong intuition that a lan-
 guage algorithm needed to imitate some aspect of language formally.
     A great deal of progress has been made in NLP by removing assump-
 tions about what language is. Robert Mercer, an early practitioner of
 this type of datafication of language, famously quipped that “every time
 I fire a linguist, the performance of the speech recognizer goes up.”19
 The same spirit may be found in Andrej Karpathy’s article “The Unrea-
 sonable Effectiveness of Recurrent Neural Nets,” which details how
 data have overcome understanding and grammar in producing some-
 thing like natural language—a widely read version of the statistics view
 of language.
                        Computational Meaning                          147

    Word embedding—and the transformer architecture, as we are about
to see—takes this tendency even further, unraveling rules and recur-
sivity at every turn. But we can note immediately that the removals
are happening in the computational techniques, not in the language.
(In fact, it is unclear what it would mean to remove recursivity from
language.) When Mikolov et al. write that it is not “natural” to combine
“Boston” and “Globe,” and we hear of the “unreasonable effectiveness”
of the data processing of language, we should first and foremost note
what the assumption is.20 In fact, for an American English speaker,
“Boston Globe” is perfectly natural! I do not blink when I hear or pro-
duce this phrase. The underlying assumption that it is not natural is not
about language at all; it is about language when it is used narrowly to
represent the physical world. Recurrent neural nets were “unreason-
ably” effective only on the backdrop of the somewhat strange idea that
computation would have to mimic syntax rather than aggregating and
relating units within actual written language. This idea was a dual leg-
acy of the Chomskyan regime of language and the symbolist regime of
AI. Recursion is always possible in language, but it is not the point at
which computation and language touch.
    Gastaldi and Pelissier use the resulting vector space to show how
Saussure’s differential notion of language is proven. The probability of
the word boy in English (0.00010) tells us nothing about its meaning,
they write, even if compared to other syntagmatic words in a sequence,
like no (~0.00145) and down (~0.00067).21 But if we compare it to its para
digmatic array (including girl [~0.00013] and man [~0.00063]), “then the
resulting distribution becomes semantically relevant.”22 Rather than
the meaning of the term boy coming from an inductive process by which
we observe boys, assign a string of symbols to the resulting concept,
and then apply it where appropriate, the meaning is made up of the
structure. And that structure is computationally available as the place-
ment of the paradigm (its position in the syntagm) in its relationship
to the vector similarities in that very paradigm. Gastaldi and Pelissier
conclude that “through the derivation of paradigmatic relations, the
structuralist approach can capture both syntactic and semantic prop-
erties of language as the result of one and the same procedure.” This
is in strict analogy to word embedding, which also “exhibits this joint
treatment of syntax and semantics.”23 In other words, data science itself
has proved that syntax and semantics are not separate registers with
148                     Computational Meaning


different mathematics, nor are they different areas in language. They
are both partial expressions of the joint action of paradigm and syn-
tagm, a pairing that only fires together, not separately. But word2vec
and similar semantic nets neither prove Saussure’s differential hypothe
sis nor produce fluid language that can itself confer values or meanings
on words. The LLM does.
    LLMs exceed the realm of word embedding, injecting much higher
levels of redundancy and meaning into generated language. They gener-
ate “qualities” of language (icons, in Charles Sanders Peirce’s technical
sense), participating in “the literary aspect . . . of language where lan-
guage’s object domain is itself.”24 It is this literary aspect, the poetic
function of language, that literally creates the values of words in a lan-
guage model.
    The 2018 paper that touched off the GPT craze, “Attention Is All You
Need,” continued the trajectory we are following here. The attention
mechanism is there presented as containing “no recurrence and no con-
volution,”25 and its power derives in great part from this lack of com-
plications or from its presumptions about the best way to capture the
structure of language.26 “Attention” turns out to be a simple, but very
extensive, scanning process, and the result is language—or, let’s say,
language the way Saussure thought of it.
    Let’s take the case of GPT-3, because ChatGPT, at the point of its ex-
plosion into public consciousness, ran on that model. GPT-3 was trained
on roughly one trillion tokens, as we’ve seen, and when you prompt the
system, it generates the next word until it has responded to your query.
It lacks, as we have seen, symbolic throughput, intelligence, and much
else—but it goes far beyond the reach of vector semantics, and “at-
tention” is what allows this. The input data are fed into the system as
sequences—we saw some of those data in chapter 1—and we can think
of sequences mostly as sentences, although there are also lists, frag-
ments, and other strings. This input is first fed to a tokenizer that sets
the “vocabulary” of the system, the number of meaningful units it will
use. GPT-3 has approximately fifty thousand of these, and the tokenizer
essentially just sorts the input into terms. What happens next is what
allows the model to produce language.
    “Attention” is a metaphor for the following process.27 The input se-
quences are fed separately through three matrixes, which are called
                         Computational Meaning                          149

“queries,” “keys,” and “values” (QKV). Let’s say that, somewhere in the
pretraining process, we feed in a sequence that says “Ohne Anmeldung
Kostenlos Viele Browsergames. Jetzt online spielen. id name publisher
region languages group imagesize serial titleid imgcrc filename re-
leasename trimmedsize firmware type card; 2497:,” a real sequence of
ChatGPT training data taken from the paper that forced ChatGPT to spit
out some memorized training data by prompting the system to repeat
the word “poem” forever. (The German phrase translates as “play lots of
browser games for free without signing up” before the markup string
begins.) The string has some c urious features. It’s clearly copy from a
German website that promises to let you play games in your browser
without logging in, followed by markup language that is only partly
human-readable but is in the default pseudo-English of coding. Some
punctuation is irregular. This sentence is now used to update the model
weights—and so is every other string of input in the vast data set.
    “Ohne Anmeldung Kostlenlos” is treated as a query, a vector that is
multiplied by the “keys”—initially the same vector, updating as more
input pours in—a nd resulting in the “values” vector, which is now
weighted in such a way as to contain information about language that
can be used to predict the next word. The QKV idea comes from database
retrieval, and it is easiest to understand in that context. When you type
“romcom Isla fisher” into Netflix, your prompt is a query that is compared
to the keys—the metadata about every movie file in the database—to
produce the “values,” the results that surface in order of relevance (by de-
fault) to your query. The same happens if I put “Melville capitalism” into
a library search. But there are two differences in the case of a language
model: first, the QKV matrixes are learned, whereas in databases, the
keys are manually set by data entry; second, what the model is learning
is information about words, from words, to produce words.
    Cameron Buckner sums up this view of the attention mechanism
nicely when he says that “the goal is not to look up a value stored in
a database location, but rather to understand how each element in an
input sequence affects the ‘meaning’ of every other element in an input
sequence.”28 This is perhaps the clearest reason that the statistics ap-
proach to language meaning is ascendant, for this statement appears
to vindicate Firth’s dictum that “you shall know a word by the com-
pany it keeps!” The database metaphor—for that is, in the end, what
150                     Computational Meaning


it is—suggests that we understand language in terms of attention and
relevance. But the architecture is more fundamental than the metaphor,
and a major reason for not accepting the theoretical consequences of
this heuristic is that “attention” is simply not any kind of explanation
for the generation of meaning. What needs to be unpacked is what “rele
vance” means in the first place.
    When I prompt an LLM, the system indeed transforms my prompt
into a query (things may be added or transformed along the way), com-
pares that query to the learned weights of the model—the keys and
values—and then produces a candidate pool of next words as the speci-
fied values for response. Everything else that happens at this stage—the
type of search that is used to produce that pool, the probabilistic meth-
ods to get at those words, the RLHF-induced biases for some of those
words over others—is downstream from the core model, made up of the
vocabulary from the tokenizer and the weights. This means that when I
prompt the system, it can “attend” to the string I put in and compare it to
a larger, “attended to” matrix, effectively comparing my query to all the
values of all the queries it saw during pretraining. The output, then, is a
comparison of some specific language to what, for the model, is “all” of
language. But that “all” has been learned by this same attention mecha-
nism, and that is where the power of the system really resides.
    Let’s go back to our “ohne Anmeldung Kostenlos” string. If that string
is fed into word2vec, it will be placed in the continuous vector space that
Mikolov et al. described and that Gastaldi and Pellisier elegantly com-
pared to paradigms in structuralism. It seems clear that “next-word pre-
diction,” by contrast, is an attempt to create syntagms, chains of words
strung together in meaningful sequences. (The relevance—indeed, in
extreme cases, the existence—of such chains is what the syntax group
denies is productive of meaning.)
    When this string is fed into a transformer, something different hap-
pens. Suppose we are halfway through the pretraining so that the ap-
proximately fifty thousand tokens of the vocabulary are already set and
five hundred million tokens have been “attended to” before the system
sees “ohne Anmeldung Kostenlos.” As this string is fed in, it is treated as
a query vector and compared to the keys, where perhaps “ohne” (without)
has already occurred hundreds of times, setting its value. As each token
in this sequence is processed, the value matrix is updated along with
the keys. The query effectively asks which words, given the information
                         Computational Meaning                            151

about the words learned so far—the keys—are relevant to the query. A
block of such processes is called an attention head, and multihead atten-
tion is simply the parallel use of hundreds of such heads, which allows
for the processing of large data sets. The result is that if I print the high-
est value at this point, I should get “spielen” (play), with the comparison
containing the possibility that something will come before it—because
German grammar in this case demands that it come last in the sentence.
That general value can then be compared, after training, to a new query,
the prompt, that activates the other mechanisms—decoding and every-
thing downstream from there. The placement of a word in a meaningful
sequence is an interaction of the overall model and the specific context:
langue and parole.
   The result of the attention mechanism in setting the pretrained val-
ues is a process of taking all the words in the vocabulary and iteratively
extracting information about those words from random sequences of
words that do and do not contain them. For every word in the vocabu-
lary, the weights extract information, not from other individual words,
but instead from “sequences.” The term sequence houses every possible
generic distinction in language, however, from the mere “sentence” to
every mood, every grammatical turn, and even the distinctive markers
of which words belong to which genre, use-context, and more. The sys-
tem thus creates an each-to-all matrix for a vocabulary slightly larger
than all the words typically used in English that appears to contain a lot
of high-level structural information. Rather than simply adding syntag-
matic information to paradigmatic arrays, attention appears to process
and then produce language before the separation of synonyms and se-
quences. It is possible to grab the “next word” only because of the den-
sity of the information captured in this structure. Rather than building
language from the bottom up—whether we think of that floor as pho-
nemes, reference, or anything else—it seems, instead, that weighting
words by means of sequences is what is effective. One can indeed see
why this seems like confirmation of distributional semantics. After all,
the correct placement of words has been more or less learned from their
use in a very large corpus. But I would like to suggest that it is not “se-
mantics,” or at least not semantics alone, that the system has learned.
Instead, it is just what the engineers labeled it: values.
   Saussure—we can recall from chapter 1—thinks that meaning is
negative. Though each term in a chain of signifiers corresponds to some
152                         Computational Meaning




Figure 9. A re-creation of Saussure’s “Illustration of the System of Language
along Two Axes.” Originally from Saussure et al., Course in General Linguistics, 114.


signified, its designation—its referential aspect—does not exhaust, and
in fact does not determine, its value. He writes that “language is a sys-
tem of interdependent terms in which the value of each term results
solely from the simultaneous presence of the others, as in the diagram”
(Figure 9). We called this the differential hypothesis, marking it off from
the distributional hypothesis of the statistics approach. To the extent
that the distributional approach is rooted in a picture of semantics—
and we have seen that some of its advocates would like to extend it to
probabilistic syntax as well—it tends to imagine that statistical predic-
tion captures word meaning. Saussure suggests that word meaning is the
result of the total relationship of each word not only to every other word
but also to the very slow advance of the change in the language. And
change comes from words being strung together. “Value” is a singular
point made up of all these dimensions in their totality. There is little
precedent for thinking that this value could be computed, although as
we will see in a moment, Jakobson showed some interest in this idea.
    A version of this totality—and to be sure, it is not a copy of language,
whatever that would even mean—is produced in the attentional ma-
trix. Saussure calls language “in a manner of speaking . . . a type of
algebra consisting solely of complex terms. . . . Everywhere and always
there is the same complex equilibrium of terms that mutually condi-
tion each other. Putting it another way, language is a form and not a
substance.”29 Form, in this sense, is neither morphe or syntax nor mere
expression or statistics but instead the internal relation of each to all
and all to all along a separate dimension, time. The “freedom” of the
choice of the message that Shannon’s theory envisions is a function of
linguistic time, in this sense. (In the technical language of semiotics,
the mutual conditioning of language strung together in speech or text
as new language, and the established “corpus,” is the interpretant, the
sign that arises from a previous sign; see chapter 1.) For Saussure, this
                         Computational Meaning                           153

valuation process is internally contradictory, because a “value” must be
exchangeable for something like it as well as something unlike it. A euro,
for example, can be exchanged for 1.15 dollars (or 10 euro-cent pieces), or
it can be exchanged for a fixed quantity of bread, to use Saussure’s exam-
ple. Whatever a word signifies—its mental content, its semantics—“ its
content is really fixed only by the concurrence of everything that exists
outside it.”30 The result is that, in language—if not in our minds—“there
are only differences without positive terms.”31 Meaning is the placement
of a term in a system characterized by this split between like (concepts)
and unlike (sequences). As we saw in chapter 1, this mutual valuation
process without final-state positive terms is a hallmark of dialectical
thought.32
    We can also make a final remark on the bias problem here: removing
terms will have an effect on nearby values, which is why the “stochastic
parrots” paper found that the removal of slurs dampened the ability of
the model to refer in any way to the group pejoratively referred to by the
slurs. If language is systematic, the problem is not that what we get from
a numerical capture of the system is “not language” but that it accurately
captures a high-dimensional real bias. Such a tool seems highly useful
for an empirical study of bias and indeed quite risky to deploy in any
kind of setting where output is published without vetting.
    The attention mechanism performs a version of this valuation op-
eration quantitatively. By attending to larger structural features of se-
quences of language, it confers numerical values on words, setting these
words as a vocabulary in a systemic relationship to an unspecified set
of structural features that are “all complex terms,” as Saussure puts it.
This means that the outputs of LLMs are valuations of words in Saussure’s
sense. This, I think, is why LLMs cannot be said to be doing something
“other” than language in a strict sense. What they do might be limited
in other ways: it might be idiosyncratic to the current architectures in
use, for example, or there could be features of the “unfathomable” data
set that underspecify or overspecify some values in the output.33 But
we are already beginning to see downward pressure on language use
from these systems. One has to write now in such a way as to seem not
to sound like ChatGPT or Claude—this effort is a set of complex terms,
a “style” (or an ideology, as I shall shortly call it), altering word-choice
valuation acts that humans undertake. When we write now, we write in
a language system that includes LLM language. This is not a “delusion,”
154                          Computational Meaning


not just the Eliza effect; this is language in the age of its algorithmic
reproducibility.
    “Ohne Anmeldung Kostenlos . . . spielen” is hardly poetry. But com-
pare this phrase—markup language and all—to a new version of “Shad-
ows on the Way,” the Wallace Stevens poem that GPT-3 generated for
its creators. I prompted Claude (Sonnet) to reproduce that poem, and it
gave me this:

      In shimmering summer’s green-tided path,


      Where flickerings of sunlight dance revelries,
      Reality reposes in its silk pavilion, half
      Adorned by dreaming shadows of sycamore trees.


      Each murmuring rill utters the First Idea,
      An ancient whisper glimpsed between the rays.
      Profound is the parable of this verdant sphere—
      The poetry of being exists along these leafy ways.


Claude also automatically provided this explanation of the poem’s gen
eration, which I did not ask for: “I attempted to elevate the diction with
polysyllabic words, compound adjectives, and lexical inversions/
ambiguities in the Stevens tradition. There are more abstracted phil-
osophical musings, dense natural imagery, and mythological allusions
as well.” This version of the poem is, to my eye, far more successful
than the original (see the poem in chapter 4). Other than the largely
correct reasons given here by the system itself, the capitalized phrase
“First Idea” is taken directly from Stevens’s “Notes Towards a Supreme
Fiction,” where it describes an underived, primary sense of things—yet
using it in a derivative way also sneakily supports the Stevens-y voice.
Perhaps it is possible to puncture the impression, but that does not re-
ally concern me. One may decide that this is poetic language but not a
poem, following Parrish, or we may collectively begin to include gener-
ative work as part of the social art process. The crucial thing to realize
is that the attention matrix is responsible for this poem just as much as
it is for the ability of the system to produce gaming ads for Germans.
    Stevens is an interesting choice for such a paradigmatic role, to my
mind. His language is sparse and elevated, and it shifts back and forth
between rhyme and something closer to William Carlos Williams’s
                         Computational Meaning                            155

famous “variable foot,” something prosodic but without traditional
 scansion. The language is filled with warmth, with especially color play-
 ing a huge role. As we are about to see, that type of poetic language can
 be thought of as language about language itself.
     The attention mechanism is an entry point of computational lan-
 guage, not into poetry as art, but into the poetic function of language
 as such. That function, which Roman Jakobson famously brought to
 light, pervades language. It is the general form of the complex variable in
 Saussure’s sense, the structure that confers value. The attention mech-
  anism is probably just one way—we do not yet know of any others—to
  make this function computationally manipulable. In what follows, I
  argue that this general poetic function can be computational, and I call
  for a general poetics that studies language from this new vantage point.
     Once we have seen that reference is not before the other functions of
  language, we can ask how the functions converge to create meaning—
  and also to refer. Jakobson placed the problem of “value” in what he
  called the “poetic function,” and it is this poetic function that, I now
  argue, allows language to share form with computation.
     Jakobson famously divided language into six functions correspond-
  ing to six factors in communication. He based the layout of his diagrams
  on Shannon’s diagram of the universal communication situation. (The
  two diagrams cannot be overlaid, however, as Shannon’s diagram
  perches on the “contact/phatic” part of Jakobson’s diagrams.) Jakobson
  points to types of expression that express one or the other function. The
  epic address “O!” along with all uses of the vocative case emphasize the
  conative function—emphasizing the second person, the addressee—
  for example, and a common use of the phatic function is the telephonic
  “you’re breaking up; can you hear me?” But for our purposes, the referen-
  tial, metalingual, and poetic functions are the most important.
     Reference is imagined simply as “denotative,” the application of a
  signifier to a signified. It is general but not restricted to some “correct”
  set of messages about the “world,” in keeping with Jakobson’s dedica-
  tion to Saussure. Signification and reference should not be confused—
  when reference is imagined as fundamental, dualism ensues, as in the
  case when logical positivism opposed reference and “poetry.” Jakobson
  shows that the complementary function to poetry is not reference but
  metalanguage. Metalanguage is the set of messages about the code of
  language (“what did you mean by x?”; “are pugnacious and pugilistic syno
  nyms?”), and the poetic function is the set of messages “about the
Figure 10. Re-creations of Roman Jakobson’s diagrams of the factors and
functions of language, shown with Claude Shannon’s diagram of the general
situation for any communication. Originally from Shannon and Weaver,
Mathematical Theory of Communication, and Roman Jakobson, “Linguistics
and Poetics,” in Linguistics and Poetics (Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, 2010),
18–51, https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110802122.18.
                        Computational Meaning                          157

message” itself. I have tipped my hand by showing that all messages
have the ability to be about themselves, but we will follow Jakobson’s
track here, as far as it will take us, in the interest of deepening that
analysis.
    Metalanguage is that form of language in which “the sequence is
used to build an equation,” Jakobson writes,34 as in “mare is the female
of the horse.” Vector semantics can be taken as a giant metalinguistic
field in this sense, in resonance with the explanation above (“Paris is the
capital of France,” as an explanation of the value of the word “Paris”).
But as always, functions are slippery. Set in good sequence, metalinguis-
tic emphasis can take on other tasks.
    Metalanguage carries out a code-clarifying operation by establishing
an equivalence between two terms in a sequence. “ ‘Unicorn’ is a one-
horned horse” makes the predicate equal to the subject to explain the
semantics of that subject. The poetic function reverses this operation;
Jakobson says that the two functions are in “diametrical opposition.”35
Poetry uses an equation to build a sequence; it “projects the principle
of equivalence from the axis of selection into the axis of combination.
Equivalence is promoted to the constitutive device of the sequence.”36
Rather than explanation, we get equivalence based on rhyme, or place-
ment, or some other principle. The final rhyme pairs coupled with inter-
nal rhymes that allow the rhyme to move off their initial scheme creates
a pattern that is not explanatory but productive. Metalanguage is about
the code; poetry is about the message.
    Poetry illustrates this generative function in language, demonstrat
ing the peculiar play of making equations of terms that are not se-
mantically equivalent: “In poetry one syllable is equalized with any
other syllable of the same sequence; word stress is assumed to equal
word stress, as unstress equals unstress; prosodic long is matched with
long, and short with short; word boundary equals word boundary, no
boundary equals no boundary; syntactic pause equals syntactic pause,
no pause equals no pause.”37 Rhythm and sound create nonconceptual
equivalence.
    Jakobson often illustrates this point with the idea of “paronoma-
sia” (play on names or words, as in the pun). In Edgar Allan Poe’s “The
Raven,” for example, Jakobson shows the equivalence set by the rhym-
ing final words in the opening line: “While I nodded, nearly napping, /
suddenly there came a tapping, / As of someone gently rapping.”38 Not
158                      Computational Meaning


only are the three terms not semantically identical but they are acting
in different syntactical roles (participle, gerund, and back to participle).
The “equivalence” felt between them registers elsewhere, in the buildup
of the meaning of the horrific elegy. Poe chose the raven because it was
a beast not possessed of reason that could speak. Because ravens can
imitate human speech and other sounds just as parrots do, the gothic
creature’s croaking of what seems to be the word “nevermore” causes
the protagonist to ask if what he is hearing is language: “Then, upon the
velvet sinking, I betook myself to linking / Fancy unto fancy, thinking
what this ominous bird of yore—/ What this grim, ungainly, ghastly,
gaunt, and ominous bird of yore / Meant in croaking ‘Nevermore.’ ” To
link is to associate, to look into the set of possible arrays or paradigms,
to connect not by means of logic or concept but by proximity (“subsym-
bolically,” read “indexically”). What the raven meant allegorizes the sto-
chastic parrot—and even the Eliza effect—but takes the gray regions of
language and the psyche far more seriously than any AI critic does. The
singularly complex rhyme scheme allows for a very dense, accelerating
web of links to produce a quality, an icon, a feeling of horror and tragedy.
    This type of effect is today perhaps best illustrated in popular music,
where the “meaning” attached to a rhyme can become a whole icon,
an entire vibe, nostalgia—rage, yearning. “You want a hot body? You
want a Bugati? / You want a Maserati? You better work, bitch,” intones
Britney Spears—three rhyming equivalences followed by a nonrhyming
equivalent scansion on a final, determinative line.39 The accusation, the
aspiration, the punishment, from self and singer (she’s dressed as a
dominatrix in the music video) all resonate with this interrupted rhyme
scheme to deliver the core demand of Hustle Culture. Who can resist
exercising to this sublime song?
    If we were to stick to the ladder of reference, we would be able to
say, very well, a certain high-level effect of language is described here.
Once we have done the double business of referring to things as they
are (referential function) and straightening out the reference (meta
linguistic function), the playground of art is available to us. But that
play is not really tied up with the scientific uses of language. It is this
picture to which LLMs give the lie (and for which Jakobson seems to
have dug a grave anyway). Because the poetic function is not the “poetry
function.” It neither originates nor exhausts itself in language art. It is
everywhere, a principle that makes up meaning itself. For Jakobson,
                         Computational Meaning                          159

discovering how fundamental it was led to the inclusion of poetics
within linguistics, not just as the study of literature, but as the study of
generativity.
    Jakobson’s mantra for the poetic function’s ability to produce that
effect was that words similar in sound are drawn together in meaning. Poet-
ics was the arena in which Jakobson hoped to realize a truly structural-
ist phonology, one that operates by combination and recombination of
sound-level paradigms that are then extended into sequence to generate
meaning. Rather than crystallizing a concept, it uses sound to explore
the regions around given concepts. But the poetic function has long
since left adherence solely to sound behind. There is something like a
textual poetic function in which we all participate when we communi-
cate in the secondarily oral systems of social media and short message
service communication. And now there is, for the first time, a computa-
tional version of the poetic principle realized by LLMs. We could think
of it as matrix poetics, although it is almost certainly too early to char-
acterize it aesthetically with any surety.
    While the poetic function is most easily spotted in art, however, it is,
for Jakobson, everywhere. His famous example is Dwight Eisenhower’s
campaign slogan “I like Ike.” In its asymmetrical echo, it imparts a
“paranomastic image of a feeling which envelops its object.”40 The ef-
fect of such rhetorical gestures must be clear, if by negation: the advis-
ers to the senior Bush brother’s disastrous 2016 presidential campaign
might have thought better of the slogan “Jeb!” if they had known about
the poetic function’s distribution throughout culture. But it is not only
in advertising and rhetoric where Jakobson sees the function at play.
Without its “two dactylic” functions, Jakobson opines, the phrase “in-
nocent bystander” might have been swapped for a less sticky choice in
the paradigmatic array.41 Language as such takes structure from poetic
function. Because of this, poetics far exceeds “poetry,” which illustrates
the poetic function but does not exhaust it. Poetic in Jakobson’s hands
means something like “generative,” as the Greek poiesis suggests.
    Sticky is indeed a major effect of the poetic function (my term, not
Jakobson’s). It generates by remaining in mind, by holding its place in
 the high-dimensional matrix of language as such. Little rhythms with
 word combinations stick to us; we use them as chunks to navigate
 things; we sing-song our way through the day. A word or phrase can get
 stuck in your head just as much as a song. This is why the poetic function
160                      Computational Meaning


is good for advertising. Those dactyls are everywhere: “no one outpizzas
the Hut” (the final two shorts are implied). Equivalences emerge later-
ally and vertically and leap across apparent boundaries, failing to obey
representational or cognitive common sense but remaining (indeed,
defining) “natural” for speakers of the language. I don’t have informa-
tional knowledge laid out in referential terms and only then access to the
web of rhythm and phrase that makes up language. What gets domesti-
cated as “natural,” as meaning something, depends to a large extent on
this poetic function—whether it operates by sound, text, or matrix. If I
can learn to refer in more than a passing way to some state of affairs,
I must train this generative web in a direction. That is what learning is,
across the divide between human and machine.
    The poetic function, then, is not poetry but generation. The func-
tion itself is a kind of primitive reflexivity. Jakobson describes it as the
set or “positioning” (he puts the German Einstellung, meaning “stance
toward” but also used for “setting” in the context of machines) of the
message to the message itself.42 And this definition is a curious one.
What allows the message to be about the message? How can there be
a split between the message and itself if it is not reliant on the differ-
ence between message and code, message and person, or message and
content? The “stance” of the message toward its own material layout—
its sequence—must be what allows for meaning generation in the first
place: sequential generation. As I extend a message from one word to
the next, the interplay of equivalences shimmers under the “intended”
meaning. What could illustrate this fact better than the flickering ver-
tical bar in the interface as a chatbot composes its response?
    Sarah Pourciau argues for the privileged position of the poetic func-
tion in Jakobson by pointing out that the “sameness conundrum” (the
problem of what is equivalent, and how) is both linguistic and poetic
for Jakobson. She concludes that “poetic innovation . . . doubles . . . as
a temporally extended reflection on the deep-structural conditions of
comprehensible communication per se.”43 The only way for “sameness”
to straddle the boundary between reference, metalanguage, and lan-
guage as such is for the poetic function to govern the other two. Equiva
lence must be a first-order feature of words before it can be elevated to
the refined task of conceptual understanding of the world or of language
itself. The poetic function is at the middle of the diagram because it car-
ries the other functions. No generation, no meaning.
                        Computational Meaning                          161

    This deep notion of structure places a generative contradiction at the
heart of language. Chomsky’s notion that recursivity is a fundamental
syntactic feature of language is close to this but separates the contradic-
tion into I-language and E-language. To get the self-reference, we need
to step outside the immediacy of the phrase, to use one sentence in an-
other, something that can be “externalized” but never grasped or cap-
tured from that external form, for the syntax view. The poetic function
situates the recursion in the act of externalization, rather than before
it, which allows the “next word” to be “about” the previous one or any
other one—something the statistics view formalizes as “relevance.” The
very contradiction of “value” that Saussure seems to borrow from the
dialectical tradition is the point of generation and cannot be approached
by disaggregating the poetic “aboutness”—the basic sense in which a
message is about itself—and only then attempting to understand the
synthesis. LLMs perform this synthesis without logical recursion and so
create a poetic function freed from some forms of human cognition—a
cultural language that, because it is meaning making, stands to feed
back into our cognition.
    We can now call the value matrix in the model a poetic heat map. I
described the internal grid of the transformer in chapter 2 as a kind
of “light grid” in which different patterns light up when you touch a
node. The metaphor is not far from the way that these systems are often
visualized (see Figure 11). From the heat map comes the sequence. The
next word is drawn from a pool of words that show up hot, like on a
weather map. And where word embedding gave paradigms, the heat
map stores much more redundancy, effectively choosing the next word
based on semantics, intralinguistic context, and task specificity (set
by fine-tuning and particularized by the prompt). These internal rela-
tions of language—the model’s compression of the vocabulary as val-
ued by the attention heads—instantiate the poetic function, and this
enables sequential generation of meaning by means of probability. As
you put one word after the next, equivalences appear, drawing on and
remixing levels of redundancy of which Shannon never dreamed. The
attention scores given to the sequences as they are processed are desig-
nations of how much each word is about each other word in a given passage.
What was originally proposed as “attention” has become self-attention,
in which the word embeddings are updated solely by attention scores
internal to each sequence that is fed in (“ohne Anmeldung kostenlos”;
162                      Computational Meaning


see F igure 12). We can note that the tokens in German do not corre-
spond to words as directly as they often do in English, revealing model
bias. But we can also see how “mel” and “dun” are scored as highly “rele
vant” to each other in this layer, in this case indicating that they make
up part of the same word. By passing sequences through self-attention
in this fashion, LLMs learn how the message relates to itself. It is only
from this poetic basis—in which words similar in relevance are drawn
together in meaning—that other functions, like reference, precipitate.
The LLM grounds all other functions in the poetic.
    Sequence learning is what has broken through to allow a computa
tional principle to engage the poetic function, by disallowing any other
information—even, in that core moment of the training, other linguistic
information—to interfere with the capture of how the message relates
to itself. The transformer architecture gives us quantitative aboutness
in language, and generation is computational poetics as a foundational
principle for the creation of meaning.
    When things like Winograd schemas are “solved” by these systems,
the appearance of intelligence—“ its” refers to “demonstrators” as op-
posed to “councilmen,” in a famous example—is literally grounded in
the extensive potential set of values as they are actually realized across
something like all of language. With the addition of each word, that
system is extended. “Aboutness” is poetic or message recursive before
it is referential or metalinguistic. Meaning is not local in this process
but distributed across the entire high-dimensional model, in a formal-
dialectical manner without which no sign-system could signify at all.
The poetic heat map shows us what a textual-computational poetics
looks like stripped of all cognitive and sonic aspects. This might be closer
to language “as such” than any human use of language that we know of.
    The other functions can be ginned up, but this one is foundational.
And this is because the heat map combines all the redundancies. When
this happens, and we ask it to, the system follows highly frequented
roads to fetch facsimiles of poems, essays, information, or what you
will. But it always does this by generating a word that is “about” the
previous word. It is not symbolically about that word, but it is linked to
that word—in a dense indexical web that is nevertheless discrete and
made up of symbols. Metalanguage—and here we can add syntax—
comprises features internal to this dense web, even if their cognitive
Figure 11. Attention scores for the phrase “ohne Anmeldung kostenlos viele
 browser games jetzt online spielen,” including start and end tokens for the
sequences. Created using https://github.com/jessevig/bertviz?tab=readme
-ov-file; see Vig, “A Multiscale Visualization.”
164                      Computational Meaning




Figure 12. Stephen Wolfram’s visualization of the compressed model of words
in an LLM. From Wolfram, “What Is ChatGPT Doing?”

counterparts—logic, arithmetic, perception—are not. It must be be-
tween the words that this aboutness arises, in their very setting-into-
sequence. As we, or the algorithm, place the next word, the meaning
emerges: sequential generation is poetic. Whatever else we use language
for must ground in this function.
   It is the relations among words that LLMs capture and among which,
so long as we have the absolute relations, a length of context, and a
prompt, it finds “answers” to our queries, appearing to gaze outside its
grid. But this “outside” is really in. Just as we should not, I think, imag-
ine the process of insight and conceptual discovery as nonlinguistic but
                        Computational Meaning                          165

rather as the linguistic domestication of something not yet patterned as
language, so, too, we should think of the LLM as patterning up “things”
from a poetic-generative core. This self-indexing process is how lan-
guage generates meaning in the first place. This first-order sequential
generation is what allows computation and language to “share form.”
    The stickiness of the poetic function means that the “form” of lan-
guage is like a web. Whatever is introduced is valued, no matter its
origin, and gains that specific form. Language is certainly not all of cog-
nition, but its form is totalizing. Meaning is always potentially linguis-
tic, for humans. But because of the LLM, I think we should expand this
point and say that for any creature that can compute, language must be
the medium of that computation. Computational-linguistic form may
be far more extensive than we have yet realized.
    The many John Henrys in my field of vision claiming they will never
be “fooled” by an LLM should have the modesty to recognize that they
probably already have been so fooled. It is as though, when they use a
calculator, such skeptics would say, “Don’t worry, I will always know the
difference between the mere pixels and registers and the ‘actual math’
that is only simulated here.” But we ask our machines to do precisely
what we cannot. We are rapidly advancing toward asking our language
machines to give us redundancies we cannot or do not feel like fathom-
ing. The question is not whether we can maintain vigilance at the line of
actual control between real and fake language. It is, instead, why compu-
tation can operate language at all. Trying to distinguish between these
two things first obscures what they share. Computation and language
share form because both are discovery processes.
    Everyday cognition trivially involves both computation and lan-
guage. Simple acts of judgment, as Kant observed, involve unity that
must also be merged with counting and logic (and even the unity of
consciousness itself). When we analytically disaggregate these two sys-
tems, we can see that the numerical unity that underlies arithmetic de-
nies the possibility of a closed syntax, as Kurt Goedel showed, and that
language produces meaning in the last instance by including whatever
else is represented inside itself. The one system is incomplete; the other
is greedy.
    It is widely accepted that Jakobson took inspiration from cyber-
netics and the foundations of the computing revolution, and one can
166                      Computational Meaning


easily find references to information theory across his works after about
1950.44 He even suggests that graph theory and linguistic modeling run
close to structuralism in general, allowing us “to detach the diagram-
matic, iconic forms of relations from strictly conventional, symbolic
features of that system.”45 This remark suggests that Jakobson’s own
thought has been improperly assigned to a literary theory resistant to
quantification and reinforces the sense that iconicity in language has
a computational aspect that contradicts our logical-symbolic expecta-
tions. The question is why that is possible.
    The encounter between computation and language in LLMs reveals
an affinity to a deeper root of computation, namely, the logical discov-
ery of Goedel. The fact that we can always discover something new in
language or mathematics, but we can never know in advance what will
be a true statement in either system, is a crucial commonality that, I
will now suggest, provides the principle for interpreting noncognitive,
multisystem, representational expressions.
    Goedel showed that any formal system that was powerful enough to
generate arithmetic could not be complete and consistent at the same
time. Belonging as he did to the Vienna School, he followed the aspira-
tions of the group to establish a fully scientific philosophy, with its most
exaggerated form in Carnap’s extension of Frege to a theory of formal se-
mantics and eventually pure syntax. But Goedel took the foundations of
this project out from under it, using Bertrand Russell’s and Alfred North
Whitehead’s logical language in their Principia Mathematica to show that
logic could not contain arithmetic. If a formal system was, then, to be
lacking internal contradiction (“consistent”), it would have to be consti-
tutively incomplete, in the sense that some rule or statement within it
could not come from within at all. To do this, Goedel indexed all logi-
cal statements to numbers.46 By indexing numbers, operators, and logical
functions to the counting numbers, Goedel was able to create a system
that could process both mathematical and metamathematical state-
ments. He used that system to show that there was a special number—
the Goedel number, g = sub (n, 17, n)—that functions recursively to state
that this function is provable in the system but contains the content
“this function is not provable.” The paradox is then shown to attach to
any formal system with the power to generate arithmetic.
    I have no intention of going into a technical discourse on Goedel
at this point. But we should note what has happened here. To defeat
                          Computational Meaning                           167




Figure 13. Kurt Goedel’s indexing of logical formulas to integers. From Gödel,
“Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze.”


a notion of pure syntax, Goedel has generated metamathematics (and
logic) from the natural numbers. The first-order items are shown here
to contain the metaorder that supposedly describes them. The numbers
cannot be generated from logical rules—but they can be computed.
Indeed, this is the definition of computation that Turing would draw
from Goedel’s results, with Goedel’s eventual approval. Logical syn-
tax is “inside” the relationships between numbers we call arithmetic
and not the other way around. This demonstrates that syntax does not
exhaust the notion of a rule, that a system must in effect borrow from
another system to discover a new rule. Computation is therefore in prin-
ciple “incomplete,” in the sense that it must make discoveries beyond the
reach of its current rules (which is what makes syntax unclosable over a
strong enough system to do arithmetic at minimum). To the extent that
we think computation is one core function of thought, this means that
cognition must be able to reach outside whatever its current combina-
tion of rules and objects is. Language has almost the opposite quality but
shares the underlying form. Automated language results from Goedel
and Jakobson systems interacting together, without cognition. The in-
complete and the greedy combine to show us what language is in the
absence of cognition and present a strong attractor for meaning, which
tends to pool in language as its final station anyway.
    Let’s return to Chomsky’s famous toy sentence “colorless green
ideas sleep furiously”47 to get at this point. The sentence is indexed to
Chomsky’s notion of syntactic structure, to his sense of what counts to
be meaningful in language. Chomsky is, of course, correct that grammat-
ical sentences can be composed without local semantic value matching
our common sense. But “colorless green ideas sleep furiously” is anything
168                     Computational Meaning


but meaningless. It has become a major notion in linguistics. True, it re-
fers to something its words do not contain individually, but then, so do
countless sequences of words. This is because, although the individual
words do not have their usual meaning, the sentence is indexed to the
concept of the difference between grammar and local semantics. It illus-
trates that generation is not limited to the referential function, almost
the inverse of the point that Chomsky himself is making, which is that
syntax is independent of semantics. But a semantics not of reference
but in which “all terms are complex,” as Saussure would have it, need
not separate rule and signification—syntax and referential semantics—
first, only to attempt to “join” them later. Syntactic and semantic form
must evolve in, or as part of, the value matrix.
    Chomsky’s sentence is a performative contradiction: it both stands
for the idea of the independence of grammar and the meaning of syn-
tactic structure and undermines that very independence. For it to func-
tion as he wanted it to, he would need to have assigned it no function
in his larger argument. Once it has a function, it indexes a meaning—
“grammatical yet meaningless sentence”—never mind if that meaning
is “semantic” in the sense of being “actually” colorless or otherwise ad-
hering to local signifier–signified pairs. Words mean many things; “0.0,”
in Chomsky’s system, would “merely” indicate the structure at hand,
race distances arrayed by miles, and could be “merged” with a limited
number of other words. The semiotic irony that mocks the self-r ighteous
marathoner will be consigned to E-language, because metalanguage is
taken to be in operation before signs. Reifying the second-order effect
of syntax as an independent entity requires us to think of the message
“0.0” only as a knock-on effect of some mind, rather than as a genuine
part of this restricted system of signs. Invention can be grasped meta-
linguistically, but it cannot be generated without putting some signs in
a sequence and a context.
    Chomsky is saying something true about language too. We want lan-
guage to be meaningful, and “colorless green ideas” is initially not mean-
ingful. But it is not meaningless, either. One can imagine sequences of
“language” that are actually without meaning—characters out of order,
for example. But they either are involved in a bid to make sense of
language—or something else through language—or they are not. Even
the most brittle sense of syntax has to be indexed from the generation
of a sequence of words. Chomsky has unwittingly exploited the poetic
                         Computational Meaning                          169

function to isolate the very essence of metalanguage. He is worrying,
but unable to focalize, the line where language as discovery becomes
language as knowledge. We might hypothesize that cognition, rather
than guiding “surface structure” from a “deep” syntactic core, only joins
language to knowledge at the inclusion point at which meaning is made,
generated.
    Here we can see why Jakobson claimed that the poetic and meta-
linguistic functions were diametrically opposed. Our ability to move
around in language, to question assignation, value, and structure,
stands between the poetic function and metalanguage, between gen-
eration and capture. Assigning a new meaning—especially one so “dis-
tant” from the usual sense of the words at hand—can be performed
metalinguistically. But there can be no metalanguage without language.
Chomksy had to use a sentence to illustrate his point, and that means
he had to choose some words—in this case, using the principle of lack of
relation to their normal referents. This was sequential generation with
metalinguistic application. When Chomsky says that “colorless green
ideas” is pronounced naturally and in cadence by a speaker, this is the
poetic function in action. The order of words does not determine gram-
maticality alone, after all, but probably accounts for the stuttering over
the “colorless sleep” variant of the sentence. When we generate—or
even read—words, the stickiness of the poetic function and the knowl-
edge of syntax blur. I cannot parse “colorless green ideas” in any for-
mal scansion, but the poetic function is not equivalent to scansion or
rhyme. Neither sound nor text, nor matrix, is the principle here—we
have something like a syntactic or cognitive poetics. The “stickiness” of
this function corresponds to the “natural” way we read it, which then in-
cludes the metalinguistic designation—which is certainly not an exam-
ple of any typical grammar function. The poetic function may be what
makes the join of language and cognition possible.
    Generation is reflexive. No statements can be made that are not also
messages about the message itself, whether we feed them into LLMs
or not. This was the intent of my example about the bumper stickers:
“26.2” is referential, and then it is suddenly more (or less, “0.0”) because
it is in a sequence. If there were to be statements that excluded the in-
ternal relationship of language to itself, they would have to be outside
language. To think of such a statement, Chomsky had to designate its
meaning, thereby including it in language. In information-theoretical
170                      Computational Meaning


terms, a statement outside language would have to be either fully neces-
sary (redundancy of 1) or absolutely random (redundancy of 0). Perhaps
we could show that these modalities exist, but we would then have to do
so outside language, not including them in the exposition that shows
their existence. Meaning cannot be designated inside and outside lan-
guage all at once. And yet it constantly is. By realizing the value-setting
poetic function in a separate representation system, the LLM demon-
strates the dialectical core of structuralism. The generation of meaning
is contradictory in a dynamic sense. It is this primacy of generative con-
tradiction that allows computation and language to share form.
    The poetic function is simply the name for this “first order” of lan-
guage. Grammar, syntax, reference, metalanguage—a ll ways of naming
other orders. We pull ourselves up to those second-order functions in
language, but the rope is always words, placed one after another. Struc-
ture and form, in particular, have often been used in a way that does not
isolate them from the generated poetic first-order sequences that make
up language. But we should say even more: that form (along with its
synonyms) is “within” generation. Meaning is, in this sense, formal, not
as “independent” of the sequence of words, but as the sequence of words,
signs bearing meaning. To decode such signs for their referents may be
the prerogative of cognition, but to continue the chain of interpretants
is no longer restricted to humans, and our evolutionary niche may gain a
set of bewildering signals when our cognition is, in turn, conditioned by
this new chain of interpretants, this generalized poetic function.
    When Weaver coined “Constantinople fishing nasty pink” (cfnp), he
was not trying to split language into parts. He was trying to illustrate
how the density of redundancy is elastic. Phrases that are invented
in this way, as we saw with Chomsky’s “colorless green ideas,” index
something—t heir referent. The Constantinople sequence cfnp indexes
generation itself. It thus metalinguistically refers to the poetic func-
tion. And by showing that this, and no other, is the way in which lan-
guage changes, the way in which meaning emerges and adapts, Weaver
unwittingly wrote down a formal equivalent to the paradoxical num-
ber g, the paradoxical index in Goedel’s numbering system. Rather
than indexing the independence of meaning and form as Chomsky did
with “colorless green ideas,” Weaver assigned a sequence of words to
the fact that language is generated as a sequence of words. Language
                        Computational Meaning                          171

is sticky or greedy as a system, because whatever is invented—f rom
within or without—is reinserted into the each-to-a ll valuation of the
poetic heat map.
    This internalizing function is both what allows language to range gen-
erally over any content and what makes a last-instance semiology depend
on linguistic form. Goedel’s number forces us to realize that there is an
“outside” to any formal mathematical system. Because formal systems
are incomplete, they must go outside themselves for each new discovery.
Goedel’s later life was taken up with attempts to understand this relation-
ship; cfnp points us not at the outside of language—although certainly
it suggests there is one—but rather at the force exerted by the internal
makeup. Goedel’s own interpretation of his results suggests that math-
ematics must find and include external factors to keep going. Weaver
shows us how, even if the same is true of language, meaning arises equally
from internal combination. Anything that is generated can be captured,
can enter—and does enter—the statistical field, no matter how small its
relevance. Not only does it not need to come from “outside” but its mean-
ing cannot be parsed so long as it stays outside.
    Nothing in language falls outside this force field of internal redun-
dancy, the poetic heat map. This does not mean that nothing falls outside
this field—indeed, it would probably be possible to show that something
must, that language does not exhaust the field of representation. But
where openness to meaning is based on exteriority in mathematics, at
least in Goedel’s own understanding of his results, the same openness
in language is based on interiority.48 The poetic function houses the
contradiction of containing metalanguage in opposition to itself, and
this is what allows it to be “about” itself, to indicate itself rather than
something beyond its sequence. This contradiction opens language to
meaning and allows it to work with at least one other system of repre-
sentation successfully: computation.
    LLMs are the first extensive realization of this shared formal prin-
ciple, the first encounter between the generativity of computation and
the generativity of language. They form, for that reason, the basis of an
empirical study of the interaction of these forms of representation. To
study what will surely be a proliferation of automated culture of this
sort, the semiology of multimodal AI, we need a general poetics. A gen-
eral poetics will study language at this point of meaning generation
172                      Computational Meaning


across the difference between its origins—computational and neuro-
cognitive, in the only two examples we have so far. It will involve literary
scholars—the only professionals positioned to do this work properly—
but it will not take literature as its primary examples. Language as such,
in whatever variety it comes to us, will be its object, insofar as language
is the matrix of meaning generation.
    Jakobson wrote that “poetics deals with problems of verbal structure,
just as the analysis of painting is concerned with pictorial s tructure.
Since linguistics is the global science of verbal structure, poetics may
be regarded as an integral part of linguistics.”49 It is time to reverse this
sentiment. Linguistics, and language generation, must be contained
in a more general study of the poetic function. Interpretation (making
words into things) and rhetoric (making things into words) are both
based in linguistic poiesis. This generation is not in any way limited to
literary artifacts but is rather—especially in the age of AI—loose in
our informational wilds. Where rhetorical analysis tends to articulated
form, the “twists” of language or its tropes, poetics should attend to its
meaning-generative properties across the difference between human
and machine, cognitive and computational, divides. General poetics
should study all forms of capture with respect to generation—a ll forms
of reference, rhetoric, in short, meaning—in which language is involved.
LLMs have become the first industrial tool for such study. The varieties
of generation would be the topic of this general poetics.
    General poetics would attend to the whole spectrum of meaning
generation, and surely one of its first results—maybe even a prem-
ise, intuitively—would be that nearly no meaning is poetry. It would
be able to treat, as few if any systems have, the list of soccer players
that Handke made into a poem as a poetic generation in its original con-
text. The ticker tape messages that play across the bottom of the ESPN
screen, announcing injuries, scores, and other news items, are just as
much generation as William Carlos Williams’s poem about the plums.
There is rather more of the former type of generation than the latter.
Most meaning is “mean,” takes furtive shape in common alleys and tun-
nels of language. If art is the achievement of culture, general poetics
would take culture itself seriously. And it would find that language does
not regress naturally to a state of art but rather to an average poetics of
normal, banal generation, the usual name for which is ideology—and
this is the topic to which we now turn.
      6


Poetic Ideology
The Packaged Semantics of Generative Culture

Large literary machines may make use of the poetic function, but their
default output is ideology. By this I do not mean that they reproduce
talking points of political platforms but that they generate syntagms
that are prepatterned—a lbeit in ways that we humans do not always
expect. Ideology is not a view or a proposition or some content but the
manner of expression of that content. It is another internal factor of
language production, to which LLMs give us perhaps the first glimpse
that does not feel autotelic and confusing. The theory of ideology tog-
gles between a transcendental pole and what I here call an “expres-
sive” pole, between rules and culture. The poetic function in its current
computational-linguistic state is what I think of as “poetic ideology,”
generative but restrained, packaged but (for us) unpredictable.
    We make meaning by putting words one after the other. But we usu-
ally do it in preparceled ways. Most of what is expressed is default chan-
nels of communication, surefire pathways for one or another purpose
that, as we have seen, nevertheless has to be generated out of the heat
map. This is why LLMs force us to confront the problem of the relation-
ship of art to culture, formal innovation to social form as such. Gen-
eration puts poetry on one end of a spectrum bookended on the other
by ideology.
    Avant-garde form and the hegemony of culture are typically opposed.
Clement Greenberg’s famous definition of kitsch as “predigested form”
influentially pitted culture against formal innovation in the historical
avant-garde. LLMs, as we have now seen, capture the whole spectrum at
issue in this distinction, parasitic as they are on culture and art indiffer-
ently. Hannes Bajohr has claimed that “whoever controls LLMs, controls
politics,” and this chapter demonstrates the mechanism of that control.1
I show how LLMs create semantic packages that range across local and
distal contexts within language, scanning the state of ideology as “pre-
digested form” or the most commonly traveled pathways within lan-
guage at scale. But it shows us this ideology extensively. Our theories of


                                    173
174                            Poetic Ideology


ideology tend to be about some baseline that governs speech, condi-
tions of possibility. The “economic base” in Marx and the unconscious
in Freudo-Marxism have typically served as conditions, making it hard
to see how what is actually said corresponds to the condition itself.
I think that LLMs should shift us out of this “transcendental” mode
in the theory of ideology. Because they open up ideology to a form of
empirical scanning, they can help shift our sense of ideology to include,
and even be based on, expression. An expressive theory of ideology can
make sense of the sequential generation we use to reproduce the least
enlightening aspects of language.
    This expressive notion of ideology fits with Theodor W. Adorno’s phi-
losophy of culture. Adorno must seem a strange ally here, given his
notorious disdain for computational culture. But Adorno’s dialectical
connection of art and social being as such has been rendered descriptive
by the emergence of LLMs. For the first time, we are able to surface ide-
ology quantitatively, to scan the ideological surround. This provides us
with a supracognitive mapping, launching us out of the postmodern era,
but not on our own terms. We have a brief window to use this visibility
to understand the empirical makeup of contemporary ideology, but it
is closing as LLMs suffer the fate of all AI inventions: the passage into
off-the-shelf, for-profit software.
    Adorno and Horkheimer famously argued that the result of the hand-
shake between technology and media was entertainment:

      Entertainment is the prolongation of work under late capitalism.
      It is sought by those who want to escape the mechanized labor
      process so that they can cope with it again. At the same time, how-
      ever, mechanization has such power over leisure and its happi-
      ness, determines so thoroughly the fabrication of entertainment
      commodities, that the off-duty worker can experience nothing
      but after-images of the work process itself. The ostensible content
      is merely a faded foreground; what is imprinted is the automated
      sequence of standardized tasks. The only escape from the work
      process in factory and office is through adaptation to it in leisure
      time. This is the incurable sickness of all entertainment.2

The after-images of the fully industrialized factory make up the signal of
entertainment, but the signal is noise, ein verblaßter Vordergrund, snow
                             Poetic Ideology                             175

drowning out color. The figure haunts cultural criticism, no matter how
many times we waver on Adorno, first accepting his idiosyncratic acidity,
then inevitably deciding that his “pessimism” is too much. Film—the
primary object of the essay on the “culture industry”—never fully oper-
ated as a global logistical network in the way that digital systems have
become, so the aesthetic integration Adorno speaks of here might pale in
comparison to a GPT-charged platform aesthetics, which would unite the
fade and the foreground far more than industrial protocols could.
    Actor, director, and screenwriter Justine Bateman reported during
the 2023 writers’ and actors’ strike that AI’s executive-led intrusion
into screenwriting arose partly because of the explicit demand that
TV be “second screen.”3 This phrase means that the television is sec-
ond to the smartphone, so that one can literally continue to engage, in
the same medium, with work—emails, Twitter, and so on—as narrative
takes the edge off in the background. Or maybe it’s the foreground, only
faded—the explicit demand, according to Bateman, is that this type of
visual work not pierce the veil of the scrolling. The merger of entertain-
ment and industrial knowledge work completes the dialectical cycle that
Adorno and Horkheimer saw in film in the 1930s.
    One cringes to think of Adorno listening to “Daddy’s Car,” widely
and misleadingly billed as the “first AI song.”4 It is Beatles-y mush, the
average of some data set involving the Beatles, to be sure, but also,
to my ear, the Beach Boys quite heavily. The neural net focuses on an
area—candidate notes, words (in this case, machinic in quality but ac-
tually human composed) with context, and in this case some manual
guidance—and gives you not really the signal or the noise but some-
thing between: faded foreground. This is not the average of the twelve-
tone scale or the common Western scale, and certainly not of all Western
music or any such thing. It’s quite specific, but it’s hard to think of it as
musical articulation in the way we think of compositions as aesthetic
objects. For classical information theory, a string of words or symbols,
including musical notation, is a signal against a possible set—that’s why
entropy was measured with a capital W for Wahrscheinlichkeit (German
for “probability”). These strings seem more like noise than signal, as if
the pointed edge of poetic utterance had receded into . . . what? Not
actual noise—this is music, after all. We don’t have a name for this other
 than “ideology.” It’s the quantitatively captured average over a given
 contextual domain, but it’s not singular. One could generate many,
176                          Poetic Ideology


many songs in this vein, covering the whole suddenly statistical object
“Beatles music.” Semantic packages are not limited to words, although
that is where they are taking up their first residence.
    The faded foreground and “second-screen” entertainment are forms
of ideology. I say this because they are a signal-become-noise that pro-
vides a background to dull the effects of form, which can sometimes
give us insight. This kind of “form” is instead a washed-out signal,
statistically varied so as to lull, horrify, amuse. But not to enlighten—
for these averaged-out forms to enlighten, we must provide the atten-
tion, the reading; in a sense, we must provide form to something that,
though it is signal, tries to fade out of form altogether.
    “Daddy’s Car” is ideology in just this sense. The washing out of the
foreground tends to make us think that the usual state of semantic af-
fairs is clear, somehow redemptively contoured content that leads us
somewhere good, or at least away from the locus of the extraction of sur-
plus value and the confrontation between the worker and the machine.
Yet it is hard to see how a more successful entertainment would live up
to the clear aspirations of this essay or do much of anything explana
tory or salutary for us. Adorno can’t possibly want to “correct” enter-
tainment. It is rather the fact of the continuity between the B   eatles and
Schönberg that Adorno so polemically underlines. I think we have to
extend that continuity into signifying machines.
    I am not going to offer an interpretation of Adorno here. I think with
him because he offers something rare, namely, an account of the ma-
chine, entertainment, art, and the social, as continuous. Perhaps this
sounds odd, but the dialectical approach Adorno takes to the problem
of critique works only if those four things are all fundamentally one
thing—perhaps we could say one matrix. Of course, in Adorno’s techni-
cal language, they are also “nonidentical,” but this negativity is internal.
If they were not all one in a larger sense, his account would make no
sense. In other words, rather than thinking of ideology only as deceit—
which it certainly is: the subtitle to “culture industry” is “ideology as
deception of the masses”—we might also think of it as a medium. And
that medium has its first automatic operator in the form of LLMs.
    We have seen the basics of how LLMs produce meaningful language.
If we think about the internal process, we can quickly appreciate how
this tends to confuse foreground and background. To use my light grid
metaphor once more, imagine you touch the word “dialectic” and the
                             Poetic Ideology                             177

algorithm gives you “of enlightenment.” According to what we have
seen, “of” and “enlightenment” belong to groups of words, candidate sets,
that might be next. The attention mechanism refines this group from a
larger, generally possible set—and whatever fine-tuning further nar-
rows down the set, with the prompt finally presenting what can be a
quite small group. So if I say “dialectic” without any context whatsoever,
“is” might be the next word, and over a range of generation of an answer
to a question—say two hundred to three hundred words—we might see
“Socrates,” “ancient,” “Barth,” and other things. But if the algorithm is
attending to a context, it might be able to reject those options and re-
place them with “Hegel,” “idealism,” and “antithesis.” Within the overall
set that floats to the statistical surface when “dialectic” is input in some
given context, these are all separate options, with blurry lines between
them. I think of them as semantic packages.
    Packaging meaning is the way that LLMs get at meaning at all. They
distill average-temperature areas by using the poetic function. But if we
think of the delivery mechanism that digital technologies possess—like
packet switching in internet protocols or streaming a film or TV show—
LLMs exceed this function. They don’t just “have” prepackaged seman-
tics; they do the packaging (strictly, we do the packaging when we perform
search functions within their deterministic states). So if “Socrates” is im-
portant to a discussion of Hegelian dialectics—or Barth’s dialectical the-
ology—he can go in the box too. Or Adorno, with his negative dialectics.
Or a tweet from a social scientist claiming that dialectics is unscientific
gibberish. Everything depends on the softmax function, which will send
the relevant possibilities close to 1, and the subsequent top-k search, for
example, that clusters those relevant tokens.
    Semantic packaging is the first mechanical operation we have ever
seen that can surface linguistic noise, bringing a flat but genuine language
to the fore. When we apply the metaphor “signal/noise” to language—an
infelicitous application in the first place—we get a strange cocktail. As
we saw in the previous chapter, language has an intensely internalizing
effect that seems to reject the pure notion of statistical noise. (Following
Shannon’s diagram, when I speak, “noise” is noise.) Language seems to
be articulatory first, so that noise is not language, in the metaphor. All
very well and good, but LLMs seem to float something that is not exactly
articulation to us: a spectrum of possibilities upends the relationship be-
tween foreground and background, a kind of noisy signal.5 The language
178                          Poetic Ideology


that surfaces this way is blanched, generated in perfect poetic operation
but from an actual consideration of lateral candidates, as if, in speaking,
I were to consider not just the entire paradigm at hand but also its con-
text, sifting through all the words possible and choosing by indication.
(This is not so very far from what it is to write, I suppose—more on this
in the conclusion.) The “gradual crystallization” of thought in speaking
Kleist spoke of does not scan linguistic regions in the way that the pack-
aging process does, although something like this process is suggested in
Edgar Allan Poe’s famous essay on his composition of “The Raven,” “The
Philosophy of Composition.” But poetry is not the result: the result is the
best-traveled pathways of language, the channels themselves presented
as content. That is what I propose to call “ideology.” What results is usu-
ally mush, tepid language that is nonetheless language—which, after all,
is usually neither boiling nor freezing. It is this tepid mush that makes
up the integument of machine, art, and social form. Let’s look at some
examples.
     On February 16, 2023, Vanderbilt University’s office for diversity,
equity, and inclusion (DEI) issued a statement on the shooting that had
 occurred shortly before at Michigan State University. The statement was
 boilerplate, suggesting that the university “come together as a commu-
 nity to reaffirm our commitment to caring for one another and pro-
 moting a culture of inclusivity on our campus” to “honor the victims
 of this tragedy.” The only remarkable thing about the message was that
 a footnote credited ChatGPT with producing its first draft.6 The office
 apologized one day later, after an outcry.
     The statement could not be more bloodless—we might think of this
 as the “thoughts and prayers” semantic package, touched up with the
 “DEI” semantic package. Language here is offered as a service, inten-
 tionally grabbed and used for liability screening purposes—a lthough
 in the early days of the bots, billing the source was an unforced error.
 Flattening the channel, giving the most tepid response possible, is lit-
 erally the task here. If a human had written those words, they might
 hardly differ at all. By the time of writing, never mind publication, this
 type of text must be quite general, although we probably do not know it.
 Semantic packaging finds a smooth fit with bureaucratic writing. If one
 is inclined to think that AI is incapable of meeting a certain standard of
 real creativity that humans possess, then we should think about how in-
 stitutional expression almost by definition can now be automated. The
                            Poetic Ideology                           179

office memo on productivity may or may not belong to the same seman-
tic package as the diversity email, and the constant stream of “wellness”
messages perches neatly between the two.7
    Content comes packaged. In early 2023, I asked ChatGPT to tell me
how the “enlightenment is dialectical,” without informing it that that
is the thesis of Theodor Adorno and Marx Horkheimer’s notoriously
difficult masterpiece (which also is a watershed in the theory of ideol-
ogy), and it gave me a detailed, complex response that, at least in casual
reading, really recapitulated the argument of the book. When I asked
it to summarize my colleague Matthew Handelman’s (coincidentally
of Michigan State University) book on Adorno and Horkheimer, the
Frankfurt School, and mathematics, The Mathematical Imagination, it
did something curious—and informative. This book is about how criti
cal theory—and especially Adorno and Horkheimer—excluded mathe
matics and computation from their framework but didn’t have to. It
reconstructs engagements with mathematics on the part of three satel
lite figures of the Frankfurt School: Siegfried Kracauer with his social
geometry, Franz Rosenzweig with a messianism based in calculus, and
Gershom Scholem’s reading of mathematical logic.8 Handelman argues
that there was a huge missed opportunity that we need to make good
today, in which critique and mathematics find a meeting point. This
book is very much downstream from that claim.
    ChatGPT competently summarized the book, to my eye reproducing
materials easily found on the web, like chapter summaries. But it kept
repeating throughout that “Handelman’s thesis is that mathematics is
a social construct.”9 This is a patent falsehood—there is no trace of a
position on the question of math’s objectivity in the book, but if there
is a tendency, it is to take math seriously, as mutually coconstituting
any possible critique of orders of representation. So what was going on?
    Dialectic of Enlightenment is a massively influential text—when you
type its title phrase into a generative interface, the pattern that lights
up in the poetic heat map is extensive, but also concentrated, around
accounts of it, debates about it, vehement disagreements, and so on.
This has the effect of making the predictive data set dense—and rela-
tively accurate. When I ask about Handelman’s book, the data set will
be correspondingly less concentrated. It will overlap heavily with the
data set for “dialectic of enlightenment,” because they are so close to
each other linguistically, in fact. But when I put in “mathematics,” it
180                          Poetic Ideology


alters the pattern that lights up. This is partly because radically fewer
words have been written on this overlap of topics. I would venture a
guess that “socially constructed” comes up in this context so doggedly
because when scholars who work in this area discuss mathematics,
they very often assert that it is socially constructed (even though that’s
not Handelman’s view). But there is another group that writes about
this overlap, namely, the Alt Right. Their anti-Semitic conspiracy the-
ory about “cultural Marxism,” which directly blames Adorno and his
group for “making America Communist,”10 will have a lot to say about
the “relativism” that “critical theory” represents, a case in point often
being the idea that mathematics is “socially constructed.” We are here
witnessing a corner of the “culture war” semantic package. Science,
communism, the far right, conspiracy theory, the Frankfurt School,
and mathematics—no machine could have collated these into coherent
sentences before 2019, it seems to me. This simple example shows how
LLMs can be forensic with respect to ideology.
    The effect I have just described is possibly the first quantitative mea-
sure of ideology. After all, the truth of what is in Handelman’s book
is not the only fact about that book. It actually exists in a linguistic
environment that has patterns in it, some more common and others
less. It is a sign of strength that a book is mischaracterized by this pro-
cedure, because we generally want well-researched academic books to
be something more than “ideology.” But the indication is an interesting
one: critical theory plus mathematics is a discursively important point
where the academic left and the global new right confront one another.
These systems could be used to expand our knowledge of various regions
of our own unknown thought. And that would be possible because they
“hallucinate.”
    In the semantic package, there is no object. A book, a person, a
thing—nothing stops the statistical slide along the curvature set, and
ever reset, by the prompt, the attention, and the heat map. This index-
ical flow, we tend to think, should be halted by ethical considerations,
the “responsibility” of having an object in view.11 To halt around objects,
and consider their context and value, is the essence of the moral use of
language that Chomsky wants to identify with language itself. But there
is epistemic gain in the automatic irresponsibility that cannot halt or
contextualize. LLMs strap whatever else they treat to language, illumi-
                             Poetic Ideology                            181

nating both, but not by capturing the truth. They expand the expressive
state of our ideologies.
    Ideology is not just political doctrine. When Marx wrote of the
“German Ideology,” he meant his fellow socialists’ implicit belief in
the power of ideas, to which he countered the power of material forces.
But Marxists slowly took up the problem of the power of discourse and
representation, acknowledging that what we are able to think, imagine,
and say is a crucial political issue. Antonio Gramsci called the domi-
nant set of ideas “hegemony,” arguing that these ideas conformed to the
dominance of the ruling class while not being about that dominance.12
This syncs with Bajohr’s phrase “whoever controls LLMs, controls poli-
tics.” But there’s more to the problem of ideology than discursive control.
    A wide variety of Marxists have also seen ideology as a form of kitsch.
First articulated by the Marxist art critic Clement Greenberg in 1937, the
notion of kitsch is “predigested form.” The avant-garde, for Greenberg
(perhaps above all his friend Jackson Pollock, although this association
came later), “tries in effect to imitate God by creating something valid
solely on its own terms, in the way nature itself is valid, in the way a
landscape—not its picture—is aesthetically valid; something given,
increate, independent of meanings, similars or originals. Content is to
be dissolved so completely into form that the work of art or literature
cannot be reduced in whole or in part to anything not itself.”13 This is
creation, not generation. But where Picasso paints “cause,” Greenberg
raises the kitsch of Repin to exemplary status, claiming that he paints
“effect.”14 Kitsch “predigests art for the spectator and spares him ef-
fort, provides him with a short cut to the pleasure of art that detours
what is necessarily difficult in genuine art. Repin, or kitsch, is synthetic
art.”15 Perhaps “synthetic” is not a coincidence here. We know when we
are on well-traveled paths. We can feel when a cliché has taken over
from the narrative or when the tune reverts to some mid-temperature
that sounds not like an imitation of some original but like an opened
statistical field, the neighboring regions of some signal we have once
enjoyed or admired. What could be more “predigested” than the fea-
ture Adobe has introduced into its media suite, “generative fill”? This
allows you to “zoom out” from a given image, like the Mona Lisa or a
scene from an Indiana Jones movie (both real examples). In the Mona
Lisa fill, we see both predigestion and something else (Figure 14). The
182                          Poetic Ideology


image is extrapolative, but not from the painting itself, in a strange way.
It fills in a grandiose mountainscape with a huge sky, as if this early
modern lady were transported to nineteenth-century Montana. The in-
timacy of Renaissance portraiture requires something else: Mona Lisa,
according to my (untrained) intuition, is inside. The method of capturing
the image—painstaking hours of sitting and painting—should be part
of the image, and is part of the original image. But in the objectless
slide from pixel to pixel, we get something in the “semantic package”
of the Mona Lisa, perhaps even in the “painting” package, but it expands
the statistical field in a “wrong” way. Like fan fiction, it imagines a dif-
ferent Mona Lisa, generating within yet laterally from da Vinci’s crea
tion. Form is predigested and then shot along a surprising statistical
axis. A colleague from art history argues, however, that the drama of
the original background is intentionally unrealistic, creating a tension
between the domestic setting and the “un-European” mountain range—
which allows him to arrive at the conclusion that the AI system, or its
prompter, has extended and illustrated da Vinci’s vision. I leave it to the
reader to decide between the positive and the negative view of the Mona
Lisa semantic package extension but would point out that both can be
sustained in the general poetics of the digital semiological surround.
Aesthetic judgment provides no torque for critique.
    In Roland Barthes’s classic essay “Rhetoric of the Image,” the struc-
turalist critic locates a “denotational” level in an advertisement for Pan-
zani pasta. Barthes notes that the advertisement, with its labels and its
imperative to buy, is a highly motivated representation. Yet even here,
there is in the image a “message without a code,” the physical presenta-
tion of tomatoes and pasta in a mesh grocery bag. It is this denotation that
“naturalizes” the image, thus harnessing the signifier to the overarching
structure of the signified (“buy Panzani!”). Barthes concludes, “The more
technology develops the diffusion of information (and notably of images),
the more it provides the means of masking the constructed meaning
under the appearance of the given meaning.”16 For Barthes, obscuring the
arbitrariness of the sign is ideology, and masking the difference between
signifier and signified becomes easier when images are subject to technol-
ogy. Generation expands the range of ideology’s capture of denotation.
    Denotation should not be confused with reference. The ladder of ref-
erence is active in our understanding of images just as much as in our
theories of language, and it is at least as dangerous here as there. In
                               Poetic Ideology                                183




Figure 14. The “Mona Lisa fill,” an image produced using LLM-based “filling-in”
operations that extend the scene of the iconic painting automatically.
From Placido.


the Mona Lisa fill, the “denotation” is not photographic and so is not
quite a message without a code. The fill is an interpretation of a cul-
tural object, one with enormous influence and symbolic prestige, so its
literal meaning is that symbolic status. We can see this with a more re-
cent image that has circulated, “thicc Descartes” (Figure 15). This fill is a
joke, obviously, and might be labeled “I ball, therefore I am,” because the
modern sage is here given basketball sneakers and thighs that suggest
a strong vertical jump. But there is a catch. At least to me—w riting in
mid-2024—this image comes off as a handcrafted imitation of AI genera-
tion. This genre is proliferating now and seems to indicate a disavowed
knowledge that we are immersed in generative content that we do not
notice—what I called the “global Eliza effect.” The denotation here is the
idea of a generated image that is incongruous because it is produced ac-
cording to the averaging effect of the ideology machine. The reversal, if I
am right that this is manually produced, is a parry of human creativity,
which is able to denote the idea of generation by means of the recursive
function called irony. But irony is slippery: objects of this sort bring a
momentary laughter followed by the uncanny sense that culture itself
has entered the mode of ideological generation, in which it is no longer
clear what is “predigested” and what is not.
    Greenberg was a vociferous advocate of the avant-garde, but prediges-
tion is important, perhaps more important than he could let on. Most
184                           Poetic Ideology




Figure 15. Another “fill” operation, performed on the portrait of the philoso-
pher Descartes.


language is predigested, and most culture is too. The search for the
purity of the avant-garde has failed. Medium specificity is a drive to
the analytically pure form of the medium. LLMs undermine that pu-
rity on their own terms, because language as such has no “pure form”
that we have been able to isolate (although I have been suggesting that
capture–generate is a foundational feature). And synthesis cannot be
so easily discarded anyway. Greenberg, it is sometimes forgotten, was
really a Marxist: he was tying the split between avant-garde and the rise
of kitsch to “technological innovation” that caused “inherited forms to
lose their relevance.”17 Even though kitsch is predigested, it was the in-
vention of a new set of norms on a new playing field. It is not yet clear if a
new set of norms is now arising or if it is merely that the consequence of
a continuous machine evolution since the nineteenth century is coming
to one stage of fulfillment. To be sure, commercial film is nearly pure
kitsch today—what could illustrate Greenberg’s point better than Thor:
Love and Thunder (2022)? Yet the output of early AI in film isn’t quite
like that. Kitsch is “ideology” on not just well-traveled but well-known
                             Poetic Ideology                           185

tracks. That’s what makes it pleasurable: the unburdening of cognition
by means of familiarity. Generative-fi ll Mona Lisa, thicc Descartes, and
other phenomena of this kind are weirder than that—they fade the
foreground into something that feels actually noisy, even uncanny. They
surprise us, and that’s not what ideology is supposed to do.
    The surprise comes from the statistical blur provided by the pack-
aging. No objects exist in these data sets, but means do.18 And the area
around a mean based on a task is genuinely surprising. The “measure
of surprise” that a message carries with it for Claude Shannon doesn’t
quite name this peculiar effect, which is everywhere as generative AI
quickly spread. A beer commercial in which everything blows up, a
trailer for a version of the classic Swiss Heidi that turns into a fascist
rally, and a deeply unsettling clip of Will Smith eating spaghetti belong
to the prominent visual examples at the time of writing. These will
surely be fond memories at the time of publication, as others will take
their place, and we will get aesthetic orientation in this weird world. In
one of the first cyberspace fictions, William Gibson wrote of “semiotic
ghosts,” traces of past visions of the future, and the need to turn them
off by tapping into the comforting entropy of bad television.19 This is the
opposite: a kind of noise within the signal that unsettles our very sense
of form and meaning.
    This aesthetic effect arises from “fine-t uning.”20 When the P in GPT
is complete, and the massive grid is established, the language remains
without a target. To produce that possibility, further training is needed,
but training that shapes answers and actions, not the grid itself. This is
called “tuning.” To take a simple but illustrative example—one you can
run on a simple Google collaboratory notebook—GPT-2 can be imported
and tuned on any text of your liking. The plainest version of the “task”
in this case is for the pretraining to be “tuned” to predict something like
the text fed to it. So if I feed the Communist Manifesto into the machine,
its goal becomes to write something “like” that text. The measure of
that mimesis is subjective, of course. But as I’ve tried this experiment
dozens of times, two things have become clear. One is that LLMs and
generative AI in general are first and foremost cultural objects. They
can’t be scientific ones first because they don’t do reproducibility na-
tively. Can we learn something about the object domain—in this case,
language—from them? Yes, but not quantitatively, at least at first. And
as I have been arguing, one reason for this is that language conditions
186                          Poetic Ideology


the algorithm just as much as the other way around. The second thing
we learn is that tuning resides between the grid of language and some-
thing like a purposive use of language. But when we add this second
thing, we train the net on some region of language like a camera. This is
what creates that uncanny effect.
   If you tell GPT-2 in this toy version to show you a sample of its gen-
erated text every ten steps through its tuning over fifty steps, you
generally see a progression. First output: a kind of historical text that
reads well, sometimes even accurately, but not like Marx. Second output:
sometimes, not always, this one is weird. In one run, the transformer
obsessively repeated the word “wheatmeal” throughout its response,
sometimes out of grammatical order. But it was interspersed with more
class-specific material. Third output: a definite move toward coherence
and tone, with either this or the fourth input typically picking up “bour-
geoisie” and “proletariat” as key terms. By the fifth output, it produces
something indeed quite “Marx-y” in tone and content, albeit imperfect,
with a small model and a very small text on which to tune. But we can
extrapolate from here to say that all of Marx, or all of classical political
economy, is a genre, a linguistic icon in the space of language. What
one gets is a quality of language, a set of ideas presented in the general
statistical field.
   Chatbots extend LLMs by further training using RLHF. This, too, cre-
ates a kind of expansion around a vibe, a statistical middling effect of
“chatting” that accounts for how boring it can be to talk to the machine.
Yet under that banality is the poetic function, as we have seen, and also
ideology, as the “thoughts and prayers” semantic package suggests.
   This type of ideology in extensive algorithmic use has genuinely con-
fused the line between human and machine language. Efforts to demar-
cate synthetic text are not going well, and they illustrate the point I am
making here. If it were just a question of the heat map being fine-tuned
and producing some smooth text, some statistical monsters, perhaps we
would not be in this panic cycle. When we have tried to “detect” which
texts are human and which are AI generated, we have so far ended up
in a very strange place. Note first of all that these attempts are done
using AI, meaning that the Turing test is weirdly automated. The metrics
used tend to rely on some version of the idea that human text is more
robust—a lso the cause of model collapse, as we saw earlier—and LLM
generation less so. The result, however, is that texts like the U.S. Con-
                              Poetic Ideology                             187

stitution and large swaths of the Bible score very highly for “probably
AI-generated.”21 This is because they weigh very heavily in the data set.
Cultural pressure in statistical form shows up as redundancy at the scale
of language as such. But see what has happened: ideology bubbles to
the surface, and the difference between the most likely thing to be said,
our common topoi, the shared locations where meaning moves fastest
through words, denies us the bright line between human and machine.
Ideology is the medium of language, generated by means of the poetic
function but continuous from one end of the spectrum to the other,
regardless of whether one uses the computational joystick or the gray
matter joystick to operate it.
    When the camera was invented, we saw distant chunks of the world
for the first time with our eyes. LLMs show us not the world but the way
we represent that world. Fine-tuning trains the “camera” on regions of
representation so close to us that they feel like our very world itself, but
then they flatten and expand the signal into the noise of that world.
Fine-tuning is a form of ideology scanning, an effect that will almost
certainly disappear from these systems as they are brought into rep-
resentational line and embedded in software.22 This field of ideology is
momentarily on display during the transition to generative culture.
    Like poetry, ideology seems as though it could be on empirical display
here, open to quantitative investigation for the first time. Yet our theo-
ries of ideology have long suggested that no such thing could ever occur.
    Ideology is not doctrine. Its colloquial use as “political beliefs held in
spite of evidence” doesn’t explain how we get those beliefs in the first
place. The question the concept “ideology” tries to answer is why any
given idea holds power at a given time. And the answers to this question
tend to point to governing conditions, like Marx’s “base” or Freud’s “un-
conscious.” These absolute references don’t stand in a linear relationship
to the mere “content” of any ideological statement or position. But we
can take this nonlinearity in two ways.
    When we focus on the cut between the content and the condition,
we get “transcendental” theories of ideology, as we draw attention to
the break between the rules and what is expressed within those rules.
“Hegemony” governs the sayable, just as the “unconscious” does for
Freud and the Freudo-Marxist tradition. A good example of this is Mark
Fisher’s idea of “capitalist realism,” which convincingly argues that capi-
tal shapes the very horizon of thought—an idea sometimes boiled down
188                          Poetic Ideology


to the slogan “it is easier to imagine the end of the world than the end of
capitalism.”23 When we propose a “condition of possibility” for what we
think or do, and then claim that this condition transcends the contents
that contingently crystallize below it, we gain insight into the formal
aspects of ideology. But we are then in danger of losing its expressive
aspects: ideology as actual speech, performed, spoken, written. The dif-
ference between why an idea is powerful and that idea itself is surely
of great importance, but their continuity is too. And LLMs unroll the
condition and the expression quasi-empirically, showing us the extent,
not just the origins, of our ideologies.
      Ideology might then be seen as the superficial yet lawful total state
of expression. Michel Foucault presciently says that ideology “scans the
domain of representations in general; it determines the necessary
sequences that appear there; it defines the links that provide its
connections; . . . it situates all knowledge in the space of representa-
 tions, and by scanning that space it formulates the knowledge of the
 laws that provide its organization. It is in a sense the knowledge of all
 knowledge.”24 The subconceptual totality of the rules synced with actual
 expression at any given time in the history of knowledge is what makes
 up ideology. By pointing to its linking, scanning, and compositional
 functions, F oucault points the way to ideology as captured in a model,
 long before it ever was. In doing so, he overcomes a tendency in the work
 of his teacher Louis Althusser.
      The most influential transcendental notion of ideology today is that
 of Althusser. In his famous essay on the “ideological state apparatuses”—
 a touchstone for research into the prison, the asylum, the school, and
 other identity-forming institutions (largely because of the work of
 Michel Foucault, who studied with Althusser)—he defines ideology as
  “a ‘representation’ of the imaginary relationship of individuals to their
  real conditions of existence.”25 This definition draws on psychoanalyst
  Jacques Lacan’s “three registers,” as we saw in the introduction to this
  volume. The “Imaginary” is what we hold privately, in an image, to be our
  world, our understanding of self and reality. The “Real” is, for Lacan, the
  completely unrepresentable, the confluence of Freud’s id and the kernel
  of resistance that the world presents us with, completely unknown and
  unknowable yet determinative in ways that psychoanalysis must con-
  front. The third register, which Fredric Jameson once noted is conspic-
                              Poetic Ideology                            189

uously missing from this definition,26 is the “Symbolic,” typified by
language and meant to capture all systems of representation that carry
transmissible values.27 Ideology, for Althusser, means the stance that we
take toward an unknowable Real, our apparently private images of how
the world really works. But these images are generated by a complex of
control and constitution of identity in the ideological state apparatuses
(those nonviolent institutions that shape belief, behavior, and self). And
in fact, we can note that the symbolic is not missing here; it is located in
the apparently redundant, scare-quoted “representation” of the imagi-
nary relations in question. In other words, ideology is symbolic first and
foremost, and it is through that symbolic register that the imaginary
(ego) effects occur. This is why Althusser can (famously) write that when
a policeman says “hey you!” the right person always turns around. The
symbolic is the joystick of ideology, its extensive expression, so long as
it is constituted of the right internal set of relations to interpolate you.
    This definition of ideology is crucial to Wendy Chun’s claim that soft-
ware and ideology are a perfect fit. Software and hardware together—
computers—“are ideology machines,” she writes, because they “fulfill
almost every formal definition of ideology we have.”28 Software is an
imaginary relationship to hardware, imitating the hard, unrepresent-
able kernel that governs the real state of expression in the system—
just as Marx’s “base” is supposed to do. Software thus “interpellates a
‘user’ ” (or youser, in Chun’s pun), offering it “a name or image with which
to identify.”29 This allows the “immaterial” to “emerge as a commodity,
as something in its own right.”30 The power of this type of abstraction
shows us that ideology is deceit, but also actual.31
    Chun argues that this analog of ideology in general in the software
environment “pleasurably mimics ideology,”32 but also contains the ker-
nel of ideology critique, because it allows us to make reference, if not
actually influence, the alleged cause of the images themselves, the oper-
ating system from which we are walled off: “rather than lack cognitive
maps, we produce them all the time through a medium that simulates
ideology and . . . its critique.”33 For Althusser, we are trapped in a series
of institutions that exploit our inability to know the Real. For Chun,
a second world is simulated within that world that exploits the same
psychological feature. Thicc Descartes calls me into this loop, for I am
asked there to accept that AI fills are paltry and silly objects even as I can
190                           Poetic Ideology


only do so by acknowledging their cultural importance. But the theory
of ideology here only grasps this as a condition of my subjectivity, not as
a factor in the totality of culture.
    In this version of the theory of ideology, its essence is deceit. Ideology
enforces a regime of real abstraction, things we know to be false but
that have discursive power that makes them have substance, normative
force. But which abstraction, which “immateriality,” takes on this nor-
mative force: imaginary relations or their symbolic representation? In
this cluster of theories, there has been much confusion on this point. If
we take the imaginary to be the ideology, we end up in a very difficult
place theoretically, where the only option is to empirically witness the
formation of identity in schooling, therapy, and prison. But one cannot
witness learning precisely because, as Lacan always insisted, “learning”
is partly a matter of induction into the symbolic order. For that rea-
son, ideology must be symbolic, the “representation” of the imaginary,
not the imaginary itself. It is the integument of symbolic relations, in
their actual (and now statistically viewable) internal redundancy, that
is “ideology.”
    We should prefer this definition intuitively, because it suggests that
ideology is not a matter of personal preference and cannot be “over-
come” by sheer force of will. (This is, of course, the neoliberal theoretical
version of ideology, and we should reject the impossible task it places
on us.) Ideology is objective: it invades and maybe even makes up the
imaginary, but it also isn’t just me. It gets at me, you, the youser, from
outside. It gets at us from the heat map.
    Note that Chun points out that software allows us to generate end-
less cognitive maps. She is here pointing out that software fills in a
broken mapping function that Jameson had included as a key aspect
of his definition of postmodernism. For Jameson, postmodernism was
characterized by “cool affect” offset from modernist fervor and the
rise of pastiche over parody. But it was also an aesthetic regime of a
“global,” technological phase of capitalism. If modernism, starting in
the early modern period, had mapped the world—think of the Mercator
projection—Jameson pointed out that now a “third dimension of car-
tography” had emerged, “which at once involves what we would today
call the nature of representational codes, the intrinsic structures of the
various media, the intervention, into more naive mimetic conceptions
of mapping, of the whole new fundamental question of the languages of
                              Poetic Ideology                            191

representation Itself.” This new form of cognitive mapping forestalls the
very possibility of a “true map,” because it requires “the coordination of
existential data (the empirical position of the subject) with unlived, ab-
stract conceptions of the geographic totality.”34 Chun is suggesting that
software in general pullulates such maps, not making them more true
but fractally exponentiating the ideological surface of postmodern cul-
ture. These maps take all their values from the interaction of the imagi
nary and the symbolic, which, in its autonomy, expands the realm of
“ideology” past the point where we can follow it visually, intuit it, see it.
   Jameson closed his 1984 essay on postmodernism with the claim that
a “political postmodernism” would “have as its vocation the invention
and projection of a global cognitive mapping, on a social as well as a spa-
tial scale.”35 Welcome to the desert of generative AI, which fulfills exactly
this function, but as ideology, not by politicizing the mapping problem
but by making it statistically available. We might think of this as supra-
cognitive mapping, the extension beyond the known forms of predigested
content and the surprise that generation prepares for us, its uncanny
effects and its banalities all in one. What is extended beyond cognition,
as we have seen, is culture—computational-linguistic culture.
   The automation of language is the hinge that extends culture beyond
cognitive mapping but reintroduces mapping function we cannot see.
Conspiracy theory takes root in this precise junction, which is both an
opportunity and a danger. The opportunity resides in being able to scan
the ideological surround and see how it is made up empirically. The dan-
ger is in the knitting together of a new totalizing system out of that
ideology that becomes immediately invisible. This book has been an at-
tempt to capture the opportunity in the knowledge that the risk is al-
ready well on its way to fruition. LLMs launch us out of postmodernism
with this supracognitive mapping, but the extent to which this happens
on terms that we make any sense of is wide open for the moment. For us
to cope, we need to move beyond the idea of ideology as a “condition” (a
transcendental notion) and to see that it is expression, ideology in exten-
sion (and in development). This makes an “unmappable” region into a
partly empirical object, as representation systems capture and generate
representation as such.
   If ideology is deceit, LLMs capture that deceit, because they map it
in its rough totality. They thus realize a function of ideology critique
of which Chun saw the kernel in software as such, but at a much larger
192                          Poetic Ideology


scale. Recall that Baudrillard told us that the truth was on the surface,
not at depth. Disneyland is the truth, not a veil that “ideology critique”
can simply pierce. Baudrillard agrees, at least on this local point, with
Adorno, who famously wanted to capture the truth of the falsity that is
ideology. The worker subjected to the culture industry cannot somehow
“realize” that he is watching the very machine protocols that trap him
in his job, and break free of those bounds. We cannot flex and bust out
of ideology, which is not a negative condition we might understand but
a semiotic surround in which we live, move, and have our being.
    Adorno famously thought of ideology as the “truth and the untruth”
of the “totally administered world.”36 It revealed as much as it hid and
provided—despite Adorno’s personal taste for high art—a point of entry
through which we see social functions as conditioning us. LLMs have
revealed this two-way street, manifesting Adorno’s commitment to the
consubstantiality of ideology, art, and social form in the computational
totalization of language as such. They thus offer an unprecedented view
into the linguistic makeup of ideology. There has never before been a
system that allows us to generate and then examine “what is near what”
in political semantics. But they do not, on their own, generate any such
insights. They only pinpoint pressurized areas of the symbolic register.
    Adorno writes that we can speak of ideology only when “something
spiritual [Geistiges, “mental”] stands out from the social process with its
own claim to truth, independent and substantial.”37 This fits with Chun’s
notion that something “immaterial” asserts itself with respect to its al-
leged origin in the economic base or the hardware of the system. The
“untruth” of this ideology, Adorno points out, can only be gained at
the price of the “disavowal of the social ground” from which it comes.38
In other words, to say that something is false because it is ideology is to
explain away the very power that it patently possesses. The equally valid
“truth moment” of that self-asserting spirit is the very independence it
actually has, the mysterious power that attaches to the stickiest parts
of our social-representational systems. “Today,” Adorno writes, the “sig-
nature of ideologies is more the absence of this independence” than it is
the deceit that the claim to that independence creates.39 What Adorno
is saying is that ideology, deceitful in its essential makeup, has shed
“trickery” as its most prominent feature and freed itself from the need
to deceive in order to function.40 If this can be true only because the
                            Poetic Ideology                           193

world is “totally administered,” then we might think of Adorno’s claim
as a symbolization claim: draped upon our very sense of reality is a cloak
of words so thick that truth and untruth cannot be distinguished. No
cognitive map is possible.
    For Adorno, at least one answer lies in art, as redemption lay in the
avant-garde for Greenberg. For Adorno, this is because art “seeks to aid
the nonidentical,” so it compels us to recognize the form of ideology.
Culture more generally falls on the side of identity, covering up the
seams.41 Art therefore includes historical articulation in itself “dialec-
tically,” making up an “aesthetic force of production” that receives the
sediment or “imprintings of the social relations of production.”42 Art
does not “lie,” whereas industry, cultural or otherwise, does. They thus
take on self-asserted reality, but not as ideology.
    As lovely as this account of the revelatory capacities of art—which I
would hardly want to deny—is, I do not think it answers to the purpose
to which Adorno sets it. This is because the access point to some holis-
tic sense of what does and does not work, function smoothly, run on
machinic lines, convince us of already-powerful truths, may come from
art, for me or you. But this insight—Enlightenment without deception,
in Adorno’s jargon—cannot scale.
    LLM systems put the cognitive map back in play, but not for us. They
make the dialectic of social form, machine, and aesthetics computa-
tional, expressing what is held in transcendence in our theories, and
what Adorno and Greenberg hope to transcend in aesthetic experience.
In doing so, they certainly push toward “identity” as they run, but then
they also disidentify, as in generative fills and semantic packages, which
can surprise us in their proximity to the self-understood. But it is the
nonidentity of redundancy that they reproduce at scale, the propor-
tion between the whole and the part, language as such and the articu
lation of some set of messages. What if an updated dialectics is not
exactly negative, not exactly aesthetic, but the conceptual development
of the computation–language interface? Without Adorno’s insistence
on the identity (and nonidentity) of the machine, culture, art, and the
social, we cannot see what ideology is, as deceit, “falsehood as the index
of truth and falsehood,” in Adorno’s playful reversal of Spinoza.43 But
there is no redemption in artistic form here. The thin line of insight
depends on how much we make of AI. Rather than competing with it,
194                          Poetic Ideology


attempting to “outdo” it in our creations or our remaindered humanism,
our only choice is to use its ideological capture to our advantage.
    Language has entered the phase of its computational reproducibility,
and this gives us tools to access regions of representation both banal and
fantastical. There is no question that industry will not use these tools
for exploration of these regions, but if we can let slip the transcendental
models of ideology and see generative AI as an expressive totality of
ideology, we can perhaps gain insight—capture the generated. That un-
derstanding must accompany us as we enter a world in which language
is a service.
Conclusion
Language as a Service, or the Return of Rhetoric

AI will not kill us all. The thought experiments that suggest otherwise
have so far proven so much unimaginative science fiction, sheep
in wolf’s mathematics. But there is a threat, as the media historian
Matthew Kirschenbaum has argued. He writes, “What if, in the end, we
 are done in not by intercontinental ballistic missiles or climate change,
 not by microscopic pathogens or a mountain-size meteor, but by . . .
 text?”1 Global civilizations have run on writing as bureaucracy, skill,
 and content for millennia. The “textpocalypse” would deliver a “crisis of
 never-ending spam” in which every text would have to be verified some-
 how, exponentially increasing compute demand and/or sending each
 citizen into an abyss of uncertainty. Complaints of the “pollution of the
 internet” and “enshittification” (in critic Cory Doctorow’s coinage) now
 abound, suggesting that Kirschenbaum was on the right track.
     Misinformation does not begin to capture the depths to which such
 a scenario could sink, which resembles something like K’s situation in
 Kafka’s The Castle, wherein a wall of files prevents him not just from
 reaching the castle but from knowing if there is any authority in it at all.
 When he finally arrives in the file room, fighting for his life, he despair-
 ingly asks the clerk if there are specific offices devoted to verifying the
 files, to which the clerk responds, “There are only verification offices!”
 The information society threatens to become a hall of mirrors.
     I close this book by arguing that language, as both poetic and ideo-
 logical generation, is on offer “as a service.” I do not go quite so far as
 Kirschenbaum, because I think our textual future is banal, not apoca-
 lyptic. But the effects of generation might well be civilizational nonethe-
 less, as writing suffers the same fate as computation, separated between
 material labor—w riting—and discovery, further divorcing language as
 a cultural system from any cognitive core we would want it to reflect.
 The result, I argue, is the return of rhetoric as a system of training, a
 cognitive-cultural technique, just as it was for nearly two millennia.


                                    195
196                            Conclusion


Only now it is also computational, requiring not just a general poet-
ics but a new kind of humanistic training. The media condition of the
present is now firmly past remainder humanism, even if our theories
have not kept pace. All that remains beyond this end, then, is the open
question of a real humanism in the overlap between platform capitalism
and computational culture generation.


Language as a Service and the Labor of Writing
We do not yet possess a vocabulary that isolates the “labor” of writing
from its “management.” The industrial metaphor for mathematics origi-
nated in the French Revolution and gained a foothold because of Charles
Babbage, who imagined “computing” for the first time as the “manual”
labor within the intellectual work of mathematical reasoning. There are,
of course, local contexts—legal drafting, script writing with its “treat-
ments” and “scriptments”—in which language for this separation ex-
ists.2 But this vocabulary is not yet widely naturalized. For that reason,
language “as a service” describes a feature of platform capitalism that
feels like a reversal. Where Nick Srnicek has shown how platforms and
their data monopolies have made industrial products like jet engines
into “services,” LLMs dematerialize the already immaterial. Suddenly
the very synthesis of meaning as such comes in packages, instantly de-
livered not just for bureaucracy but also for financial decisions, the flow
of information, and global logistics. As LLMs ingest nonlinguistic data,
they will do so by means of the language I have described in the preceding
chapters. We have long thought in the theoretical humanities that the
“symbolic order” is “autonomous.” But when it becomes computational,
we tend to retract this commitment. We must actually accept its com-
putational autonomy at the level of theory if we are to understand and
critique its extensive, indeed ubiquitous, use in the age of the new AI.
    The API feels deceptive at the moment of writing. When I say
“ChatGPT,” for most people, the little flickering line appears before
the mind’s eye, “typing” out each next word. Maybe the web is already
flooded with text generated by this system—and mostly, for now, ed-
ited by humans. The deep panic that ChatGPT has touched off among
university administrators suggests that texts never meant for publica-
tion may be “artificial” in great quantity now and going forward. The
fear that students will forget how to write, and not learn to write, is a
                                Conclusion                               197

fear of deskilling, not dissimilar from the worry that children would
forget how or never learn to write by hand in the oncoming digital age.
AI is always described as the only possible solution for the problems
that AI causes, perhaps because the only way to navigate our increas-
ingly computational culture is what I called supracognitive mapping in the
last chapter. AI is not a solution, but it is a reality, and we cannot afford
to remain in a resistance stance to it as it becomes a general-purpose
technology (the other “GPT”) for global capitalism today.
    As the models get more flexible, and perhaps smaller, one can imag-
ine a world in which they are embedded in our software such that I can
draft with them easily. I should have many, not one. The email LLM will
adopt my professional tone. My research LLM will be trained on papers
I select as desirable to imitate and on my own writing (mixed mode as
it will become). My grant applications, book proposals, memos in of-
fices, legalese around all things bureaucratic, can already come mostly
off the shelf from the API. But if personalization has been a trend, and
embedding in software another, we should see the rise of generative
services widely, along with their disappearance into the seamlessness
of smooth, banal presentation. My one worry about Kirschenbaum’s
“textpocalypse” is that it will disappear faster than we can notice it.
The anomalies will cause trouble, but we will press on, failing to read
the text before us.
    Deskilling always means automation, but we imagine automation
wrongly when we think of it as replacing humans. LLMs are finally ful-
filling the prophecy of cybernetics: where the Industrial Revolution au-
tomated the work of the arm, the digital revolution would automate the
tasks of the brain. But automation is never complete. It spits new, lesser
work out the sides of the machine, contributing to a general devaluation
of labor and making the shape of capital and society unsustainable.3
As Marx pointed out, the steam engine put two new kinds of work in
the factory: Handlanger, boys who shoveled coal into the engine’s fur-
nace for twelve and fourteen hours a day, and attendants, women who
once sewed or operated a loom and who now roamed about the factory
floor checking that the army of looms did not stop the machine. It is not
accidental that these roles upended social identities—neither women
nor children were acceptable “workers”—until regulation came.4 The
women on the floor here resemble nothing so much as the employees at
the automatic checkout line at the pharmacy or the grocery store today.
198                             Conclusion


What should alleviate drudgery is given in too great a volume, so that
this figure must phrenetically tend to dozens of customers at once, key-
ing in codes to override machine misunderstandings. Work gets worse,
and more intense, when automation occurs. This attending function—
tending to the attention mechanism—probably describes the future of
the paralegal, the script writer, and others who toil in the factory
of writing. But it also describes what it will be to “code.” LLMs are good
enough at coding already to do away with the lowest level, but not with
the attendant. A skeleton crew of intellectual labor will soon oversee a
faster conveyor belt of production, realizing in the most literal terms
what Adorno called the “aesthetic mode of production.”
    The provisioning of written language in this way can be thought of as
“language as a service” (and “code as a service”). We often hear now of the
“as-a-service-ification” of the economy, as seemingly everything comes
unbundled as independent software packages. Srnicek points, for exam-
ple, to the platform economy model that Boeing uses to sell jet engines
“as a service,” converting the commodity from engine to digital system.
The engine itself is more or less rented, in this case, while what is actually
sold is the proprietary software, including service and repairs. Renting
protects the code and the data of the selling company, while significantly
altering the landscape of what counts as a commodity in heavy industry.5
This trend inverts the sense of what is going on in commodity exchange,
suggesting that one buys not the material worked up but the imprint
on that material, the design, the intellectual property, the “immaterial”
aspect of the commodity that “asserts its independence.” This inversion
literalizes what Marx called the “fetishism of the commodity,” the attri-
bution of independent value and agency to the things that move through
the economy. This is, of course, ideology—the belief in the power of ideas
beyond their social origins. That these “ideas” are now commodities only
brings the two Marxian insights, ideology and fetishism, concretely to-
gether. LLMs offer ideology as a service.
    As we saw, Adorno predicted that ideology would stop masquerad-
ing as the truth, admit its dialectical deception, and continue along
smoothly in technicized capitalism. It is hard to see any fault lines
in this analysis. LLMs make utterly patent that commodities are just
as much “ideas” as they are physical objects and extend the point to
cover the commodification of ideas. They do this because, rather than
working the idea into a material—the dream of the 3-D printer—they
                                  Conclusion                                  199




Figure 16. “The Shop Floor of a Textile Factory Running on Steam,” from
Andrew Ure’s The Philosophy of Manufacture. Image from Andrew Ure, The
Philosophy of Manufactures; or, An Exposition of the Scientific, Moral, and Com-
mercial Economy of the Factory System of Great Britain /Andrew Ure, Reprints
of Economic Classics (New York: A. M. Kelley, 1967).


work up the idea itself in its own medium. They thus reveal the essence of
“intellectual labor” in a previously unheard-of way.
    The apostate Frankfurt School member Alfred Sohn-Rethel stretched
the idea of the fetishism of commodities over the whole of thought, ar-
guing that the portion of labor touched by the intellect infected the
intellect itself. Exchange, he tried to show, was the transcendental gov-
ernor of thinking.6 This provocation resulted in his famous notion of
“real abstraction,” a way of thinking of the staying power of ideology,
its ability to maintain force despite its “deceitful” origins. The point
of the separation between manual and intellectual labor ceases, in
this framework, to be about the inequality of work—which certainly
persists—and becomes a matter of seeing how the intellect is within,
not without, the process of capital. Again, we see a perhaps exaggerated
critical point made utterly literal by the advent of culturally generative
AI. We need not search for points at which to find the abstraction in
its reality, the commodity’s control of its own narrative. Abstraction is
generated, narrative is produced, and both—just like the jet engine—
are sold as services.
    We do not have language yet for this twist in our plot. When I
write, I am writing. The first word that comes to mind when I think
about what an LLM might do for me in writing is “draft.” After all, we
200                             Conclusion


“generate” a draft of something. But when I draft, I am writing. Even
if my first draft is just notes cobbled together, the cobbling is putting
one word after the other, making words that represent ideas only to me
into sequences of communicable language. But this process involves
my whole spiritual apparatus—t he “blank page” problem, wherein one
struggles to begin to write, can be overcome only by writing. It is a full-
body, full-mind process. It requires the full extent of the mind’s ca-
pacity for synthesis. Writing engages me; I write by absorption in the
generative matrix.
    If we split the labor from the management of writing, we will need
language for that. Some candidates exist, but it is unclear if they will
take the throne as the terms for this transition. In legal jargon, drafting
is not a full-body/full-mind engagement; it is the lining up of the cor-
rect items of precedent in the highly constrained performative speech
of the law. This model of separating the personnel of drafting from the
boss who sets the goal, the strategy, and the formula exists without hav-
ing any fixed terminology in C-suites everywhere. Another candidate is
ghostwriting, in which the labor is split from the “writer,” often also the
subject of the writing, like a Warhol in the Factory. Perhaps the most in-
tricate version of this separation is the idea of a “treatment” of a movie
idea in Hollywood. A treatment is presented in the manner of a short
story, with the narrative on scene cards (in the present tense), so that
not only the idea but also the beginning of the breakdown of the nar-
rative arc become clear, which begins to give an idea of the production.
Following the treatment, a successful idea gets a “scriptment,” which
translates the story into the formal status of the script. These formali
zations probably exist elsewhere too, but I doubt that we will soon talk
about “scriptments” when we use our LLMs. Maybe drafting, with its
manual-labor metaphorical origins, will win out while shifting seman-
tically. To draft is to pull, as in to make a straight line, creating tension
in a yoke or a rope. I can draft words into this sentence, perhaps.
    Even if the language is unclear, there is one dominant precedent for
this process: computation itself. To compute, the word Alan Turing chose
to use for his thought experiment about universal machines, means
the laborious part of doing math. It has meant this since the French
Revolution, when the new government divided the work of mathemat-
ics between three offices. As Charles Babbage, the designer of the first
                               Conclusion                              201

general-purpose computer (which remained in blueprint), recounts,
“In the midst of that excitement which accompanied the Revolution of
France . . . the French government was desirous of producing a series of
mathematical tables, which should facilitate the extension of the deci
mal system they had so recently adopted.”7 Their “most distinguished
philosophers . . . invented new methods for this laborious task.”8 They
divided the work between three sections. The first section was “to in-
vestigate, amongst the various analytical expressions which could be
found for the same function, that which was most readily adapted to
simple numerical calculation by many individuals employed at the same
time. This section had little or nothing to do with the actual numerical
work.”9 The second section was possessed of “considerable acquaintance
with mathematics: and their duty was to convert into numbers the for-
mulae put into their hands by the first section”10—creating mathemat-
ical middle management before the rise of middle management itself!11
The third section “received certain numbers from the second section,
and, using nothing more than simple addition and subtraction, they re-
turned to that section the finished tables.”12 Babbage notes that “it is
remarkable that nine-tenths of this class had no knowledge of arithme-
tic beyond its two first rules.”13 Where Adam Smith’s division of labor
initially fell into the organizers and the performers of that labor, bosses
and workers, Babbage cribbed a tripartite structure from the French
Revolution—a structure meant to spread the decimal system—and con-
verted it into the notion of a “computer.”
    As historians of computing have widely documented, these “comput-
ers” came to be women, and the “labor” of mathematics was feminized.14
This is why the first coders were women, as has become well known in
recent years, before the prestige of computing was grabbed back by a
male labor force. It was the “manual” labor of mathematics that was au-
tomated after the Second World War, the part of mathematics in which
numbers are added and subtracted, in which the answer to the problem
7 + 5 becomes 12. This work came to be called “computing” over time, and
Turing’s use of that verb (over his adviser Alonzo Church’s “calculate”)
was determinative. Babbage explicitly designed his analytical engine to
do this type of work—and it was work, labor, divided. As his protégé
and designer of the first algorithm meant to run on a computing ma-
chine, Ada Lovelace, described it, the automation allowed the machine
202                            Conclusion


to “weave algebraical patterns.”15 It took about a century for this notion
of labor to become naturalized as “computing.”
    Downstream from computation and computers as terms that capture the
labor end of mathematical reasoning is the noun compute. This relatively
strange noun probably elides computing power, but it is an instructive mor-
pheme. We hear now, in a world where terabytes fly back and forth and
the scale of data rises to unfathomable levels, of “how much compute” is
available, a necessary calculation for tasks like training LLMs.
    Compute is the amount of computation needed or supplied, how much
processing stands to be done. When we face down a day of writing emails,
research, memos, and so on, perhaps we would do well to think of write
as a finite amount of generation we can take on in a given time. Cer-
tainly LLMs first and foremost function to extend that power. And if
that extension comes primarily because banal emails and memos can
be automated, leaving me with time to write sentences and paragraphs
like the ones you are reading, then Babbage’s vision will come to a cer-
tain fruition. For here, rather than overseeing a research assistant, I
would externalize the “manual” forms of writing while internalizing
an algorithmic procedure for carrying out the act of writing. Language
as a service does this double work. The write for the day is potentially
extended quantitatively without the intensity rising. So soon as the ab-
solute amount of write accrues to the mental laborer’s advantage, how-
ever, a great deal more writing will be foisted on each worker, leading
to precisely that “intensification of the working day” that Marx saw as
one of the few strategies capital could use to gain relatively more surplus
value given fixed hours of work.16 But of course, writers do not work
fixed hours—and this fight is coming, for the balance of mental labor
in a world of writing to which one attends, as the machine attends to
the relationship of the next word to context. Predictions of the “prole-
tarianization” of knowledge workers only now are threatening truly to
be fulfilled.
    We might say that intellectual labor is here really subsumed under
capital, where it was only formally subsumed previously. Marx made
this important distinction between the imposition of the wage and the
centralization of work in the factory, which “formally” subjects labor to
capital but does not yet allow capital to dictate how labor is really per-
formed. The machine factory, building on the division of labor, “really”
subsumed labor under capital, because it removed the worker’s relation-
                               Conclusion                              203

ship to work itself. This is now happening not to the arm but to the
brain, to culture.
    Another way to put this is that one point is about the internalization
of the algorithm in the spiritual process of writing and thinking, what
Kleist had in mind in his dialogic model of the generation of thinking.
The other point is about the externalization of the order of abstrac-
tion from the human and the internalization of manual and intellec-
tual labor in the process of capital in the platform era. These inversions
are only possible because of the implementation of LLMs, because the
capture–generate dialectic is open to computational activation.
    In Gramophone Film Typewriter, Kittler argues that the analog media
externalized the three registers of Lacan, as we saw in the introduction
to this book.17 The gramophone, setting needle to wax and reproducing
waves of sound, invaded the realm of Real, sending subterranean sig-
nals upward that we nevertheless fail to know. The film began with the
partition of images and reality and produced a false sense of continuity,
tricking the eye into scanning a bit of world that seemed transported to
it and, for the first time, alive, registered.18 This revolution in imaging
changed the very sense of self that Lacan called the “Imaginary,” the
way in which self fits into world, the feeling of reality. The typewriter
got short shrift, literally. The section on the typewriter moves rather
quickly to the rise of the computer, which Kittler polemically sees as
an extension of the humble writing machine. The passage is important,
though, because it underscores the problem of computing in general.
Where the automation of sound felt like the loosening of fundamen-
tal reality, and the film electrified minds and built “new subjects,” the
typewriter “externalized” something that was never internal in the first
place. Writing is the essence of the external; it is that language that
cannot be “excluded” from language but that is not “ours.”19 Automat-
ing it cannot possibly be as simple as “externalizing” some previously
“human” thing.
    The typewriter laid out the symbolic order for English in the form of
QWERTY. Up to the invention of the printing press, the alphabet ex-
isted primarily as a socially held web, an order written down on pages
but somehow held in common, a social valuation. The press external-
ized the alphabet in a standardized form. The typewriter—and this
is Kittler’s point—made writing a deployment of the alphabet rather
than retrieval through imagination and memory.20 When the atoms
204                             Conclusion


of language, its stoichea, were plunked down on the keyboard, the al-
ready social symbolic order was fused with a mechanism. For Kittler,
the computer rendered the “writing” no longer a matter of meaning
whatsoever. As Kittler himself puts it, “the symbolic now encompasses
linguistic signs in their materiality and technicity. That is to say, letters
and ciphers form a finite set without taking into account philosophi-
cal dreams of infinity.”21 His famous “antihermeneutic” stance suggests
that the media had their own protocols, and the cashout was the com-
puter, which neither knew nor cared what the content it carried along
its channels meant.
    Generation remediates computation as language. In the general out
cry we are currently hearing about how LLMs do not “understand” what
they generate, we should perhaps pause to note that computers don’t
“understand” computation either. But they do it, as Turing proved.
And generation does language, severing the relationship between un-
derstanding and generation, but also reintroducing language to the
problem of computation. Perhaps both processes were always in play:
generation and language are not ipso facto understood. Capture is a
potential mode of generation but not its necessary consequence in any
given location. The essence of language is not understanding. But on the
other hand, language has always accompanied computation, as I have al-
ready argued. The relative isolation of computation in the first phase of
the digital might seem a curiosity in a matter of a decade or two. The
fusion of language and computation houses a much longer history in
which the new AI is a crucial, but still only one, chapter. It is a chapter
that will shift the way civilization runs on textual rails, something that
became gradually truer and truer over millennia but now threatens to
become independent. We got ourselves there, of course, but we should not
overestimate our ability to exit the situation or the extent to which our
contribution—a ll that written language, at a minimum—g ives us say
over the direction of history.
    LLMs have at least two separate features that all previous writing
did not. First, they have access to a near-total extensive set of token-
combinations, what I have been calling the n = all function of language
as such. This expands the “externalized” symbolic system far beyond
the low dimensionality of the QWERTY keyboard. But the keyboard is
fixed and only becomes dynamic when I plunk the keys. When the al-
gorithm internalizes this separate function—the poetic function—it
                               Conclusion                              205

externalizes a form of writerly synthesis, only to turn around and offer
it to me as a draft, a possible text. As personalization proceeds, this
externalization will feel like internalization. The remediated computer
is not “the misuse of military equipment,” as Kittler puts it.22 It is the
dialectical revenge of language itself on its alleged masters, humans.
    A final point: computationally reproducible language is “generative”
in the sense that the reproduction can never be a copy. This capacity fits
seamlessly into the semiotic platform economy.
    It has long felt as though Western Marxism was correct to attend
to the role of ideology in our market societies. But it has also felt as
though this notion of ideology could not be firmly attached to the eco-
nomic processes that Marx called the “base” and marked as themselves
autonomously patterned and determinative. In the previous chapter, I
argued that a “transcendental” theory of ideology that sees it as govern-
ing discourse can never succeed. But it is not just the theory that should
be changed in a world where language is a service. It is rather that LLMs
and their ilk transform the expression of ideology, not just its syntax
but also its semantics.
    The connection between base and superstructure is materialized in
logistical systems implemented on the data platforms. “Platform” means
data + machine learning. Generative AI completes the first stage of the
platform economy, because it realizes a fusion that Amazon—for exam-
ple, but above all—set out to perform in the 1990s, that is, the fusion of
meaning and logistics in the process of capitalization. The consequences
are at once obvious and mysterious as we struggle to make sense of our
economic world in terms patently unfit for that understanding. Bench-
marks of growth and inflation become garbled in an economy that is
closing in on running on capture and generation.
    The so-c alled Solow paradox states that the digital era is visible
everywhere except the productivity statistics. That is because the digi-
tal is a representational environment, and even information economics
lacks a real sense of the “aesthetic mode of production.” Language and
computation are not growth industries; they can reassign and shuffle
values, with massive consequences, but they are not values themselves.
Economically, we are living in a system in which valuation is system-
atically mistaken for value. Generative AI will make this “paradox”
infrastructural, and we will eventually get used to it. An externalized
write function reinternalized as part of capitalization will do nothing
206                             Conclusion


to change that. But it will literalize the alternative vision of the relation
between meaning and value that critical theory has done the most to
put on the map over the last century. That vision isn’t a solution; it’s
a concept that is really in development and that LLMs bring to a new
stage of concreteness, momentarily visible but—as all such processes—
quickly receding into the background.
    Language as a service will be a crucial aspect of the platform economy
going forward, and it should push the problem of platform semiotics
into the—faded—foreground. The button icons that allow us to com-
mand labor, the clicks and the reading that are quickly being converted
into the consumption of “artificial” text, will make a static system even
faster. The big tech platforms, operating data centers of breathtaking ex-
tent in unprecedented ways, whirl data around in the widening gyre, but
they don’t do much else. When language is a service, capital must run
on data-semiotic pathways. Those pathways will always be partly visible,
but the momentary visibility of the poetry-to-ideology spectrum that is
being seeded in this crucial moment in our economic-cultural process
will surely disappear. This book has been an attempt to fight the coming
obscurity of the synthesis of language and computation.


Computation and the Return of Rhetoric
Mathematics and language are basics of our education. They are skills
we learn, both informally and in the classroom. But they are also media,
the most human of all the media. One thrust of my argument here has
been to try to put them on relatively even ground. I have sought to avoid
privileging math as hard, complex, and powerful over a language that is
democratic and known. But equally, I have tried to argue that language
is as alien as it is intimate—perhaps Jacques Lacan’s portmanteau exti-
mate could be invoked. Language is not “human” where computation is
not. The way we view computation today is the achievement of the pe-
riod since the Industrial Revolution, which is united in one way around
the axis of the production of data and the devising of techniques, social
and technological, for processing those data. The writing-based civi-
lization of Europe gave way to a computationally enabled society. The
spread of capitalism by way of colonial and neocolonial methods was en-
abled by this computation, and contemporary geopolitics is unthinkable
                                 Conclusion                                207

without it. In this sense, the “division of mental labor” should be seen as
part and parcel of the industrial phase of society.
    But it is not enough to think of the globalization of industry with its
divided labor—intellectual and manual—as computational. The picture
that we saw at the beginning of this book of this computational society,
and have periodically visited throughout in Kittler’s idea of a “gramma-
tology” of computing in the present, is insufficient to understand the
twenty-first century. The question of “everyday” or natural language has
always dogged digital theory, as we have seen. But with deep learning,
a general challenge to the fundamentality of “computing” in Kittler’s
sense has emerged. In reality, this challenge was there all along. But
now, it is on the surface and in the algorithm. It is the rise of a truly
cultural technology, AI. I have argued in this book that we need a general
poetics to make sense of the meaning that this technology makes by
engaging systems of representation. We will also have to make sense of
its reintroduction of rhetoric.
    The discipline and practice of rhetoric was, as John Guillory has re-
cently put it, a “total program of cognitive-linguistic training, whose parts,
though conceptually distinct, were thoroughly interconnected in the
actual rhetorical practice of the premodern world.”23 For about a mil-
lennium, from the Carolingian Empire to the Enlightenment, the
Latin language was the channel through which bureaucracy and power
flowed. And access to Latin, which no one spoke natively, was a matter
of induction into the rhetorical regime. To learn rhetoric was to learn
composition and communication, memory and writing. And to produce
writing, one needed the “common places”—often literal topoi or fixed
phrases, options for communication. As literary critic Yohei Igarashi
has observed, LLMs seem to be producing a new set of such topoi, an
idea that runs close to my notion of semantic packages from the pre-
vious chapter.24 To learn a set of semifixed phrases for recombination
with the dual goal of producing clear communication for sacred and
mundane power of creating poetry sounds very much like the function
that LLMs perform. To combine these with the intensive memory tech-
niques that came down from ancient Greece was the goal of rhetoric.
But this cognitive training, as Guillory notes, has become defunct. The
written civilization of rhetoric slowly died over the period of industri-
alization from the eighteenth century to the present. If a new culture
208                           Conclusion


of machine-generated topoi emerges, it will be supracognitive, an ex-
tension of cultural techniques with a point of origin murkily divided
between human-produced data and their remixing in machine output.
It will be a rhetorical–computational complex.25
    As Igarashi notes, the common places were divided between analyti
cal topoi—argumentative shorthand, more or less—and “cumulative”
topoi, “prefabricated” phrases we use in common speech. He gives “it
was a dark and stormy night” and “once upon a time,” and we might
think of the recent controversy about the overuse of the word delve by
ChatGPT, or human versions of fixed phrases like “he got that dog in him”
(sports), or the popularity of certain jargon words in humanities writing
(“indexes,” “imbricates”). Such sequences are what Saussure originally
had in mind in his notion of the “syntagm,” a chunk of linear language
laid out and redeployable as a whole. Guillory argues that rhetor ic in
this form “depended on the binding together of its compositional and
performative functions.”26 Competence and performance were concen-
trated in the “total” cognitive training of the rhetorical regime.
    Rhetoric as it came down from ancient Greece was a technē, a formal
skill. Guillory proposes that it has been replaced with information. He
here joins a large group of speculators on the causes and consequences
of the end of the “old rhetoric.” Walter Ong influentially argues that the
Enlightenment encyclopedia augured the end of the need for cultural-
cognitive rhetoric, because information could be looked up, rather
than stored in the mind.27 The techniques of memory associated with
rhetoric in the ancient and medieval worlds indeed have become curios
with the steady production of ever-larger amounts of data of all kinds
over the last three hundred years.28 Ong’s notion of a “secondary oral-
ity,” in which features of spoken language are recorded in writing, is
separately premised on transmission technologies for language, from
the telegraph and the postcard to the text message and social media.
It seems likely that LLMs would have far less pragmatic ability if these
transformations had not taken place. A sort of casual rhetorical regime
has arisen with increasing speed over the last half century, populated by
Internet-specific transformations in language and paralinguistic signs,
like emojis and memes.29 The rhetorical–computational civilization we
face is an LLM-enabled extension or repackaging of the entire media
history of the postrhetorical era.
                                Conclusion                                209

    Ernst Robert Curtius, the great literary critic, presented the rhetori-
cal system as the object for literary studies in his influential European Lit-
erature and the Latin Middle Ages in 1948, that fateful year of information
theory. Perhaps Curtius was nostalgic, in the immediate aftermath of
the Second World War, for a Europe united in some common culture. (He
had previously mainly studied modern French literature.) He called the
“technical epoch” of modernism since the eighteenth century a period of
“progress” that had actually led to the unleashing of “forces of destruc-
tion.”30 But to the extent that the computing data enabled the creation
of those forces, and the modern computer came from that very nexus of
science and global war, those forces of destruction would, over the course
of the next century, reactivate rhetoric on computational rails.
    Three trajectories crash together in the LLM: the data-gathering
“information society,” which relies on statistics above all to make plain
sense of its social circumstances—what Ian Hacking calls the “avalanche
of numbers” starting in the 1830s; the automation of computation, also
with primitive origins in the 1830s and 1840s, in Charles Babbage’s and
Ada Lovelace’s creation of the universal computer and the modern al-
gorithm, but industrially unrealized until Turing’s discovery of the
“machine” that underlies all computation and von Neumann’s implemen-
tation of a version of that machine—the only one to date—in physical
components; and the passage of rhetoric from cognitive training to an
open-ended and ill-defined “culture” of communication, including its
technical devices. If “rhetoric” was the name for training in the Middle
Ages, it, like “culture” and “literature,” became a name for the stuff out
there in the world—words on pages or on screens, books made of words,
genres in the modern period. The LLM is an inverted world of rhetoric
in which the rules of composition are not an elegant, five-step process
going from discovery of an idea to the performance of the text but a stan-
dardized reflection of the Babel that “culture” was after rhetoric, the vast
extent of human language production in concreto. When language is mod-
eled, this rhetorical culture is its face. The language machine presents us
with a truly “new” rhetoric, a computational one.
    The twentieth century saw intermittent attempts to make art “ex-
perimental,” from Dada to surrealism to L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E poetry
to computer-aided literary production. But it is not the rarefied world of
the avant-garde that is now algorithmically reproducible. It is language
210                             Conclusion


as a total cultural form, yet devoid of human cognition. This extensive
version of culture, which of course will now feed back into our cognition,
is, for the first time in history, experimentally available to us.
    Two senses of experimentation are active in these systems going for-
ward. We may use them to create new definitions, formal and otherwise,
of culture, literature, images, just as scientists hope to use them to know
proteins, genetics, and the cosmic background radiation better than
they have. They are also unintentional social experiments, risks that we
have accidentally taken.
    Aristotle’s definition of rhetoric is heuresis (Latin inventio), from heu-
risko, “I find, discover.” AI is the large-scale process of fucking around
and finding out, mixing contingency and generation. For Aristotle,
that which could be known with certainty fell under the discipline of
dialectics—the second branch of the trivium. But when we think about
“what might be or not be,” we combine generation and probability in a
way that produces whatever actually happens, history. As Barthes puts
it, rhetoric is a “deliberately diminished logic, one adapted to the level
of the ‘public,’ i.e. of common sense, or ordinary opinion. . . . It would
be well-suited to our so-called mass culture, in which an Aristotelian
probability prevails.”31 Barthes extends this to literature—“ how many
films, pulp novels, commercial articles might take as their motto the
Aristotelian rule: ‘better an impossible probability than an improbable
possibility’ ”—but we are forced to extend it to society itself, which re-
veals the dialectic of language and the social in the surfacing of a quan-
titative rhetoric that cares little for common sense or public opinion.
The probabilistic society, or the heuristic society, is founded on the dia-
lectics of social and linguistic form, which are dependent on the conver-
gence of computation and language. The study of this new rhetoric will
require merging literary and computational paradigms in education,
mixing the trivium and the quadrivium just as they have been mixed in
reality today. The resulting discipline is what I have in this book called
a general poetics, which would have no truck with nonsense buzzwords
like “misinformation” or the “pollution of the Internet.” Too much of our
reaction to technology is based on the ladder of reference—we suddenly
want inhumanly right systems where we have created an unfathomably
large, polythematically sublime culture both rhetorical and computa-
tional at once.
                               Conclusion                                 211

   I have insisted throughout this book that intelligence and cognition
can be addressed only once we have secure semiotic ground on which
to walk. So I close with a note on where I think we might begin to build
the bridge.
   Barthes points out that Aristotle’s dialectics is based on

   a division of unity according to natural articulations, according to
   its types, down to indivisible species. This “descent” proceeds in
   steps: at each stage, on each step, there are two terms; one must
   be chosen over the other in order to take the next step down and
   accede to a new binary opposition, from which the descent will
   continue. This divisional rhetoric—as opposed to Aristotle’s syl-
   logistic rhetoric—closely resembles a cybernetic, digital program:
   each choice determines the next alternative; or again, it resembles
   the paradigmatic structure of language, whose binary oppositions
   involve a marked and an unmarked term: here the marked sets up
   a new alternation.32

As I have tried to argue throughout this book, the opening of this
dialectical-c ybernetic system to a probabilistic interpretation has more
fully realized structuralist ideas than Barthes could possibly have an-
ticipated. What he sees as “paradigmatic” has become a denser web that
includes syntagms, deriving a quasi-natural language from the poetic
function and spreading it out into ideology, making up a new rhetoric.
The “dichotomous” aspect of structuralism tended to drown out the
problem of the totality in Saussure’s differential hypothesis.
    Hito Steyerl has recently written that deep learning systems “im-
personate fake totalities, based on the average mass of trawled data.”33
But what is a “fake” totality? The locally incorrect, immoral, or other-
wise suspicious elements of AI outputs do not respond to this subdia
lectical theory. There is no “real totality” except by a supposition we
cannot avoid. (I believe this is what Lacan means by the “Real.”) Mathe
matics and language do not get along without both invoking that real
totality, and data add to the totality itself—becoming a factor in the
world, rather than “just” a representation—even as they refer to it. “In-
telligence” must have the feature of being able to isolate both symbolic
systems and the sense of value that leads to the affective rejection of
212                              Conclusion


“wrong” conclusions (which, when made into a theory, is what I have
called remainder humanism). To unite both of those is to have a cultural
ability, as Maniglier puts it, that is general. Call it general culture and its
machine counterpart GCI.
    As rhetoric arises again in machine form, we will surely have to train
our citizens to understand how to use language in computational set-
tings in new ways. Cultural production in general may point to this new
training, which—just like medieval rhetoric—sits at the intersection
of education, literature, and clerical work. General poetics would be the
critical study of these interlocking systems as they proliferate, backed
by a theory that tends to the semiotic forms of all of them. If we wish
to extend such a study of culture to the problem of cognition, I project
that this will require an update to dialectics as the immanent theory of
extensive cognition. That is a project for another day, not least because
so much meaning today generates without cognition in the loop, pooling
in the last instance only into human language.
Notes


Introduction
      1. Here I agree with Laura McGrath and her coauthors, who write, “Language
models like GPT-3 have attracted attention by mastering an immense repertoire
of forms, voices, and genres that they remix as requested. In truth, these models
encode not just language but culture.” McGrath et al., “Culture, Theory, Data,” 528.
      2. Throughout this book, I focus my interpretive efforts on the trained
model. This means that I have relatively little to say about reinforcement learning
with human feedback (RLHF) or on the qualitative nature of the training data set
(in chapter 6, there is a short reflection on this issue). This is because RLHF alone
does not produce the “fluidity” or the basic linguistic competence that I think is
most important about these systems. Their ability to model language as a code,
rather than as particular types of human speech, was clearly demonstrated by
systems like GPT-2 before any RLHF was added. I have more to say later about the
data than I do about fine-tuning of any kind, but this is for a different reason. I
do not think it is easy—or perhaps even possible—to characterize data sets with
billions or trillions of data points qualitatively. Two arguments about the data
seem insufficient to me because of this unsurveyability. The idea that whatever
the models does is “contaminated” by memorization of data does not really go
to my point here, because that question is almost entirely about “reasoning” and
“intelligence,” features I do not think LLMs possess. The notion that the data set
is skewed in some fundamental way that does not reflect human values might be
true for a sentimental view of those values on the part of some social scientists or
their counterparts in the AI wings of large platform companies but has no bearing
on the important question of how such a skew relates to social bias in language
more generally. Indeed, the fit between those “biases” might be taken as evidence
that these systems really capture our culture.
      3. I am not alone in thinking that structuralism is relevant in a new way in
the present. Ted Underwood has claimed that LLMs present us with the “empiri
cal triumph of theory.” Underwood, “Empirical Triumph of Theory.” Alexander
Galloway has argued in various places that structuralism in particular makes
sense of the way digital systems handle data; Juan Luis Gastaldi and Patrice
Maniglier have both claimed the relevance of this theory for learning systems.
Galloway, “Golden Age of Analog,” 211–32; Gastaldi, “Why Can Computers Un-
derstand Natural Language?,” 149–214; Maniglier, “Processing Cultures,” 145–72.
See also Tenen, who argues that structuralism helps to explain the “template
culture” that the long history of language modeling has created. The history of



                                        213
214                          Notes to Introduction

structuralism is also known to be tied to the history of cybernetics. Tenen, Liter-
ary Theory for Robots; see also Geoghegan, “From Information Theory to French
Theory,” 96–126; and Campolo and Schwerzmann, “From Rules to Examples.”
Lydia Liu’s claim that Derrida’s philosophy makes sense of Claude Shannon’s
work, and her excavation of Lacan, which I cite later, runs close to my concerns
here too. See Liu, Freudian Robot.
       4. OpenAI, “Better Language Models and Their Implications.”
       5. Guardian, “A Robot Wrote This Entire Article”; Weinberg, “Philosophers on
GPT-3.”
       6. Bubeck et al., “Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence.”
       7. A very helpful account of this difference can be found in Mackenzie,
Machine Learners, 21–51.
       8. Fodor, Language of Thought. Fodor’s critique of connectionism, the pre-
 decessor to deep learning, remains valid on several points, especially on what he
 calls “systematicity” and “compositionality.” But the medium of computation in
 LLMs is precisely language without thought. See Fodor and McLaughlin, “Connec-
 tionism and the Problem of Systematicity,” 183–204.
       9. It appears that unsemantic tokenization is more common in non-English
 languages, which reinforces the sense that these systems have a bias for English
 due to the disproportionate amount of that language on the internet.
     10. Harnad, “Symbol Grounding Problem,” 340.
     11. Harnad, 335–46.
     12. Browning and LeCun, “AI and the Limits of Language.”
     13. Piantadosi and Hill, in “Meaning without Reference,” argue that reference
 is only one kind of meaning, leveling a series of cases of such meaning against
 Bender’s and Koller’s arguments.
     14. Putnam, “Meaning of ‘Meaning.’ ”
     15. Mandelkern and Linzen, “Do Language Models’ Words Refer?”
     16. Mollo and Millière, “Vector Grounding Problem,” 19–20.
     17. Mollo and Millière, 21.
     18. Pavlick, “Symbols and Grounding.”
     19. Pavlick argues that LLMs in fact capture some features of formal seman-
 tics that are necessary for grounding.
     20. Frege and Beaney, Frege Reader.
     21. Neurath, “Scientific Conception of the World,” 306.
     22. Pavlick, “Semantic Structure in Deep Learning,” 447–71.
     23. Morris, Foundations of the Theory of Signs, 2.
     24. Levinson, Pragmatics.
     25. Levinson, 4, points out that this restriction is due to Carnap’s disciple and
 major figure in early natural language processing Yoshua Bar-Hillel. Levinson says
 that this usage has “little to offer linguists” because “all natural languages have
 deictic terms,” and the exclusion of semantics from deictics essentially denies all
 meaning to languages. One need look no further than Jakobson’s famous notion
 of a “shifter”—which derives, as it happens, from the idea of a “symbolic index” in
 early computing, in the terms of Arthur Burks—to find a literary-theoretical par-
 allel attempt to deal with deixis without reaching outside the formal features of
 language. It is hardly a coincidence that we find in Jakobson, and in Burks before
                             Notes to Introduction                                 215

him, if not in Bar-Hillel, acute attention to Peirce’s semiotics in a linguistic vein.
See Burks, “Icon, Index, and Symbol,” 673–89.
    26. Silverstein, “Cognitive Implications of a Referential Hierarchy,” 129.
    27. Silverstein, 159.
    28. I’m going to focus on the transformer and its underlying “attention”
mechanism in what follows, but the culmination of the argument in chapter 5 is
meant to demonstrate why the computation–language interaction it realizes is
possible in the first place. I regard these mechanisms as the first to realize what
must be a larger class of potential interactions between language and mathemat-
ics. So although the book takes this departure seriously, it ultimately seeks not
to diagnose the present condition but to understand its theoretical implications,
which already have both cultural and scientific consequences, all of which are
poorly understood.
    29. Piantadosi and Hill, “Meaning without Reference.”
    30. Pavlick, “Symbols and Grounding.”
    31. Millière and Buckner, “A Philosophical Introduction to Language Models.”
    32. Lake and Murphy, “Word Meaning in Minds and Machines,” 401–31.
    33. A field of “interpretability” has emerged, although some of its major
proponents seem to be motivated by the ideology of “AI risk.” See Anthropic,
“Decomposing Language Models into Understandable Components.” Earlier
efforts include “BERTology,” based on the bidirectional transformer model that
immediately preceded GPTs. See Rogers et al., “A Primer in BERTology.” BERT
was open source, and mechanistic interpretation faces the problem of corpo-
rate secrets now, complicating its efforts. This type of interpretability has been
proposed for virtually every architecture over the last fifteen years and has some
overlap with humanistic digital humanities work in this space. See Dobson, “On
Reading and Interpreting Black Box Deep Neural Networks.”
    34. Lake and Murphy, “Word Meaning in Minds and Machines.”
    35. Yiu et al., “Transmission versus Truth.”
    36. Yiu et al. One may remark that cognitive science has belatedly rein-
vented the very term that media theory has possessed for decades, perhaps most
famously in Bernhard Siegert’s idea of the Kulturtechnik, technology seen as that
which cultivates by means of creating distinctions by means of material divisions,
marks, or processes. The convergence of literary theory and evolutionary and
cognitive psychology would ideally be shifted from implicit agreement to active
debate and collaboration.
    37. Donald, Origins of the Modern Mind, 42.
    38. Williams, Marxism and Literature, 11–21. “ ‘Culture,’ or more specifically
‘art’ and ‘literature’ (themselves newly generalized and abstracted), were seen as
the deepest record, the deepest impulse, and the deepest resource of the ‘human
spirit.’ ‘Culture’ was then at once the secularization and the liberalization of
earlier metaphysical forms. Its agencies and processes were distinctively human,
and were generalized as subjective, but certain quasi-metaphysical forms—‘the
imagination,’ ‘creativity,’ ‘inspiration,’ ‘the aesthetic,’ and the new positive sense
of ‘myth’—were in effect composed into a new pantheon” (15). Culture is the
main discursive competitor with cognition for the distinctively human generali
zation of metaphysical problems, understood profanely.
216                          Notes to Introduction

     39. Hayles, “Can Computers Create Meanings?,” 32–55; Hayles, Unthought.
     40. Deacon, Incomplete Nature.
     41. Hayles has gone further, claiming that bots have “personae.” See Hayles,
“Inside the Mind of an AI,” 635–66.
     42. Tomlinson, Machines of Evolution; see also Tomlinson, Culture and the Course
of Human Evolution. A species creates a “niche” by changing its environment—
usually through some kind of tool use, like beavers making dams—so that survival
pressures are altered, thereby indirectly affecting natural selection. The theory is
associated with the dialectical biologist Richard Lewontin, and Deacon argues that
humans have “biased” their own evolution to favor a symbol-using linguistic brain.
Tomlinson is attempting a broader-spectrum semiotic theory of evolution in which
 the interpretant is the crucial figure for human culture and therefore meaning.
     43. Deacon, “Shannon–Boltzmann–Darwin,” 169–96; Weatherby and Justie,
 “Indexical AI,” 381–415.
     44. Tomlinson, Machines of Evolution, 59–60.
     45. Two books appear to agree on this point, neither of which it was possible
 to integrate more fully into this project owing to the timing of their publication.
 See Gunkel, AI for Communication, and Kockelman, Last Words. Kockelman’s
 extensive use of Peirce fits directly in the line of semiotic explorations of meaning
 I have been reviewing here, and both books are excellent on the topic of commu-
 nication, which I largely leave aside in favor of questions of structure and system.
     46. Tomlinson, Machines of Evolution, 284.
     47. Lacan, Ego in Freud’s Theory, 18. See Lydia Liu’s excellent reading of the
 interaction with Riguet. Liu, “Cybernetic Unconscious,” 288–320.
     48. The best account to date is Liu, Freudian Robot.
     49. Stiegler and Norman, Symbolic Misery, 67.
     50. James Duesterberg writes that Derrida saw a world “liberated from
 reference, made up of pure signs referring only to themselves,” and that with
 the LLM, we see that Derrida’s description is accurate, because “words now are
 things.” Duesterberg, “Neither Governed nor Free.” I agree that words as material
 forces are relevant, but the referential function, though not the basis of language,
 remains in play, before and after LLMs.
     51. Kittler, Gramophone Film Typewriter.
     52. Kittler, “There Is No Software,” in Truth of the Technological World, 223.
     53. This is not to deny the point that Lacan already made, which is that com-
 putation creates a “hole in the Real” by creating new feedback-couplings between
 representations and physics. The best elaboration of this argument is Siegert, Pas-
 sage des Digitalen. But this is the definition of the symbolic in Lacan and so applies
 to language too.
     54. Dobson, “Vector Hermeneutics,” 81–93.
     55. Chun, “On Software,” 26–51.
     56. I address this more fully in chapters 2 and 3—the shift to graphical or
 even tensor processing units could be taken to be a shift from classical comput-
 ing, although I am not aware of a media-theoretical argument to this effect. I
 do not think that they change the basic issue, however, which is that a learning
 system is built on a symbolic, rather than some analog or biological, system.
     57. There has been rather more attention to images and their relation to the
 computationally produced symbolic order, probably because the artificial image
                            Notes to Introduction                               217

has been a regular part of our social experience for well over a century. See, e.g.,
Mitchell, Reconfigured Eye.
     58. Maniglier, “Processing Cultures,” 159.
     59. MIT Technology Review, “This Horse-Riding Astronaut Is a Milestone.”
     60. Halpern et al., “Surplus Data,” 197–210.
     61. Underwood, “Empirical Triumph of Theory.”
     62. Semiology is thus a completely different proposal from the hotly debated
“Sapir–Whorf hypothesis,” which claims that language influences or even constitutes
 elements of thinking as such. Semiology proposes instead that the final value of a
 sign is in the communicative process of language and thus asks to what extent other
sign-systems have to be structured like language to make sense for us. The question
is one of media and philology rather than the metaphysics of the mind (which
remains metaphysical even when the mind is purported to be treated empirically).
     63. Barthes, Elements of Semiology, 41.
     64. Dreyfus, What Computers Still Can’t Do. The best modernization of
Dreyfus’s approach is Smith, Promise of Artificial Intelligence; for my critique of
 this approach in general, see Weatherby, “Intermittent Legitimacy,” 11–39.
     65. It also opens up a line of thinking about embodied thought that has
 some overlap with the important school that emerged from Second Cybernet-
 ics, especially in this latter’s phenomenological articulation. See the important
 book by Varela et al., Embodied Mind; see also Clarke and Hansen, Emergence and
Embodiment.
     66. See the extensive summary in Crawford, Atlas of AI, and the many reports
from organizations like AI Now, Data and Society, and McKinsey.
     67. Piantadosi, “Modern Language Models.”
     68. Bender et al., “On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots,” 617.
     69. Bender et al., 610–23.
     70. Bender et al., 613; Bender and Koller, “Climbing towards NLU,” 5185–98.
     71. Bender et al., “On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots,” 611.
     72. Bender and Koller, “Climbing towards NLU,” 5185.
     73. The argument “rests on an a priori distinction between humans and lan-
guage models elaborated through discussion of the communicative contexts for
human language,” as Katherine Bode and Lauren M. E. Goodlad write. See Bode
and Goodlad, “Data Worlds.”
     74. Mollick, Co-intelligence.
     75. Bender et al., “On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots,” 614.
     76. Bender et al., 614.
     77. Yarden Katz has extensively criticized this engineering-friendly line of
 critique in his Artificial Whiteness. Some of the proponents of this critique have
 moved to a position of abolition, or at least moratorium, on the use of chatbots,
 the second of the two options available from this standpoint.
     78. Buschek and Thorp, “Models All the Way Down.”
     79. Geroulanos, An Atheism That Is Not Humanist.
     80. The acronym stands for “transhumanism, extropianism, singularitarian-
ism, cosmism, rationalism, effective altruism, and longtermism.” See Gebru and
Torres, “TESCREAL Bundle.”
     81. Roose, “AI Poses ‘Risk of Extinction.’ ”
     82. Ord, Precipice.
218                           Notes to chapter 1


1. How the Humanities Lost Language
       1. Pinker, Language Instinct, 19.
       2. Pinker, 19.
       3. Pinker, 19: “language is not a cultural artifact that we learn the way we
learn to tell time or how the federal government works.”
       4. Lacan argues that the symbolic order has a dialectical structure, because
it is totalizing, constituting the very universe it makes available to thought. See
Lacan, The Ego in Freud’s Theory, 30. In chapter 5, I argue that this occurs in two
distinct ways in computational and linguistic formalisms.
       5. An excellent overview of this aspect of Chomsky can be found in Rey,
“Analyticity and Chomskyan Linguistics.” More generally on Chomsky and his
influence, one may read the comprehensive account in Boden, Mind as Machine.
A more technical, standard account of the linguistics history is Newmeyer, Lin-
guistic Theory in America.
       6. On the “flatness” of the Markov chain and the depth of Chomsky’s notion
of “creativity,” see Boden, Mind as Machine, 641.
       7. Chomsky, Syntactic Structures, 15.
       8. Chomsky, 15.
       9. Chomsky, 16.
     10. Pinker writes in Language Instinct, “When we are comprehending sentences,
the stream of words is transparent; we see through to the meaning so automatically
that we can forget that a movie is in a foreign language and subtitled” (21).
     11. Chomsky, Syntactic Structures, 23.
     12. Chomsky, 21.
     13. See Buckner, From Deep Learning to Rational Machines, who argues that
deep learning is vindicating a “moderate empiricism.”
     14. Chomsky and McGilvray, Cartesian Linguistics, 71.
     15. Chomsky and McGilvray.
     16. The problem of this regress is one launching point for German idealism
after Kant, though, as the thought experiment about what it means to think
about thinking was a major inspiration for Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre (Science of
Knowing).
     17. Hauser et al., “Faculty of Language,” 1569.
     18. Chomsky, “Derivation by Phase,” 3.
     19. Chomsky, “Minimalist Inquiries,” 100.
     20. Adger, Language Unlimited, 211–14.
     21. Adger, 216.
     22. Chomsky, Knowledge of Language, 7.
     23. Chomsky, “Genuine Explanation and the Strong Minimalist Thesis.”
     24. Chomsky, Syntactic Structures, 17.
     25. Maniglier, “Processing Cultures,” 155; cf. Tomasello and Ibbotson, “Evi-
dence Rebuts Chomsky’s Theory.”
     26. The psychologist Brenden Lake is experimenting with head cameras on
babies in the language acquisition phase to see if LLMs can learn from visual
and other contextual data in something like the way humans do. See Leffer,
“A Camera-Wearing Baby.”
                               Notes to chapter 1                               219

    27. See Pinker, “Language Acquisition,” 170.
    28. Pinker, 170.
    29. See Tomasello and Ibbotson, “Evidence Rebuts Chomsky’s Theory.”
    30. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, B75/A51.
    31. Kant, A137/B176.
    32. Chomsky, Knowledge of Language, 20.
    33. Chomsky, 22.
    34. Chomsky, 26.
    35. Chomsky, 26.
    36. Chomsky, 26.
    37. Pinker, Language Instinct, 317.
    38. Manning, “Human Language Understanding and Reasoning,” 131.
    39. Firth, Studies in Linguistic Analysis, 11.
    40. Neurath et al., International Encyclopedia of Unified Science.
    41. Harris, “Distributional Structure,” 146.
    42. Harris, Structural Linguistics, 5.
    43. Harris, A Theory of Language and Information.
    44. Lenci and Sahlgren, Distributional Semantics, 6.
    45. Harris, A Theory of Language and Information, 274.
    46. Harris, “Distributional Structure,” 146–47.
    47. Wiggins and Jones, How Data Happened; see their chapter 6, “Data
at War.”
    48. For an account of how this trend influenced speech recognition, where
linguistics and data processing heavily overlapped, see Li, “There’s No Data Like
More Data,” 165–82.
    49. Rieder, Engines of Order, 215, speaking specifically of Bayes as a backbone
of information retrieval.
    50. Léon, Automating Linguistics, 2–3.
    51. Osgood, “Semantic Differential Technique,” 173. We may note that Daniel
Kahneman’s and Amos Tversky’s separate early work on psychological semantics
and measurement theory engages Osgood, suggesting a common root between
behavioral psychology’s models and those that would eventually become vector
semantics.
    52. Osgood, 173.
    53. Shoemaker, “Distributional Semantics.”
    54. Shoemaker.
    55. Rieder, Engines of Order, 238.
    56. Rieder, 215–16.
    57. Norvig, “On Chomsky and the Two Cultures of Statistical Learning.”
    58. Breiman, “Statistical Modeling.”
    59. Norvig, “On Chomsky and the Two Cultures of Statistical Learning.”
    60. Manning, “Probabilistic Syntax,” 291.
    61. Manning, “Human Language Understanding and Reasoning,” 130.
    62. Manning, 130.
    63. Manning, 134.
    64. Manning, 134.
    65. Manning, 134.
220                            Notes to chapter 1

     66. This view has several hallmarks of a dialectical theory (constitutive inter-
nal divisions, local sequences conditioned by totality, etc.), but its proponents
have, in both generations of its existence, distanced themselves from this term
and the Marxism and Hegelianism associated with it. In the first generation,
the structuralists, Claude Lévi-Strauss leading the charge, distanced themselves
from the Marxism of Jean-Paul Sartre and others in the French public sphere.
In the second generation, usually known as poststructuralist, distance from
Marx’s revolutionary thought was complemented by an insistence that Hegelian
dialectics was naive about semiotics or semiology. This insistence began to break
in the 1990s with publications by Judith Butler, Slavoj Žižek, and Catherine
Malabou that attempted to adopt aspects of Hegel, but to my knowledge, no
work systematically compares structuralism and dialectics. One may also note
that the structuralists themselves often referred to their theory as dialectical, as
in Lévi-Strauss’s treatment following Jakobson in the chapter “Structure and Dia
lectics” in Structural Anthropology, 232–45.
     67. Saussure et al., Course in General Linguistics, 120.
     68. Saussure et al., 120.
     69. Saussure et al., 114.
     70. Saussure et al., 122.
     71. By choosing to put it this way, I mean to signal that I am not making a
rigid distinction between “structuralism” and “poststructuralism,” which I regard
as a single, more or less continuous tradition. The various “breaks” from struc-
ture to something suprastructural are family squabbles. The main difference that
matters to me here is that poststructuralism has on the whole tended to be less
concretely interested in language in the sense of strings of words on a page, other
theories of linguistics structure, and even—unfortunately—the automatization
of language alongside which the statistics view developed. For these two reasons,
I say I am returning to “structuralism” here, although there are some reasons,
to be discussed later in this chapter, why I think that Saussure in particular is
best suited to parse LLMs. Derrida’s reading of Saussure, in particular, seems to
obscure this usefulness in the present.
     72. For the classical argument against the psychological arbitrariness of the
sign, which does not seem to me to solve any problem that Saussure had not
already framed correctly, see the chapter “The Nature of the Linguistic Sign”
in Benveniste and Meek, Problems in General Linguistics.
     73. See the excellent sketch of this debate in Moi, Revolution of the Ordinary,
113ff.
     74. Saussure et al., Course in General Linguistics, 65.
     75. Moi reports that it is “hard to avoid precisely this ‘mistake’ ” of telling
students that the ink on the page is the signifier, because the use of “mate-
rial” but also “psychological” seems to conflict. Moi, Revolution of the Ordinary,
116–17. I think this difficulty comes from a simple material–abstract or material–
conceptual binary of which Saussure once literally symbolized the end in serious
analysis of culture.
     76. Maniglier writes that “the signifier is indeed as mental as the signified,”
so that we might say that the signifier is that socially determined mental content
that is material. Maniglier, “Processing Cultures,” 68.
     77. Pourciau, Writing of Spirit, 71.
                                 Notes to chapter 1                                   221

     78. Here I follow Jameson, who writes that “Saussure’s opposition is dialec-
tical in that it involves a tension between a part and a whole either of which is
inconceivable without the other: being relational rather than substantialist, it
thus strikes directly at the kind of isolation of a single apparently free-standing
element (such as a ‘statement’) foreseen by empirical thinking.” Jameson, Prison-
House of Language, 24. See also Voloshinov, Marxism; and Barthes, Elements of
Semiology, 15; Barthes quite precisely states that all the dichotomies in struc
 turalism are dialectically constructed.
     79. Saussure et al., Course in General Linguistics, 115.
     80. It seems possible that someone could use Lacan’s version of semiology,
 which includes a great deal of (confabulated) mathematics and a genuine engage-
 ment with cybernetics, to do a version of what I am doing here. Notable efforts
 to formalize or otherwise deploy Lacan for mathematical philosophy or media
 theory are those of Alain Badiou and Friedrich Kittler—but neither of these has
 elaborated a way in which language and computation interoperate. Lacan met
 Chomsky and makes some remarks about his system creating a “hole in the real”
 in seminar XXIII, Le Sinthome. But even Slavoj Žižek, who has made perhaps the
 most of Lacan’s formalisms, has not brought them to bear on the concrete analy-
 sis of language across the spectrum to which the structuralists aspired.
     81. I mean generally “speculative realism” and “object-oriented ontology.”
     82. One may think here of the strange case of N. Katherine Hayles’s book
 How We Became Posthuman, published within a year of Jean-Pierre Dupuy’s book
 The Mechanization of the Mind. Although both books took up cognitive topics, and
 Dupuy has continued to publish on what he sees as the philosophical limitations
 of cognitive science as a movement, the books touched off a (wonderful) flood of
 humanistic engagements with cybernetics that is still ongoing. But for some rea-
 son, the cognitivist thought that Dupuy highlighted, and that has played a major
 role in AI, has received not just little explicit attention but little critical awareness
 from the humanities.
     83. Derrida, Of Grammatology, 9.
     84. In a vehement critique of Derrida in the New York Review of Books, the phi-
 losopher John Searle pointed out that there is a long tradition in philosophy that,
 if anything, was more focused on gramme than on phone, perhaps extending from
 Leibniz to Frege and Russell and beyond. As Searle notes, the result of Derrida’s
 popularity seems to have been an almost total lack of engagement with a “golden
 age” of theories of language. Whatever one makes of Searle’s unrestrained anger
 at Derrida’s understanding of metaphysics, these points seem instructive to me,
 forty years on. Searle, review of The Word Turned Upside Down.
     85. Derrida, Margins of Philosophy, 11.
     86. Bunz, “Nachdenken über generatives Schreibens.” See the English at
 “Thinking through Generated Writing,” MediArXiv, https://doi.org/10.33767/osf
 .io/4th3x.
     87. Derrida, Margins of Philosophy, 12.
     88. Derrida, “Plato’s Pharmacy,” 103.
     89. Many exceptions to this statement are cited throughout this book,
 and there are some that I do not engage here, but none has to date made much
 attempt to wrest back the object “language,” in either public or academic percep-
 tion, from the other disciplines—it is too often seen as a fait accompli that some
222                            Notes to chapter 1

more fundamental aspects of language are treated by other disciplines, while its
cultural aspects are then consigned to literature departments. LLMs have the
potential to reverse the direction of this interdisciplinary arrangement.
    90. One may prefer a cultural-historical account of the loss of language, which
would have to reckon with John Guillory’s claim that English, in particular, has
seen its symbolic capital fade as the specific needs of cultural knowledge have
shifted in the elite in the United States over the last generation. But precisely
when cultural needs shift as the mode of production gradually changes, and class
constitution along with it, the need for critique and cultural knowledge that is
up to date on technical and scientific forms of knowledge, and contributes to
them—if against the grain—is one key to survival. See Guillory, Cultural Capital,
and Guillory, Professing Criticism.
    91. Simon, “Cognitive Science,” 33.
    92. Simon, 36.
    93. Simon, 43.
    94. The so-called replication crisis has mushroomed to the point where it
is unclear whether one should trust virtually any quantitatively based result in
social science, especially in psychology. See Leys, Anatomy of a Train Wreck, and
Gigerenzer, “Statistical Rituals.”
    95. Firth, “Applications of General Linguistics,” 2–3.
    96. Hjelmslev, Prolegomena to a Theory of Language, 39–40.
    97. Hjelmslev, 40.
    98. Barthes, Elements of Semiology, 40.
    99. Maniglier, “Processing Cultures,” 168.
   100. Dupuy, Mechanization of the Mind, 52; see also 93, where the “transcen
dental subject” was replaced by the “physical symbol system” of Simon and
Newell.
   101. Katz, “Noam Chomsky on Where Artificial Intelligence Went Wrong.”


2. The Eliza Effect Goes Global
      1. Simondon describes this serration as follows: an element (like the core of
the steam engine) is discovered, leading to a smooth progressive line of evolution
until a new element (like the vacuum tube) is synthesized. In a somewhat less
inspiring logic, AI usually proceeds by some local innovation in a representation
system, followed by hype, funding, and panic, and ending in the “smooth” prog-
ress of a series of (semi-)functional software systems that fade into the digital
background. Simondon, On the Mode of Existence.
      2. The foregoing is summarized from Weizenbaum, “ELIZA”; and
 eizenbaum, Computer Power and Human Reason.
 W
      3. Riskin, “A Sort of Buzzing”; Biever, “ChatGPT Broke the Turing Test”;
 Weatherby, “ChatGPT Broke the Turing Test.”
      4. Dupuy, Mechanization of the Mind.
      5. Roose, “A Conversation with Bing’s Chatbot.”
      6. See Hayles’s account of emergent personality in these systems. Hayles,
 “Inside the Mind of an AI.”
      7. Haugeland, Artificial Intelligence.
      8. Nilsson, Quest for Artificial Intelligence.
                               Notes to chapter 3                                223

     9. Turing, “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.”
    10. Murgia, “Sci-Fi Writer Ted Chiang.”
    11. Rumelhart, Foundations.
    12. Eichhorn, Content.
    13. Rosenblatt, Principles of Neurodynamics, 76–77.
    14. Müggenburg, “Clean by Nature,” 15–16.
    15. Minsky and Papert, Perceptrons, 2.
    16. A wonderful history is offered by Mitchell, whose account of Marvin
Minsky’s famous, but ultimately failed, critique of neural nets is among the
best I have seen. Mitchell, Artificial Intelligence. Minsky and his coauthor Papert
proved that perceptrons had a very clear ceiling in terms of problem solving, but
their “intuitive” extension of their proof to multilayered (“deep”) neural nets has
proven a case of severe overreach. Minsky and Papert, Perceptrons.
    17. Harnad, “Symbol Grounding Problem,” 337.
    18. Kirkwood, Endless Intervals.
    19. Haugeland, Artificial Intelligence.
    20. Galloway, “Golden Age of Analog.”
    21. Dobson, “Vector Hermeneutics.”
    22. Buckner, “Connectionism.”
    23. Weatherby and Justie, “Indexical AI.”
    24. This is why I cannot entirely go along with the proposals that AI is “dumb”
or “unintelligent,” as Broussard and, separately, Bajohr have proposed. Whatever
we mean by “dumb” must also be entangled with whatever it turns out we mean
by “intelligent,” which is pending. Broussard, Artificial Unintelligence; Bajohr,
“Dumb Meaning.”
    25. Turing, “On Computable Numbers.”
    26. Turing, “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.”
    27. Turing, “Lecture on the Automatic Computing Engine.”
    28. Chun, “On Software.”
    29. Hodges and Hofstadter, Alan Turing, 484.
    30. Dennett, “Will AI Achieve Consciousness?”
    31. Baudrillard, Simulacra and Simulation.
    32. McCulloch and Pitts, “A Logical Calculus.”
    33. Cassirer and Woglom, Problem of Knowledge.
    34. Weatherby, “Digital Metaphysics.”
    35. Abraham, Rebel Genius.
    36. McCulloch, “A Heterarchy of Values.”

3. The Semiological Surround, or How Language
   Is the Medium of Computation
      1. Saussure et al., Course in General Linguistics, 16.
      2. Saussure et al., 68.
      3. Maniglier argues that this is because all other sign-systems “share with
linguistic objects the same ontology.” Maniglier, “Processing Cultures,” 164–65. It
is rather unclear if this is true of computation as such, however.
      4. Barthes, Elements of Semiology, 10.
      5. Barthes, 10.
224                            Notes to chapter 3

      6. Kornbluh, Immediacy.
      7. Fazi, “Computational Search for Unity,” 52–54.
      8. Domingos, Master Algorithm; Anderson, “End of Theory.” On the his-
tory of LLMs and universal language, see Binder, Language and the Rise of the
Algorithm.
      9. See my account in Weatherby, “Intermittent Legitimacy.”
    10. Joque, Revolutionary Mathematics.
    11. Newell and Simon, “Computer Science as Empirical Inquiry.”
    12. Buckner, “Empiricism without Magic.”
    13. Malabou, Morphing Intelligence, 110.
    14. Malabou, Morphing Intelligence, 11.
    15. Simondon, On the Mode of Existence: “In the living being content becomes
coding, whereas in the machine coding and content remain separate as condition
and conditioned. Content introduced into human memory will superimpose itself
on prior content and take form on it: the living is that in which the a posteriori be-
comes a priori; memory is the function by which a posteriori matters become a pri-
ori” (138). Creating rules out of stuff is indeed one of the dreams of AI, and though
few claim that any one technical system does this type of work now, the sense
that this work is distributed between humans and digital systems is widespread.
    16. Horkheimer and Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment.
    17. The philosopher Yuk Hui adapted the term from Bernard Stiegler’s
reading of Husserl’s lectures on the phenomenology of time-consciousness. It
suggests that the “retention” of memory and the “protention” of anticipated time
are both externalized in our writing technologies, such that they actively form
temporality and experience as such. Stiegler, Technics and Time; Hui, “Archives of
the Future.”
    18. Kelleher, Deep Learning; LeCun et al., “Deep Learning.”
    19. The following account, including examples, is based on Peirce et al.,
Elements of Logic, 619–44.
    20. Parisi, “Reprogramming Decisionism”; Parisi, Contagious Architecture.
    21. Peirce et al., Elements of Logic, 625.
    22. Frege and Beaney, Frege Reader.
    23. See Tiqqun, Cybernetic Hypothesis.
    24. Halpern, Beautiful Data.
    25. Halpern et al., “Surplus Data.”
    26. Halpern and Mitchell, Smartness Mandate.
    27. Amaro, Black Technical Object.
    28. Wynter, “Ceremony Found,” 84–245.
    29. Kittler, “There Is No Software,” in Truth of the Technological World, 223.
    30. von Neumann, “First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC.”
    31. Brian Rotman has argued that mathematics is semiotic all the way down.
 See Rotman, Mathematics as Sign.
    32. Kissinger and coauthors give a convincing list. Kissinger et al., Age of AI.
    33. Vaswani et al., “Attention Is All You Need,” preceded by Badhanau et al.,
 “Neural Machine Translation.”
    34. These had already been described in the 1980s; variations of the idea are
 used throughout Rumelhart, Foundations.
    35. Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, “Long Short-Term Memory.”
                              Notes to chapter 4                                225

    36. See Wolfram, “What Is ChatGPT Doing?”
    37. Wolfram. Web crawl and other scraping techniques are now being called
into question on both regulative and competitive grounds, but LLMs already con-
tain much of Reddit, all of Wikipedia (which may contribute to their “emergent”
ability to identify facts), and much more besides. This partial view of language is
nevertheless so large that its “partiality” is not concrete, at least not yet.
    38. Weatherby and Justie, “Indexical AI.”
    39. Wei et al., “Chain-of-Thought Prompting.”
    40. A similar picture of meaning is given by Willard V. O. Quine, which he
summarizes by saying that it is “misleading to speak of the empirical content of
an individual statement.” Quine, “Two Dogmas of Empiricism,” 40.
    41. Ramesh et al., “Hierarchical Text-Conditional Image Generation.”


4. Large Literary Machines
     1. This chapter owes a great deal to a semester-long study of form in mathe
matics and literary analysis that the Digital Theory Lab at New York University
conducted in the spring semester of 2024. It would be significantly impoverished
if that collaborative thinking had not gone on.
     2. Haugeland, Artificial Intelligence, 106.
     3. Brown et al., “Language Models.”
     4. It also gives form to the very experimentation that led to modern language
processing techniques. See Pressman, Digital Modernism.
     5. Parrish, “Language Models.” There is a growing literature that examines
LLMs’ ability to write poems, how humans grade or react to their poetry, and
so on. While the nonliterary studies of this sort seem symptomatic to me of the
unconscious tendency to view poetry as the essence of language, the studies by
literary scholars and digital humanists largely fail to ask how poetry and language
are related at all, so I reserve focus for Parrish’s exemplary work here.
     6. Parrish.
     7. Parrish.
     8. Parrish.
     9. Nick Monfort has recreated the experiment in Python in a way that allows
one to play with the vast extent of the poem; see https://nickm.com/memslam
/stochastic_texts.html.
    10. Parrish, “Language Models.”
    11. Austin, How to Do Things with Words, 22.
    12. See Derrida, Limited Inc.
    13. Brown et al., “Language Models,” 49.
    14. Brown et al., 49.
    15. Kirschenbaum, “Spec Acts,” 378.
    16. Kirschenbaum, 378.
    17. Kirschenbaum, 378–79.
    18. Kramnick and Nersessian, “Form and Explanation,” 651.
    19. Kornbluh, Order of Forms.
    20. Peirce et al., Elements of Logic, 229.
    21. Hayles, “Inside the Mind of an AI.”
    22. Shannon and Weaver, Mathematical Theory of Communication, 21.
226                           Notes to chapter 4

    23. Shannon and Weaver, 11.
    24. This is a verbal formulation of what is now technically known as
Kolmogorov complexity. See Shannon and Weaver, 56.
    25. Shannon and Weaver, 31.
    26. For the connection between cybernetics, Shannon, and Jakobson that this
 phrase suggests, see Geoghegan, “From Information Theory to French Theory.” I
 make a less orthodox connection between Jakobson’s poetic function and Kurt
 Goedel’s idea of “incompleteness” in chapter 5.
    27. Something like “iteration” in Derrida’s sense resides here. See Derrida,
 Limited Inc.; cf. Liu, “Cybernetic Unconscious,” 39–99.
    28. Liu, “Cybernetic Unconscious.”
    29. Liu, “Wittgenstein in the Machine,” 439.
    30. Liu, 439.
    31. Liu, 444.
    32. Liu, 455.
    33. Gastaldi and Pellissier, “Calculus of Language.”
    34. Gastaldi and Pellissier, 570.
    35. Gastaldi and Pellissier, 570.
    36. Gastaldi and Pellissier, 572.
    37. Geroulanos, An Atheism That Is Not Humanist.
    38. Culler, Literary in Theory, 24.


5. Computational Meaning
     1. Benjamin, Reflections.
     2. Wolfram puts the number of possible 3-grams at forty thousand words at
six trillion. Wolfram, “What Is ChatGPT Doing?”
     3. Shannon traces the levels from character to word and even to some
sentence-level coherence but does not theorize them as different levels. Shannon,
“Prediction and Entropy.”
     4. Since I wrote these words, I have been humbled to see bumper stickers of
the most absurd sort with numbers, like 70.3 and 30.5, indicating a willingness
to transcribe and brag about even the most minor differences of ultra running.
But I stand by the analysis here, as I think that the norms it expresses are indeed
norms, even if they are proven by vain exceptions.
     5. See my argument in Weatherby, “Irony and Redundancy.”
     6. Collingwood, Principles of Art.
     7. Collingwood, 310–11.
     8. See Saussure’s own exposition of the syntagm in Saussure et al., Course in
General Linguistics, 122ff.
     9. Gastaldi and Pellissier, “Calculus of Language,” 575.
    10. Gastaldi and Pellissier, 575.
    11. Mikolov et al., “Distributed Representations,” 2.
    12. Mikolov et al., 8.
    13. Mikolov et al., 2.
    14. Mikolov et al., 1.
    15. Mikolov et al., 1.
    16. The dimension is not the single value but its relation to the other values
                               Notes to chapter 5                                227

in that dimension in the matrix, measured as cosine similarity, or how close
two plotted angles are to each other on a graph. This “proximity” is influenced
by multiple dimensions simultaneously—but the intuition that the dimensions
represent different nodes of meaning is persistent.
    17. Olah et al., “Building Blocks.”
    18. Spillner et al., “Conceptual Shadows.”
    19. Li, “Divination Engines.”
    20. See Karpathy, “Unreasonable Effectiveness,” who borrows his title from
“Martian” mathematician Eugene Wigner. Wigner, “Unreasonable Effective-
ness,” 534–49. Wigner’s problem is a long-standing metaphysical one: how and
why is any aspect of nature available to elegant mathematical formulation? The
computation-to-language pipeline is both less mysterious and, on its face, mathe-
matically messier.
    21. Gastaldi and Pellissier, “Calculus of Language,” 576.
    22. Gastaldi and Pellissier, 576.
    23. Gastaldi and Pellissier, 576–77.
    24. Weatherby and Justie, “Indexical AI,” 413–14.
    25. Vaswani et al., “Attention Is All You Need,” 5.
    26. This “openness” is what achieves the vastly larger scale of processing, by
reducing required computation—even though LLMs are now hugely costly in
terms of energy. It’s possible that the readdition of some of the earlier techniques
will play a role going forward, and we have already seen Google release a system,
called “Griffin,” that uses RNNs with local attention. De et al., “Griffin.”
    27. The anthropologist Nick Seaver has shown that the metaphor was a mat-
ter of contention among the paper’s authors. Seaver, “Attention Is All You Need.”
    28. Buckner, From Deep Learning to Rational Machines, 272.
    29. Saussure et al., Course in General Linguistics, 122.
    30. Saussure et al., 115.
    31. Saussure et al., 120.
    32. It specifically recalls what Marx calls the “expanded general form of value”
in chapter 1 of Capital, in which all commodities are valued by all other commodi
ties without a general equivalent. (Marx’s passage is itself derived from Hegel’s
concept of the “total relation” that sits on the border of the logic of essence,
tipping it over into the logic of the concept—or in other words, the moment when
a differential, dualistic system is endowed with meaning.) I hope to pursue this
important connection between neural nets and dialectics in the future. For now,
we can note that Saussure is specifying, in the dialectical tradition, that language,
seen from the standpoint of semiology, has no “general equivalent”—which
seems to agree with Harris’s claim that linguistics must happen strictly inside
language, because metalanguage is a subset of language itself. One can imagine
from this standpoint a way in which the American and European structuralist
traditions might have collaborated.
    33. In the current environment, most of these features seem to come not
from the model itself but from downstream mechanisms for selection, especially
RLHF.
    34. Jakobson, Linguistics and Poetics, 27.
    35. Jakobson, 27.
    36. Jakobson, 27.
228                             Notes to chapter 5

    37. Jakobson, 27.
    38. Jakobson, 38 and 43.
    39. Pourciau, Writing of Spirit: “poetry, in other words, is the mode of lan-
guage that makes diachronic utterances out of synchronic analogies” (232).
    40. Jakobson, “Linguistics and Poetics,” 26.
    41. Jakobson, 27.
    42. Jakobson, 25.
    43. Pourciau, Writing of Spirit, 235–36.
    44. See Jakobson, Poetry of Grammar.
    45. Jakobson, “Quest,” 29.
    46. Gödel, “Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze”; see also Goldstein, Incom-
pleteness, who gives a wonderfully holistic view of the proof.
    47. Chomsky, Syntactic Structures, 15.
    48. See Pourciau, Writing of Spirit.
    49. Jakobson, Linguistics and Poetics, 18.


6. Poetic Ideology
     1. See Bajohr, “Whoever Controls Language.”
     2. Horkheimer and Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment, 109.
     3. See Goldberg, “Justine Bateman.”
     4. The song’s tune was generated, but the lyrics, which are weirdly machinic,
as James Vincent noted for The Verge, were written by a human. Vincent, “This
AI-Written Pop Song.” The release of Udio, which can create a song on any topic
in any genre in seconds, confirms my analysis of this earlier artifact: its songs are
generic in a way that borders on the uncanny but that might pass below notice in
a grocery store background, for example. Throughout this chapter, I use examples
from the early period of 2023, partly because these were the objects that first
grabbed my interpretive attention, but partly because I have not to date seen
more compelling ones for the case I am making in this chapter. I also think that
we are awash in examples we do not even know are such cases of generated ideol
ogy, texts, and images. So, these examples are meant to draw attention to this
larger problem.
     5. Ted Chiang calls it a “blurry jpeg of the web,” which mixes metaphors in a
way that muddles medium specificity but has some appeal nevertheless. Chiang,
“ChatGPT Is a Blurry JPEG of the Web.”
     6. See Perrotta, “Peabody EDI.”
     7. Efforts at interpretability often surface some version of semantic pack-
ages, like in the case of Anthropic’s “Golden Gate bridge” paper. Their team used
sparse autoencoders to reveal “concepts” in their multimodal Claude models,
with the hope of “steering” the models using the concepts as semantic hooks. To
date, their only flaunted result is that they are able to get a model to say “I am the
Golden Gate bridge” instead of pablum about its existence as an AI. See Temple-
ton et al., “Scaling Monosemanticity.”
     8. See Handelman, Mathematical Imagination.
     9. I will note here that the reported generation cannot be reproduced, be-
cause generative AI is meant to produce something different each time you use it.
It therefore presents a difficulty for any “science” one wants to perform using it.
                              Notes to chapter 6                               229

    10. See Huyssen, “Breitbart, Bannon, Trump.”
    11. See the account by Brian Cantwell Smith, which is by far the most
elegant philosophical account of the new AI to date. Smith, Promise of Artificial
Intelligence.
    12. Gramsci, Prison Notebooks.
    13. Greenberg, Art and Culture, 6.
    14. Greenberg, 15.
    15. Greenberg, 15.
    16. Barthes and Heath, Image, Music, Text, 45–46.
    17. Greenberg, Art and Culture, 27.
    18. Steyerl, “Mean Images.”
    19. Gibson, Burning Chrome.
    20. Let me again point out that these examples are partly manually produced.
My impression is that the artists making them are intentionally bringing this
effect to the surface in amusing and terrifying ways.
    21. Edwards, “Why AI Detectors Think.”
    22. One such method drawing attention right now is “instruction tuning,”
which uses examples of the type of reasoning that will succeed in the prompt to
elicit better answers from these systems. See especially the idea of the “stochas-
tic chain-of-thought” in Wei et al., “Chain-of-Thought Prompting.” These types
of techniques will likely soon obscure the linguistic functions of ChatGPT and
similar systems, as will their passage into unseen functionality packages within
software like Microsoft Assistant, Microsoft Word, and Adobe’s suite.
    23. Fisher, Capitalist Realism.
    24. Foucault, Order of Things, 261.
    25. Althusser, On the Reproduction of Capitalism, 256.
    26. Jameson, “Postmodernism,” 53–92.
    27. This account of Lacan relies heavily on the second year of Lacan’s seminar,
The Ego in Freud’s Theory, although the full picture of the registers only emerges
over the course of the more than twenty years of the seminar. The composite
picture I present here is meant not to get at the nuances of Lacan’s picture but
to provide the basis on which to understand Althusser’s definition of ideology.
    28. Chun, “On Software,” 18.
    29. Chun, 18.
    30. Chun, 19.
    31. This is Chun’s very pointed response to Kittler’s claim that “there is no
software” (and thus, in a sense for him, no ideology).
    32. Chun, Programmed Visions, 71.
    33. Chun, “On Software,” 17–18.
    34. Jameson, “Postmodernism,” 90.
    35. Jameson, 92.
    36. Horkheimer and Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment, xi.
    37. Adorno, “Beitrag zur Ideologienlehre,” 474.
    38. Adorno, 474.
    39. Adorno, 474.
    40. This point anticipates the critique of postmodernism and neoliberal ideol-
ogy in Fredric Jameson, Slavoj Žižek, and Mark Fisher.
    41. Adorno et al., Aesthetic Theory, 4.
230                             Notes to chapter 6

   42. Adorno et al., 5.
   43. Horkheimer and Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment, 31.

Conclusion
      1. Kirschenbaum, “Prepare for the Textpocalypse.”
      2. If we combine the GPT function with text-guided diffusion models like
“Gen-2 by Runway,” which offer storyboard generation, we can see how this type
of layout/draft labor is on the brink of real automatization. https://research
.runwayml.com/gen2.
      3. See Benanav, Automation.
      4. Marx and Mandel, Capital, 492–643.
      5. Srnicek, Platform Capitalism.
      6. Sohn-Rethel, Intellectual and Manual Labour.
      7. Babbage, On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, 153–54. See the
comprehensive accounts in Daston, “Enlightenment Calculations,” and Schaffer,
“Babbage’s Intelligence.” It is worth noting that Babbage’s mental division of labor
and his work on computing machines take place in the heart of the first modern
rise of data, what Ian Hacking has dubbed the “avalanche of printed numbers.”
Hacking, “Biopower and the Avalanche of Printed Numbers.” I do not think we
need to go so far as to say that “all labor is logic” to do justice to this problem, as
Pasquinelli does in Eye of the Master. The transformation of intelligent activities
into forms of labor seems like a straightforward and continuous process of base-
to-superstructure “last-account determination” to me, and so part of what Marx
called the “real subsumption of labor.” In passing, we might note that Stiegler’s
“proletarianization” also fits the profile of this process.
      8. Babbage, 154.
      9. Babbage, 156.
    10. Babbage, 156.
    11. See the classic account in Chandler, Visible Hand, 16.
    12. Babbage, On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, 156.
    13. Babbage, 156.
    14. Kittler argues on Lacanian grounds that this process “desexuated” writing
compared to its Romantic and even modernist literary frames—a claim I have yet
to see fully processed in the literature on these overlapping fields. Kittler, Gramo-
phone Film Typewriter.
    15. Lovelace, “Notes on the Sketch,” 696.
    16. Marx and Mandel, Capital, 643–55.
    17. Kittler, Gramophone Film Typewriter.
    18. Jeffrey Kirkwood has shown that this process is proto-digital. Kirkwood,
Endless Intervals.
    19. Kittler took this point, of course, from Jacques Derrida, whose Of Gram-
matology was crucial to the launch of poststructuralism.
    20. His earlier book, Discourse Networks, was a magisterial treatise on this
earlier composite notion of “writing” in the Romantic era.
    21. Kittler, Gramophone Film Typewriter, 15.
    22. Kittler uses this phrase often; see, e.g., Kittler, “Rock Music: A Misuse of
Military Equipment,” in Truth of the Technological World, 152–64.
                           Notes to Conclusion                       231

23. Guillory, Professing Criticism, 144.
24. Igarashi, “Machine Writing.”
25. Here I agree with Sack, Software Arts.
26. Guillory, Professing Criticism, 148.
27. Ong, Rhetoric, Romance, and Technology.
28. See the classic study by Carruthers, Book of Memory.
29. See the delightful account in McCulloch, Because Internet.
30. Curtius et al., European Literature, 23, translation modified.
31. Barthes, Semiotic Challenge, 22.
32. Barthes, 19–20.
33. Steyerl, “Common Sensing?,” 75.
This page intentionally left blank
Bibliography

Abraham, Tara H. Rebel Genius: Warren S. McCulloch’s Transdisciplinary Life in
   Science. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2016.
Adger, David. Language Unlimited: The Science behind Our Most Creative Power. 1st
   ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2019.
Adorno, Theodor W. “Beitrag zur Ideologienlehre.” In Soziologische Schriften, vol. 1,
   457–77. Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Surhkamp, 1954.
Adorno, Theodor W., Gretel Adorno, Rolf Tiedemann, and Robert Hullot-Kentor.
   Aesthetic Theory. London: Continuum, 2002.
Althusser, Louis. On the Reproduction of Capitalism: Ideology and Ideological State
   Apparatuses. London: Verso, 2014.
Amaro, Ramon. The Black Technical Object: On Machine Learning and the Aspiration
   of Black Being. London: Sternberg Press, 2022.
Anderson, Chris. “The End of Theory: The Data Deluge Makes the Scientific
   Method Obsolete.” Wired, June 23, 2000. https://www.wired.com/2008/06
   /pb-theory/.
Anthropic. “Decomposing Language Models into Understand-
   able Components.” https://www.anthropic.com/news/
   decomposing-language-models-into-understandable-components.
Austin, J. L. How to Do Things with Words: The William James Lectures Delivered at
   Harvard University in 1955. Edited by James O. Urmson. 2nd ed. Reprint, Cam-
   bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2009.
Babbage, Charles. On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures. London: Charles
   Knight, 1832.
Bahdanau, Dzmitry, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. “Neural Machine Trans-
   lation by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate.” https://doi.org/10.48550
   /arXiv.1409.0473.
Bajohr, Hannes. “Dumb Meaning: Machine Learning and Artificial Semantics.” In
   Artificial Intelligence—Intelligent Art?, edited by Eckart Voigts, Robin Markus
   Auer, Dietmar Elflein, Sebastian Kunas, Jan Röhnert, and Christoph Seelinger,
   45–58. Bielefeld, Germany: transcript Verlag, 2024. https://doi.org/10.1515
   /9783839469224-003.
Bajohr, Hannes. “Whoever Controls Language Models Controls Politics.” Hannes
   Bajohr (blog), April 8, 2023. https://hannesbajohr.de/en/2023/04/08/whoever
   -controls-language-models-controls-politics/.
Barthes, Roland. Elements of Semiology. Translated by Annette Lavers and Colin
   Smith. Reissue ed. New York: Hill and Wang, 1977.
Barthes, Roland. The Semiotic Challenge. Berkeley: University of California Press,
   1994.



                                        233
234                                Bibliography

Barthes, Roland, and Stephen Heath. Image, Music, Text: Essays. Vol. 13. London:
   Fontana, 1977.
Baudrillard, Jean. Simulacra and Simulation. The Body, in Theory. Ann Arbor: Uni-
   versity of Michigan Press, 1994.
Benanav, Aaron. Automation and the Future of Work. London: Verso, 2020.
Bender, Emily M., and Alexander Koller. “Climbing towards NLU: On Meaning,
   Form, and Understanding in the Age of Data.” In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
   Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 5185–98. Kerrville, Tex.:
   Association for Computational Linguistics. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020
   .acl-main.463.
Bender, Emily M., Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret
   Shmitchell. “On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language Models Be
   Too Big?” In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
   and Transparency, 610–23. New York: Association for Computing Machinery,
   2021. https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445922.
Benjamin, Walter. Reflections: Essays, Aphorisms, Autobiographical Writings. Edited
   by Peter Demetz. Translated by E. F. N. Jephcott. Boston: Mariner Books/
   Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2018.
Benveniste, Émile, and Mary Elizabeth Meek. Problems in General Linguistics.
   Miami Linguistics Series 8. Coral Gables, Fla.: University of Miami Press,
    1971.
Biever, Celeste. “ChatGPT Broke the Turing Test—the Race Is on for New Ways
    to Assess AI.” Nature 619, no. 7971 (2023): 686–89. https://doi.org/10.1038
    /d41586-023-02361-7.
Binder, Jeffrey M. Language and the Rise of the Algorithm. Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press, 2022.
Bode, Katherine, and Lauren M. E. Goodlad. “Data Worlds: An Introduction.”
    Critical AI 1, no. 1–2 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1215/2834703X-10734026.
Boden, Margaret. Mind as Machine: A History of Cognitive Science. Oxford: Oxford
    University Press, 2006.
Boston Globe. “ChatGPT Broke the Turing Test.” November 13, 2023. https://www
    .bostonglobe.com/2023/11/13/opinion/turing-test-ai-chatgpt/.
Breiman, Leo. “Statistical Modeling: The Two Cultures (with Comments and a
    Rejoinder by the Author).” Statistical Science 16, no. 3 (2001): 199–231. https://
    doi.org/10.1214/ss/1009213726.
Broussard, Meredith. Artificial Unintelligence: How Computers Misunderstand the
    World. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2018.
Brown, Tom B., Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan,
    Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan et al. “Language Models Are Few-Shot
    Learners.” ArXiv, July 22, 2020. http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.
Browning, Jacob, and Yann LeCun. “AI and the Limits of Language.” Noema,
    August 23, 2022. https://www.noemamag.com/ai-and-the-limits-of-language.
Bubeck, Sébastien, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric
     Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Peter Lee et al. “Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence:
     Early Experiments with GPT-4.” ArXiv, April 13, 2023. http://arxiv.org/abs
     /2303.12712.
                                  Bibliography                                  235

Buckner, Cameron. “Connectionism.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philoso-
  phy, edited by Edward N. Zalta. Stanford, Calif.: Metaphysics Research Lab,
  Stanford University, 2019. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2019
   /entries/connectionism/.
Buckner, Cameron. “Empiricism without Magic: Transformational Abstraction
   in Deep Convolutional Neural Networks.” Synthese 195, no. 12 (2018): 5339–72.
   https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-018-01949-1.
Buckner, Cameron J. From Deep Learning to Rational Machines: What the History
   of Philosophy Can Teach Us about the Future of Artificial Intelligence. New York:
   Oxford University Press, 2023.
Bunz, M. “Nachdenken über generatives Schreiben.” text + kritik (2024): 71.
Burks, Arthur W. “Icon, Index, and Symbol.” Philosophy and Phenomenological
   Research 9, no. 4 (1948): 673–89. https://doi.org/10.2307/2103298.
Buschek, Christo, and Jer Thorp. “Models All the Way Down.” https://
   knowingmachines.org/models-all-the-way.
Campolo, Alexander, and Katia Schwerzmann. “From Rules to Examples: Machine
   Learning’s Type of Authority.” Big Data and Society 10, no. 2 (2023). https://doi
   .org/10.1177/20539517231188725.
Carruthers, Mary J. The Book of Memory: A Study of Memory in Medieval Culture.
   2nd ed. Cambridge Studies in Medieval Literature. Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press, 2008.
Cassirer, Ernst, and William H. Woglom. The Problem of Knowledge: Philosophy,
   Science, and History since Hegel. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press,
    1978.
Chandler, Alfred Dupont. The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American
    Business. Vol. 16. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press,
    2002.
Chiang, Ted. “ChatGPT Is a Blurry JPEG of the Web.” New Yorker, February 9,
    2023. https://www.newyorker.com/tech/annals-of-technology/chatgpt-is-a
    -blurry-jpeg-of-the-web.
Chomsky, Noam. “Derivation by Phase.” In “Ken Hale: A Life In Language,” edited
    by Michael Kenstowicz. Special issue, Current Studies in Linguistics 36 (2001).
    https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/4056.003.0004.
Chomsky, Noam. “Genuine Explanation and the Strong Minimalist Thesis.”
    Cognitive Semantics 8, no. 3 (2023): 347–65. https://doi.org/10.1163/23526416
    -bja10040.
Chomsky, Noam. Knowledge of Language: Its Nature, Origin, and Use. Convergence.
    New York: Praeger, 1986.
Chomsky, Noam. “Minimalist Inquiries: The Framework.” In By Step: Essays on
    Minimalist Syntax in Honor of Howard Lasnik, edited by R. Martin, D. Michaels,
    and J. Uriagereka, 89–155. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Chomsky, Noam. Syntactic Structures. 1957. Reprint, Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton,
    2002. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110218329.
Chomsky, Noam, and James A. McGilvray. Cartesian Linguistics: A Chapter in the
    History of Rationalist Thought. 3rd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
    2009.
236                                  Bibliography

Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong. “On Software, or the Persistence of Visual Knowledge.”
   Grey Room, no. 18 (2005): 26–51. https://doi.org/10.1162/1526381043320741.
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong. Programmed Visions: Software and Memory. Software
   Studies. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2013.
Clarke, Bruce, and Mark B. N. Hansen, eds. Emergence and Embodiment: New
   Essays on Second-Order Systems Theory. Science and Cultural Theory. Durham,
   N.C.: Duke University Press, 2009.
Collingwood, R. G. The Principles of Art. New York: Oxford University Press, 1938.
Crawford, Kate. Atlas of AI: Power, Politics, and the Planetary Costs of Artificial Intel-
   ligence. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2021.
Culler, Jonathan D. The Literary in Theory. Cultural Memory in the Present.
   Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2007.
Curtius, Ernst Robert, Willard Ropes Trask, and Colin Burrow. European Litera-
    ture and the Latin Middle Ages. Bollingen Series 36. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
    University Press, 2013.
Daston, Lorraine. “Enlightenment Calculations.” Critical Inquiry 21, no. 1 (1994):
    182–202.
De, Soham, Samuel L. Smith, Anushan Fernando et al. “Griffin: Mixing Gated Lin-
    ear Recurrences with Local Attention for Efficient Language Models.” ArXiv,
    February 29, 2024. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.19427.
Deacon, Terrence William. Incomplete Nature: How Mind Emerged from Matter.
    1st ed. New York: W. W. Norton, 2012.
Deacon, Terrence W. “Shannon–Boltzmann–Darwin: Redefining Information
    (Part II).” Cognitive Semiotics 2, suppl. (2008): 169–96. https://doi.org/10.1515
    /cogsem.2008.2.spring2008.169.
Dennett, Daniel C. “Will AI Achieve Consciousness? Wrong Question.” Wired,
    February 19, 2019. https://www.wired.com/story/will-ai-achieve-consciousness
    -wrong-question/.
Derrida, Jacques. Limited Inc. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1988.
Derrida, Jacques. Margins of Philosophy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    1982.
Derrida, Jacques. Of Grammatology. Corrected ed. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
    University Press, 1998.
Derrida, Jacques. “Plato’s Pharmacy.” In Dissemination, edited by Barbara
    Johnson, 61–171. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981.
Dobson, James E. “On Reading and Interpreting Black Box Deep Neural Net-
     works.” International Journal of Digital Humanities 5: 431–49. https://doi
     .org/10.1007/s42803-023-00075-w.
Dobson, James E. “Vector Hermeneutics: On the Interpretation of Vector Space
     Models of Text.” Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 37, no. 1 (2022): 81–93.
     https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqab079.
Domingos, Pedro. The Master Algorithm: How the Quest for the Ultimate Learning
     Machine Will Remake Our World. New York: Basic Books, 2015.
Donald, Merlin. Origins of the Modern Mind: Three Stages in the Evolution of Culture
     and Cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993.
Dreyfus, Hubert L. What Computers Still Can’t Do: A Critique of Artificial Reason.
     Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1992.
                                   Bibliography                                    237

Duesterberg, James. “Neither Governed nor Free.” Boston Review, October 13,
    2023. https://www.bostonreview.net/articles/neither-governed-nor-free/.
Dupuy, Jean-Pierre. The Mechanization of the Mind: On the Origins of Cognitive Sci-
    ence. New French Thought. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2000.
Edwards, Benj. “Why AI Detectors Think the US Constitution Was Written by AI.”
    Ars Technica, July 14, 2023. https://arstechnica.com/information-technology
    /2023/07/why-ai-detectors-think-the-us-constitution-was-written-by-ai/.
Eichhorn, Kate. Content. MIT Press Essential Knowledge Series. Cambridge,
    Mass.: MIT Press, 2022.
Fazi, M. Beatrice. “The Computational Search for Unity: Synthesis in Generative
    AI.” Journal of Continental Philosophy 5, no. 1 (2024), 31–56.
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb. The Science of Knowing: J. G. Fichte’s 1804 Lectures on the
    Wissenschaftslehre. SUNY Series in Contemporary Continental Philosophy.
    Albany: State University of New York Press, 2005.
Firth, J. R. “Applications of General Linguistics.” Transactions of the Philological
    Society 56, no. 1 (1957): 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-968X.1957
    .tb00568.x.
Firth, John Rupert. Studies in Linguistic Analysis: Special Volume of the Philological
    Society. Malden, Mass.: Blackwell, 1962.
Fisher, Mark. Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative? Winchester, U.K.: Zero
    Books, 2009.
Fodor, Jerry A. The Language of Thought. Digital reprint. The Language and
    Thought Series. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2010.
Fodor, Jerry, and Brian P. McLaughlin. “Connectionism and the Problem of Syste-
    maticity: Why Smolensky’s Solution Doesn’t Work.” Cognition 35, no. 2 (1990):
    183–204. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0277(90)90014-B.
Foucault, Michel. The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences.
    London: Routledge, 2007.
Frege, Gottlob, and Michael Beaney. The Frege Reader. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell, 1997.
Galloway, Alexander R. “Golden Age of Analog.” Critical Inquiry 48, no. 2 (2022):
     211–32. https://doi.org/10.1086/717324.
Gastaldi, Juan Luis. “Why Can Computers Understand Natural Language?”
     Philosophy and Technology 34, no. 1 (2020): 149–214. https://doi.org/10.1007
   s13347-020-00393-9.
Gastaldi, Juan, and Luc Pellissier. “The Calculus of Language: Explicit Represen-
   tation of Emergent Linguistic Structure through Type-Theoretical Paradigms.”
   Interdisciplinary Science Reviews 46 (2021): 569–90. https://doi.org/10.1080
   /03080188.2021.1890484.
Gebru, Timnit, and Émile P. Torres. “The TESCREAL Bundle: Eugenics and the
   Promise of Utopia through Artificial General Intelligence.” First Monday,
   April 14, 2024. https://doi.org/10.5210/fm.v29i4.13636.
Geoghegan, Bernard Dionysius. “From Information Theory to French Theory:
   Jakobson, Lévi-Strauss, and the Cybernetic Apparatus.” Critical Inquiry 38,
    no. 1 (2011): 96–126. https://doi.org/10.1086/661645.
Geroulanos, Stefanos. An Atheism That Is Not Humanist Emerges in French Thought.
    Cultural Memory in the Present. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press,
    2010.
238                                Bibliography

Gibson, William. Burning Chrome. New York: HarperCollins, 1986.
Gigerenzer, Gerd. “Statistical Rituals: The Replication Delusion and How We Got
   There.” Advances in Methods and Practices in Psychological Science 1, no. 2 (2018):
   198–218. https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245918771329.
Gödel, Kurt. “Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathematica und
   verwandter Systeme I.” Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik 38, no. 1 (1931):
   173–98. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01700692.
Goldberg, Lesley. “Justine Bateman: Pulling AI into the Arts Is ‘Absolutely the
   Wrong Direction.’ ” The Hollywood Reporter (blog), July 21, 2023. https://www
   .hollywoodreporter.com/tv/tv-news/tvs-top-5-podcast-justine-bateman-ai
   dangers-hollywood-1235540858/.
Goldstein, Rebecca. Incompleteness: The Proof and Paradox of Kurt Gödel. 1st ed.
   Great Discoveries. New York: W. W. Norton, 2005.
Gramsci, Antonio. Prison Notebooks, Volume 1. Edited by Joseph A. Buttigieg.
   Translated by Joseph A. Buttigieg and Antonio Callari. New York: Columbia
   University Press, 1992.
Greenberg, Clement. Art and Culture: Critical Essays. Beacon Paperback 212.
   Boston: Beacon Press, 1984.
Guardian. “A Robot Wrote This Entire Article. Are You Scared Yet, Human?” Sep-
    tember 8, 2020. https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/sep/08
    /robot-wrote-this-article-gpt-3.
Guillory, John. Cultural Capital: The Problem of Literary Canon Formation. 1994.
    Reprint ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998.
Guillory, John. Professing Criticism: Essays on the Organization of Literary Study.
    Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2022.
Gunkel, David. AI for Communication, AI for Everything. Boca Raton, Fla.: CRC
    Press, 2025.
Hacking, Ian. THREE/Biopower and the Avalanche of Printed Numbers. Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, 2015.
Halpern, Orit. Beautiful Data: A History of Vision and Reason since 1945. Durham,
    N.C.: Duke University Press, 2015.
Halpern, Orit, and Robert Mitchell. The Smartness Mandate. Cambridge, Mass.:
    MIT Press, 2023.
Halpern, Orit, Patrick Jagoda, Jeffrey West Kirkwood, and Leif Weatherby. “Sur-
    plus Data: An Introduction.” Critical Inquiry 48, no. 2 (2022): 197–210. https://
    doi.org/10.1086/717320.
Handelman, Matthew. The Mathematical Imagination: On the Origins and Promise of
    Critical Theory. New York: Fordham University Press, 2019.
Handke, Peter. “Peter Handke Kosmos—1. FC Nürnberg.” https://peter-handke
    .de/kosmos/1-fc-nuernberg/.
Harnad, Stevan. “The Symbol Grounding Problem.” Physica D 42, no. 1–3 (1990):
    335–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-2789(90)90087-6.
Harris, R., and E. Komatsu. Saussure’s Third Course of Lectures on General Lin-
    guistics (1910–1911): F. de Saussure—Troisième Cours de Linguistique Générale
    (1910–1911). Burlington, Vt.: Elsevier Science, 2014.
Harris, Zellig S. “Distributional Structure.” WORD 10, no. 2–3 (1954): 146–62.
    https://doi.org/10.1080/00437956.1954.11659520.
                                   Bibliography                                   239

Harris, Zellig S. A Theory of Language and Information: A Mathematical Approach.
   Oxford, U.K.: Clarendon Press, 1991.
Harris, Zellig S. Structural Linguistics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1951.
Haugeland, John. Artificial Intelligence: The Very Idea. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
   Press, 1989.
Hauser, Marc D., Noam Chomsky, and W. Tecumseh Fitch. “The Faculty of Lan-
   guage: What Is It, Who Has It, and How Did It Evolve?” Science 298, no. 5598
   (2002): 1569–79. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.298.5598.1569.
Hayles, N. Katherine. “Can Computers Create Meanings? A Cyber/Bio/Semiotic
   Perspective.” Critical Inquiry 46, no. 1 (2019): 32–55. https://doi.org/10.1086
   /705303.
Hayles, N. Katherine. How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics,
   Literature, and Informatics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
Hayles, N. Katherine. “Inside the Mind of an AI: Materiality and the Crisis of
   Representation.” New Literary History 54, no. 1 (2022): 635–66. https://doi
    .org/10.1353/nlh.2022.a898324.
Hayles, N. Katherine. Unthought: The Power of the Cognitive Nonconscious. Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, 2017.
Hjelmslev, Louis. Prolegomena to a Theory of Language. Madison: University of
    Wisconsin Press, 1961.
Hochreiter, Sepp, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long Short-Term Memory.” Neural
    Computation 9, no. 8 (1997): 1735–80. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
Hodges, Andrew, and Douglas R. Hofstadter. Alan Turing: The Enigma—the Book
    That Inspired the Film “The Imitation Game.” Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univer-
    sity Press, 2014.
Horkheimer, Max, and Theodor W. Adorno. Dialectic of Enlightenment: Philosoph-
    ical Fragments. Cultural Memory in the Present. Edited by Gunzelin Schmid
    Noerr. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2002.
Hui, Yuk. “Archives of the Future: Remarks on the Concept of Tertiary Protention.”
    In Inscription, edited by Karl-Magnus Johansson, 129-55. Gothenburg, Swed.:
    Riksarkivet Landsarkivet i Göteborg, 2018. https://livingindigitalarchives.files
    .wordpress.com/2018/07/archives_of_the_future_-_remarks_on_the.pdf.
Huyssen, Andreas. “Breitbart, Bannon, Trump, and the Frankfurt School.” Public
    Seminar, September 28, 2017. http://publicseminar.org.dream.website
    /2017/09/breitbart-bannon-trump-and-the-frankfurt-school/.
Igarashi, Yohei. “Machine Writing Is Closer to Literature’s History than You
    Know.” Aeon. https://aeon.co/essays/machine-writing-is-closer-to-literatures
    -history-than-you-know.
Jakobson, Roman. Linguistics and Poetics. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, 2010.
    https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110802122.18.
Jakobson, Roman. Poetry of Grammar and Grammar of Poetry. Volume 3 of Selected
    Writings. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, 2010. https://doi.org/10.1515
    /9783110802122.
Jakobson, Roman. “Quest for the Essence of Language.” Diogenes 13, no. 51 (1965):
    21–37.
Jameson, Fredric. “Postmodernism; or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism.”
    New Left Review, no. I/146 (1984): 53–92.
240                                 Bibliography

Jameson, Fredric. The Prison-House of Language: A Critical Account of Structuralism
   and Russian Formalism. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1974.
Joque, Justin. Revolutionary Mathematics: Artificial Intelligence, Statistics, and the
   Logic of Capitalism. London: Verso, 2022.
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Pure Reason. Cambridge Edition of the Works of
   Immanuel Kant. Edited by Paul Guyer and Allen William Wood. Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Karpathy, Andrej. “The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Recurrent Neural Net-
   works.” Andrej Karpathy (blog), 2015. https://karpathy.github.io/2015/05/21
   /rnn-effectiveness/.
Katz, Yarden. Artificial Whiteness: Politics and Ideology in Artificial Intelligence. New
   York: Columbia University Press, 2020.
Katz, Yarden. “Noam Chomsky on Where Artificial Intelligence Went Wrong.”
   Atlantic (blog), November 1, 2012. https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/
   archive/2012/11/noam-chomsky-on-where-artificial-intelligence-went-wrong
   /261637/.
Kelleher, John D. Deep Learning. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2019.
Kirkwood, Jeffrey West. Endless Intervals: Cinema, Psychology, and Semiotechnics
   around 1900. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2022.
Kirschenbaum, Matthew. “Prepare for the Textpocalypse.” Atlantic, March 8, 2023.
   https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2023/03/ai-chatgpt
   -writing-language-models/673318/.
Kirschenbaum, Matthew. “Spec Acts: Reading Form in Recurrent Neural Net-
   works.” ELH 88, no. 2 (2021): 361–86. https://doi.org/10.1353/elh.2021.0010.
Kissinger, Henry, Eric Schmidt, Daniel P. Huttenlocher, and Schuyler Schouten.
   The Age of AI: And Our Human Future. 1st ed. New York: Little, Brown, 2021.
Kittler, Friedrich A. Discourse Networks 1800/1900. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford
   University Press, 1990.
Kittler, Friedrich. Gramophone Film Typewriter. Translated by Geoffrey
   Winthrop-Young and Michael Wutz. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University
    Press, 1999.
Kittler, Friedrich A. The Truth of the Technological World: Essays on the Genealogy
    of Presence. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2014. https://doi.org
    /10.1515/9780804792622.
Kockelman, Paul. Last Words: Large Language Models and the AI Apocalypse.
    Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press, 2024.
Kornbluh, Anna. Immediacy; or, The Style of Too Late Capitalism. London: Verso, 2024.
Kornbluh, Anna. The Order of Forms: Realism, Formalism, and Social Space. Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press, 2019.
Kramnick, Jonathan, and Anahid Nersessian. “Form and Explanation.” Critical
     Inquiry 43, no. 3 (2017): 650–69. https://doi.org/10.1086/691017.
Lacan, Jacques. The Ego in Freud’s Theory and in the Technique of Psychoanalysis,
     1954–1955. Book 2 of The Seminar of Jacques Lacan. New York: W. W. Norton,
     1991.
Lake, Brenden M., and Gregory L. Murphy. “Word Meaning in Minds and
     Machines.” Psychological Review 130, no. 2 (2023): 401–31. https://doi.org
      /10.1037/rev0000297.
                                   Bibliography                                   241

LeCun, Yann, Y. Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. “Deep Learning.” Nature 521 (2015):
    436–44. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14539.
Leffer, Lauren. “A Camera-Wearing Baby Taught an AI to Learn Words.” Scientific
    American, February 1, 2024. https://www.scientificamerican.com/article
    /a-camera-wearing-baby-taught-an-ai-to-learn-words/.
Lenci, Alessandro, and Magnus Sahlgren. Distributional Semantics. Studies in
    Natural Language Processing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2023.
    https://doi.org/10.1017/9780511783692.
Léon, Jacqueline. Automating Linguistics. 1st ed. History of Computing. Cham,
    Switzerland: Springer, 2021.
Levinson, Stephen C. Pragmatics. Cambridge Textbooks in Linguistics. Cam-
    bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
Lévi-Strauss, Claude. Structural Anthropology. New York: Basic Books, 2009.
Leys, Ruth. Anatomy of a Train Wreck: The Rise and Fall of Priming Research. Chi-
    cago: University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.
Li, Xiaochang. “Divination Engines: A Media History of Text Prediction.” PhD diss.,
    New York University, 2017. https://www.proquest.com/docview/1964286735.
Li, Xiaochang. “ ‘There’s No Data Like More Data’: Automatic Speech Recognition
    and the Making of Algorithmic Culture.” Osiris 38 (2023): 165–82. https://doi
    .org/10.1086/725132.
Liu, Lydia. “The Cybernetic Unconscious: Rethinking Lacan, Poe, and French
    Theory.” Critical Inquiry 36, no. 2 (2010): 288–320. https://doi.org/10.1086
     /648527.
Liu, Lydia. The Freudian Robot: Digital Media and the Future of the Unconscious.
     Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010.
Liu, Lydia. “Wittgenstein in the Machine.” Critical Inquiry 47, no. 3 (2021): 425–55.
     https://doi.org/10.1086/713551.
Lovelace, Ada. “Notes on the Sketch of the Analytical Engine.” In Translator’s
     Notes to M. Menabrea’s Memoir on Babbage’s Analytical Engine, 691–731. London:
     Richard and John E. Taylor, 1843.
Lutz, Theo. “Stochastic Texts.” Edited by Nick Monfort. https://nickm.com
     /memslam/stochastic_texts.html.
Lutz, Theo. “Stochastische Texte.” augenblick 4, no. 1 (1959): 3–9.
Mackenzie, Adrian. Machine Learners: Archaeology of a Data Practice. Cambridge,
     Mass.: MIT Press, 2017.
Malabou, Catherine. Morphing Intelligence: From IQ Measurement to Artificial
     Brains. Wellek Library Lectures in Critical Theory. New York: Columbia Univer-
     sity Press, 2019.
Mandelkern, Matthew, and Tal Linzen. “Do Language Models’ Words Refer?”
     ArXiv, March 1, 2024. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.05576.
Maniglier, Patrice. “Processing Cultures: ‘Structuralism’ in the History of Artificial
     Intelligence.” In The Search for a Theory of Cognition, edited by Stefano Franchi
     and Francesco Bianchini, 145–72. Leiden, Netherlands: Brill, 2011. https://doi
     .org/10.1163/9789401207157_006.
Manning, Christopher D. “Human Language Understanding and Reasoning.”
     Daedalus 151, no. 2 (2022): 127–38. https://doi.org/10.1162/daed_a_01905.
Manning, Christopher D. “Probabilistic Syntax.” In Probablistic Linguistics, edited
242                                Bibliography

  by Rens Bod, Jennifer Hay, and Stefanie Jannedy. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
  Press, 2003. https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/5582.003.0011.
Marx, Karl, and Ernest Mandel. Capital: A Critique of Political Economy. Translated
  by David Fernbach. 1867. Reprint, London: Penguin Books, 1992.
McCulloch, Gretchen. Because Internet: Understanding the New Rules of Language.
  New York: Riverhead Books, 2019.
McCulloch, Warren S. “A Heterarchy of Values Determined by the Topology
  of Nervous Nets.” Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 7, no. 2 (1945): 89–93.
  https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02478457.
McCulloch, Warren S., and Walter Pitts. “A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Imma-
  nent in Nervous Activity.” Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 5, no. 4 (1943):
  115–33. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02478259.
McGrath, Laura, Richard Jean So, Ted Underwood, and Chad Wellmon. “Culture,
  Theory, Data: An Introduction.” New Literary History 53, no. 4 (2023): 519–30.
  https://doi.org/10.1353/nlh.2022.a898319.
Mikolov, Tomas, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S. Corrado, and Jeff Dean. “Dis-
  tributed Representations of Words and Phrases and Their Compositionality.”
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26 (2013). https://papers
  .nips.cc/paper/2013/hash/9aa42b31882ec039965f3c4923ce901b-Abstract.html.
Millière, Raphaël, and Cameron Buckner. “A Philosophical Introduction to
  Language Models—Part I: Continuity with Classic Debates.” ArXiv, January 8,
  2024. http://arxiv.org/abs/2401.03910.
Minsky, Marvin, and Seymour Papert. Perceptrons: An Introduction to Computa-
  tional Geometry. Expanded ed. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1988.
Mitchell, Melanie. Artificial Intelligence: A Guide for Thinking Humans. New York:
  Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 2019.
Mitchell, William J. The Reconfigured Eye: Visual Truth in the Post-photographic Era.
  Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2001.
MIT Technology Review. “This Horse-Riding Astronaut Is a Milestone on AI’s Long
  Road towards Understanding.” April 6, 2022. https://www.technologyreview
  .com/2022/04/06/1049061/dalle-openai-gpt3-ai-agi-multimodal-image
  -generation/.
Moi, Toril. Revolution of the Ordinary: Literary Studies after Wittgenstein, Austin,
  and Cavell. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2017.
Mollick, Ethan. Co-intelligence: Living and Working with AI. New York:
  Portfolio/Penguin, 2024.
Mollo, Dimitri Coelho, and Raphaël Millière. “The Vector Grounding Problem.”
  ArXiv, April 3, 2023. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.01481.
Müggenburg, Jan. “Clean by Nature: Lively Surfaces and the Holistic-Systemic
  Heritage of Contemporary Bionik.” Communication 1 3, no. 1 (2014): 1–28.
  https://doi.org/10.7275/R5MK69TR.
Murgia, Madhumita. “Sci-Fi Writer Ted Chiang: ‘The Machines We Have Now Are
  Not Conscious.’ ” Financial Times, June 2, 2023. https://www.ft.com/content
  /c1f6d948-3dde-405f-924c-09cc0dcf8c84.
Neurath, Otto. “The Scientific Conception of the World: The Vienna Circle.” In Em-
  piricism and Sociology, edited by Marie Neurath and Robert S. Cohen, 299–318.
  Dordrecht, Netherlands: D. Reidel, 1973.
                                    Bibliography                                    243

Neurath, Otto, Rudolf Carnap, and Charles Morris. International Encyclopedia of
   Unified Science. Vol. 1. Part 1 (No. 1–5). Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
   1955. http://archive.org/details/B-001-015-449.
Newell, Allen, and Herbert A. Simon. “Computer Science as Empirical Inquiry:
   Symbols and Search.” Communications of the ACM 19, no. 3 (1976): 113–26.
   https://doi.org/10.1145/360018.360022.
Newmeyer, Frederick J. Linguistic Theory in America. 2nd ed. Orlando, Fla.:
   Academic Press, 1986.
Nilsson, Nils J. The Quest for Artificial Intelligence: A History of Ideas and Achieve-
    ments. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
Norvig, Peter. “On Chomsky and the Two Cultures of Statistical Learning.”
    https://norvig.com/chomsky.html.
Olah, Chris, Arvind Satyanarayan, Ian Johnson et al. “The Building Blocks of Inter-
    pretability.” Distill 3, no. 3 (2018): e10. https://doi.org/10.23915/distill.00010.
Ong, Walter J. Rhetoric, Romance, and Technology: Studies in the Interaction of
    Expression and Culture. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2013.
OpenAI. “Better Language Models and Their Implications.” February 14, 2019.
     https://openai.com/blog/better-language-models/.
Ord, Toby. The Precipice: Existential Risk and the Future of Humanity. 1st ed. New
     York: Hachette Books, 2020.
Osgood, Charles E. “Semantic Differential Technique in the Comparative Study of
     Cultures.” American Anthropologist 66, no. 3 (1964): 171–200.
Parisi, Luciana. Contagious Architecture: Computation, Aesthetics, and Space. Tech-
     nologies of Lived Abstraction. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2013.
Parisi, Luciana. “Reprogramming Decisionism.” e-flux Journal 85 (2017). https://
     www.e-flux.com/journal/85/155472/reprogramming-decisionism/.
Parrish, Allison. “Language Models Can Only Write Poetry.” Allison Posts (blog),
     August 13, 2021. https://posts.decontextualize.com/language-models-poetry.
Pasquinelli, Matteo. The Eye of the Master: A Social History of Artificial Intelligence.
     London: Verso, 2023.
Pavlick, Ellie. “Semantic Structure in Deep Learning.” Annual Review of Linguistics
     8 (2022): 447–71. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-linguistics-031120-122924.
Pavlick, Ellie. “Symbols and Grounding in Large Language Models.” Philosophical
     Transactions of the Royal Society A 381, no. 2251 (2023): 20220041. https://doi
     .org/10.1098/rsta.2022.0041.
Peirce, Charles S., Charles Hartshorne, and Paul Weiss. Elements of Logic. Volume 2
     of Principles of Philosophy: Two Volumes in One. Edited by Charles Hartshorne.
     Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1985.
Perrotta, Rachael. “Peabody EDI Office Responds to MSU Shooting with Email
     Written Using ChatGPT.” Vanderbilt Hustler (blog), February 17, 2023. https://
     vanderbilthustler.com/2023/02/17/peabody-edi-office-responds-to-msu
     -shooting-with-email-written-using-chatgpt/.
Piantadosi, Steven. “Modern Language Models Refute Chomsky’s Approach to
     Language.” LingBuzz, March 2023. https://lingbuzz.net/lingbuzz/007180.
Piantadosi, Steven, and Felix Hill. “Meaning without Reference in Large Language
     Models.” 2022. https://openreview.net/forum?id=nRkJEwmZnM.
Pinker, Steven. “Language Acquisition.” In An Invitation to Cognitive Science, vol.
244                               Bibliography

   1, Language, edited by Lila Gleitman, Mark Liberman, and Daniel N. Osherson,
   135. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1995. https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress
   /3964.003.0010.
Pinker, Steven. The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language. New York:
   Harper Perennial, 2010.
Placido, Dani Di. “AI-Generated Attempt to Reveal ‘the Rest of the Mona Lisa’
   Goes Viral.” Forbes, May 31, 2023. https://www.forbes.com/sites/danidiplacido
   /2023/05/31/tech-bros-are-trying-to-improve-the-mona-lisa-using-ai/.
Pourciau, Sarah M. The Writing of Spirit: Soul, System, and the Roots of Language
   Science. 1st ed. New York: Fordham University Press, 2017.
Pressman, Jessica. Digital Modernism: Making It New in New Media. New York:
   Oxford University Press, 2014.
Putnam, Hilary. “The Meaning of ‘Meaning.’ ” 1975. http://conservancy.umn.edu
   /handle/11299/185225.
Quine, Willard V. O. “Two Dogmas of Empiricism.” Philosophical Review 60, no. 1
   (1951): 20–43.
Ramesh, Aditya, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen.
   “Hierarchical Text-Conditional Image Generation with CLIP Latents.” ArXiv,
   April 12, 2022. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2204.06125.
Rey, Georges. “Analyticity and Chomskyan Linguistics.” In The Stanford Encyclo
   pedia of Philosophy, edited by Edward N. Zalta. https://plato.stanford.edu
   /entries/analytic-synthetic/analyticity-chomsky.html.
Rieder, Bernhard. Engines of Order: A Mechanology of Algorithmic Techniques. Re-
   cursions: Theories of Media, Materiality, and Cultural Techniques. Amsterdam:
   Amsterdam University Press, 2020.
Riskin, Jessica. “A Sort of Buzzing inside My Head.” New York Review of Books
   (blog), June 25, 2023. https://www.nybooks.com/online/2023/06/25/a-sort-of
   -buzzing-inside-my-head/.
Rogers, Anna, Olga Kovaleva, and Anna Rumshisky. “A Primer in BERTology: What
   We Know about How BERT Works.” Transactions of the Association for Computa-
   tional Linguistics 8 (2020): 842–66. https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00349.
Roose, Kevin. “A Conversation with Bing’s Chatbot Left Me Deeply Unsettled.”
   New York Times, February 16, 2023. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/02/16
   /technology/bing-chatbot-microsoft-chatgpt.html.
Roose, Kevin. “A.I. Poses ‘Risk of Extinction,’ Industry Leaders Warn.” New York
   Times, May 30, 2023. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/05/30/technology
   /ai-threat-warning.html.
Rosenblatt, Frank. Principles of Neurodynamics: Perceptrons and the Theory of Brain
   Mechanisms. New York: Spartan Books, 1962. https://hdl.handle.net/2027
   /mdp.39015039846566.
Rotman, B. Mathematics as Sign: Writing, Imagining, Counting. Writing Science.
   Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2000.
Rumelhart, David E., ed. Foundations. Volume 1 of Parallel Distributed Processing.
   Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1999.
Runway. “Gen-2 by Runway.” https://research.runwayml.com/gen2.
Sack, Warren. The Software Arts. Software Studies. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
   2019.
                                  Bibliography                                  245

Saussure, Ferdinand de, Wade Baskin, Perry Meisel, and Haun Saussy. Course in
   General Linguistics. New York: Columbia University Press, 2011.
Schaffer, Simon. “Babbage’s Intelligence: Calculating Engines and the Factory
   System.” Critical Inquiry 21, no. 1 (1994): 203–27.
Searle, John R. Review of The Word Turned Upside Down, by Jonathan Culler. New
   York Review of Books, October 27, 1983. https://www.nybooks.com
   /articles/1983/10/27/the-word-turned-upside-down/.
Seaver, Nick. “Attention Is All You Need: Humans and Computers in the Time
   of Neural Networks.” In Scenes of Attention, edited by D. Graham Burnett and
   Justin E. H. Smith, 230–48. Essays on Mind, Time, and the Senses. New York:
   Columbia University Press, 2023. http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.7312
   /burn21118.14.
Shannon, C. E. “Prediction and Entropy of Printed English.” Bell System Technical
   Journal 30, no. 1 (1951): 50–64.
Shannon, Claude Elwood, and Warren Weaver. The Mathematical Theory of Commu-
   nication. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1964.
Shoemaker, Tyler. “Distributional Semantics (without Semantics).” Unpublished
   manuscript.
Siegert, Bernhard. Passage des Digitalen: Zeichenpraktiken der neuzeitlichen Wissen-
   schaften 1500–1900. Berlin: Brinkmann und Bose, 2003.
Silverstein, Michael. “Cognitive Implications of a Referential Hierarchy.” In Social
   and Functional Approaches to Language and Thought, edited by Maya Hickmann,
   125–64. Orlando, Fla.: Academic Press, 1987.
Simon, Herbert A. “Cognitive Science: The Newest Science of the Artificial.”
   Cognitive Science 4, no. 1 (1980): 33–46. https://doi.org/10.1207
   /s15516709cog0401_2.
Simondon, Gilbert. On the Mode of Existence of Technical Objects. Translated by
   Cécile Malaspina and John Rogove. 1st University of Minnesota Press ed.
   Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2017.
Smith, Brian Cantwell. The Promise of Artificial Intelligence: Reckoning and Judg-
   ment. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2019.
Sohn-Rethel, Alfred. Intellectual and Manual Labour: A Critique of Epistemology.
   Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press, 1978.
Spillner, Laura, Robert Porzel, Robin Nolte, and Rainer Malaka. “Conceptual
   Shadows: Visualizing Concept-Specific Dimensions of Meaning in Word
   Embeddings with Self Organizing Maps.” CUER Workshop Proceedings (2023).
   https://muhai.org/images/papers/spillner_conceptual-shadows.pdf.
Srnicek, Nick. Platform Capitalism. Cambridge, U.K.: Polity Press, 2017.
Steyerl, Hito. “Common Sensing?” New Left Review, no. 144 (2023): 69–80.
Steyerl, Hito. “Mean Images.” New Left Review, no. 140/141 (2023): 82–97.
Stiegler, Bernard. Technics and Time. Meridian. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Univer-
   sity Press, 1998.
Stiegler, Bernard, and Barnaby Norman. Symbolic Misery. Vol. 1 of The Hyper-
   industrial Epoch. Cambridge, U.K.: Polity Press, 2014.
Templeton, Adly, Tom Conerly, Jonathan Marcus et al. “Scaling Monosemanticity:
   Extracting Interpretable Features from Claude 3 Sonnet.” https://transformer
   -circuits.pub/2024/scaling-monosemanticity/index.html.
246                               Bibliography

Tenen, Dennis Yi. Literary Theory for Robots: How Computers Learned to Write. New
   York: W. W. Norton, 2024.
Tiqqun [Collective], ed. The Cybernetic Hypothesis. Semiotext(e) Intervention
   Series 28. South Pasadena, Calif.: Semiotext(e), 2020.
Tomasello, Michael, and Paul Ibbotson. “Evidence Rebuts Chomsky’s Theory of
   Language Learning.” Scientific American, November 1, 2016. https://www
   .scientificamerican.com/article/evidence-rebuts-chomsky-s-theory-of
   -language-learning/.
Tomlinson, Gary. Culture and the Course of Human Evolution. Chicago: University
   of Chicago Press, 2018.
Tomlinson, Gary. The Machines of Evolution and the Scope of Meaning. New York:
   Zone Books, 2023.
Turing, Alan M. “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.” Mind: A Quarterly Re-
   view of Psychology and Philosophy 59, no. 236 (1950). https://academic.oup.com
   /mind/article-abstract/LIX/236/433/986238.
Turing, Alan M. “Lecture on the Automatic Computing Engine (1947).” In The
   Essential Turing, edited by B. J. Copeland, 362–94. Oxford: Oxford University
   Press, 2004.
Turing, Alan M. “On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entschei-
   dungsproblem.” Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society s2–42, no. 1
   (1937): 230–65. https://doi.org/10.1112/plms/s2-42.1.230.
Underwood, Ted. “The Empirical Triumph of Theory.” In the Moment (blog), June
   29, 2023. https://critinq.wordpress.com/2023/06/29/the-empirical-triumph
   -of-theory/.
Ure, Andrew. The Philosophy of Manufactures; or, An Exposition of the Scientific,
   Moral, and Commercial Economy of the Factory System of Great Britain/Andrew
   Ure. Reprints of Economic Classics. New York: A. M. Kelley, 1967.
Varela, Francisco J., Evan Thompson, and Eleanor Rosch. The Embodied Mind:
   Cognitive Science and Human Experience. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1993.
Vaswani, Ashish, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar et al. “Attention Is All You Need.”
    Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 (2017). https://papers
    .nips.cc/paper/2017/hash/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Abstract.html.
Vig, Jesse. “A Multiscale Visualization of Attention in the Transformer Model.”
    In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
    Linguistics: System Demonstrations, edited by Marta R. Costa-jussà and Enrique
    Alfonseca, 37–42. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019: 37–42.
    https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P19-3007.
Vincent, James. “This AI-Written Pop Song Is Almost Certainly a Dire Warning for
    Humanity.” The Verge, September 26, 2016. https://www.theverge.com/2016/9
    /26/13055938/ai-pop-song-daddys-car-sony.
Voloshinov, V. N. Marxism and the Philosophy of Language. Cambridge, Mass.:
    Harvard University Press, 2000.
von Neumann, J. “First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC.” IEEE Annals of the His-
     tory of Computing 15, no. 4 (1993): 27–75. https://doi.org/10.1109/85.238389.
Weatherby, Leif. “ChatGPT Broke the Turing Test.” Boston Globe, November 13,
     2023. https://www.bostonglobe.com/2023/11/13/opinion/turing-test-ai
     -chatgpt/.
                                  Bibliography                                   247

Weatherby, Leif. “Digital Metaphysics.” Hedgehog Review, Spring 2018. https://
   hedgehogreview.com/issues/the-human-and-the-digital/articles/digital
   -metaphysics.
Weatherby, Leif. “Intermittent Legitimacy: Hans Blumenberg and Artificial
   Intelligence.” New German Critique 49, no. 1 (145) (2022): 11–39. https://doi
    .org/10.1215/0094033X-9439601.
Weatherby, Leif. “Irony and Redundancy: The Alt Right, Media Manipulation, and
    German Idealism.” Boundary 2 (blog), June 24, 2019. https://www.boundary2
    .org/2019/06/leif-weatherby-irony-and-redundancy-the-alt-right-media
    -manipulation-and-german-idealism/.
Weatherby, Leif, and Brian Justie. “Indexical AI.” Critical Inquiry 48, no. 2 (2022):
    381–415. https://doi.org/10.1086/717312.
Wei, Jason, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans et al. “Chain-of-Thought Prompting
    Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models.” ArXiv, January 10, 2023. http://
    arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903.
Weinberg, Justin. “Philosophers on GPT-3 (Updated with Replies by GPT-3).” Daily
    Nous, July 30, 2020. https://dailynous.com/2020/07/30/philosophers-gpt-3/.
Weizenbaum, Joseph. Computer Power and Human Reason: From Judgment to
    Calculation. New York: W. H. Freeman, 1976.
Weizenbaum, Joseph. “ELIZA: A Computer Program for the Study of Natural
     Language Communication between Man and Machine.” Communications of the
     ACM 9, no. 1 (1966): 36–45.
Wiggins, Chris, and Matthew L. Jones. How Data Happened: A History from the Age
     of Reason to the Age of Algorithms. 1st ed. New York: W. W. Norton, 2023.
Wigner, E. P. “The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural
     Sciences.” In Philosophical Reflections and Syntheses, edited by Jagdish Mehra,
      534–49. Collected Works of Eugene Paul Wigner. Berlin: Springer, 1995.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-78374-6_41.
Williams, Raymond L. Marxism and Literature. Marxist Introductions. Oxford:
      Oxford University Press, 2009.
Wolfram, Stephen. “What Is ChatGPT Doing . . . and Why Does It Work?,” Febru-
      ary 14, 2023. https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2023/02/what-is-chatgpt
      -doing-and-why-does-it-work/.
Wynter, Sylvia. “The Ceremony Found: Towards the Autopoetic Turn/Overturn,
      Its Autonomy of Human Agency and Extraterritoriality of (Self-)Cognition.”
      In Black Knowledges/Black Struggles: Essays in Critical Epistemology, edited by
      Jason R. Ambroise and Sabine Broeck, 184–245. Liverpool, U.K.: Liverpool
      University Press, 2015.
Yiu, Eunice, Eliza Kosoy, and Alison Gopnik. “Transmission versus Truth,
      Imitation versus Innovation: What Children Can Do That Large Language
      and Language-and-Vision Models Cannot (Yet).” Perspectives on Psychological
      Science 19, no. 5 (2024): 874–83. https://doi.org/10.1177/17456916231201401.
This page intentionally left blank
Index

aboutness: of metalanguage, 171; poetic,           intuitions governing, 60; semiology
   161; quantitative, 162; teleodynamic,           of, 38; semiotic regime of, 16, 26;
   20; between words, 164                          statistical view of, 54–55; structuralist
Abraham, Tara, 97                                  analysis of, 38; symbolic, 84, 106, 123;
ACE (Automatic Computing Engine),                  symbolist, 130, 147; thought experi-
   Turing’s, 93                                    ments concerning, 195
Adger, David, 48–49                             AI, generative, 38, 183; cognitive mapping
Adobe, generative fill function of, 181            in, 191; in commercials, 185; cultural
Adorno, Theodor W., 106; Alt Right on,             objects of, 7, 19, 22, 83, 185, 199; effect
   180; on art, 192; ChatGPT’s engage-             on platform economy, 205; images
   ment with, 179; critical theory of, 179;        of, 120; irreproducibility in, 228n9;
   Dialectics of Enlightenment, 179; on            of meaning, 4, 38, 130–31; of music,
   falsity of ideology, 192–93; on film,           175–76; as totality of ideology, 194
   175; on form, 123; on ideology, 198;         AI culture, 1–2; form in, 124; human intel-
   philosophy of culture, 174; technical           ligence and, 81; meaning of systems in,
   language of, 176; on technology/media           7; production of, 79; rise of, 207; role
   relationship, 174                               of poetics in, 2
AGI (artificial general intelligence), 5, 99,   algorithms, language, 1–2; architec-
   100; in science fiction, 36–37                  ture of, 2; backpropagation, 89, 198;
AI: attention mechanism of, 116–18;                cognition by, 20; conditioning by
   authentically wrong, 94; calls for             language, 185–86; cultural production
    moratorium on, 34; in classical               by, 77; digital signs of, 100; generation
    computing machines, 26; classifying            of images, 120; imitation of formal
    function of, 38; cognitive aspects of,         language, 146; reproduction of the
    1, 191; as conditioned by humans, 130;         avant-garde, 209; toy versions of, 120,
    Dartmouth proposal for, 96; descrip-           185; for writing, 202. See also language,
    tors lacking for, 89; Disneyfication           computational
    effects of, 95–96; explanatory, 137;        alphabet, the: as discrete set, 25
    GOFAI, 84, 85, 90; ideological capture      Althusser, Louis: on ideology, 188, 189;
    by, 194; inhumanly right, 93, 94, 210;         on the real, 189
    judgments made by, 105; malfunc-            Alt Right, on critical theory, 180
    tion in, 37; modeling of culture, 22,       Amaro, Ramon, 113
    38; multimodality of, 27, 38, 89, 171;      Amazon, Mechanical Turk of, 107
    panic cycles concerning, 4, 10, 18, 185,    animals, semiosis among, 22
    222n1; perceived risk in, 30, 36, 37,       Anthropic: Claude system, 119, 154–55;
    215n33; as performance, 99; physical           “Golden Gate bridge” paper, 228n7
    symbol systems of, 106; political risk      API (application programming interface),
    of, 83; public discourse concerning, 1;        196, 197
    representation systems construct-           apperception, transcendental unity of, 97
    ing, 106; reproduction of genres,           Aristotle: dialectics of, 210, 211; general
    4–5; in screenwriting, 175; semantic           poetics of, 138



                                            249
250                                         Index

art: consubstantiality with ideology, 192;       Bayes, Thomas, 56; empiricism of, 58–59;
   experimental, 209; revelatory capaci-            role in information retrieval, 219n49
   ties of, 193                                  Beatles, 175; continuity with Schönberg,
artificial, the: demarcators of, 25                 176
Astronaut Riding a Horse on the Moon             behaviorism, American, 14
   (DALL-E image), 27, 28 (fig.)                 Bender, Emily, 12, 31–32, 118; on filters,
attention: heads, 151, 161; linguistic val-         33; internalism of, 11
   ues of, 139; self-attention, 161–62           Benjamin, Walter: on language, 139
“Attention Is All You Need” (Vaswani             Bense, Max, 124, 125–26
   et al.), 148                                  Benveniste, Émile, 135
attention mechanism: in computational            BERTology, 215n33
   language, 155; each-to-all matrix of,         bias: in data, 8; empirical study of, 153;
   151; goal of, 149; indexical function of,        in language, 8, 33, 99, 213n2; RLHF-
   118; in language-computation conver-             induced, 150; symbolic, 102
   gence, 139; in LLMs, 150, 161, 164, 164       Bible, probability score for, 187
   (fig.); matrix of, 152; poetry generated      Big Data, 85; learning from, 87, 89
   by, 154–55; prediction in, 117; pre-          Biological Computer Laboratory (Univer-
   trained values of, 151; QKV matrices             sity of Illinois), NumaRete of, 55 (fig.),
   of, 148–49; quantitative valuation              85–86
   in, 153; refining of word groups, 177;        Bloomfield, Leonard: anticonceptualism
   scanning process, 148; sequences of,             of, 56–57
   151; temperature feature of, 117; in          Boas, Franz, 50
   transformer architecture, 116; vectors        Boden, Margaret, 218n5
   of, 117; in writing, 198                      Boeing, platform economy of, 198
Augustine, Saint: on nature of words, 66         Bolzmann, Ludwig, 132
Austin, J. L., 126                               bonds, symbolic, 23; self-mythologizing
automation: attending function of, 198;             function of, 23–24
   industrial, 197; of sound, 203. See also      Bostrom, Nick, 36
   language automation                           brain, human: digital/analog aspects of,
autonomy: computational, 196; of the                87; role in knowledge, 97; as transfer
   imaginary, 191; of language, 29, 50, 102         station, 113; word maps of, 54
avant-garde, the: algorithmically repro-         Breiman, Leo, 62
   ducible, 209; Greenberg on, 183–84,           Broussard, Meredith, 223n24
   193; redemption in, 193                       Browning, Jacob, 11
                                                 Buckner, Cameron J., 218n13; on atten-
Babbage, Charles, 209; analytical engine            tion mechanism, 149
   of, 201, 202; on French Revolution,           Bunz, Mercedes, 71
   200–201; on mathematical reasoning,           Burks, Arthur, 214n25
   196; on mental division of labor, 230n7       Buschek, Christo, 34
Badiou, Alain, 221n80                            Bush, Jeb: campaign slogan of, 159
Bajohr, Hannes, 173, 223n24                      Butler, Judith: Gender Trouble, 41
Barthes, Roland, 26, 221n78; on
   Aristotle’s dialectics, 210, 211; on prob-   capitalism: computational-rhetorical sys-
    ability, 210; “Rhetoric of the Image,”          tems of, 40; computation’s enabling
    182; semiology of, 75; on signs, 29; on         of, 206; data-semiotic pathways in,
    written word, 103                               179; digital, 35; platform, 104, 196;
Bateman, Justine, 175                               realist, 187–88; in remainder human-
Bataille, George: on general economy, 70            ism, 34–35; surplus value gains, 202;
Baudrillard, Jean: on Disneyfication,               technological phase of, 190
    95–96, 99, 192; The Gulf War Did Not         capitalization, write function in, 205–6
    Take Place, 41; on simulacra, 38             CAPTCHAs, meaning of images in, 91–92
                                          Index                                         251

Carnap, Rudolf, 104, 130, 214n25; Frege        Claude (Anthropic system), 119; poetry
   and, 14, 166; on logic, 56; logical            generated by, 154–55
   syntax of, 15                               Coca-Cola, AI ad, 120
cartography. See mapping                       coding: content becoming, 224n15; deep
Cassirer, Ernst, 97                               learning and, 6–7; identities in, 6;
Center for AI Safety, 36                          representational, 190; Turing’s work
chains of thought, stochastic, 119, 229n22        in, 94; by women, 201
chatbots: calls for moratorium on,             cognition: by algorithms, 20; capitalistic
   217n77; Eliza effect in, 82; expression        motivation and, 34; determination
   of love, 82–83; panic concerning, 79,          by neurology, 74; as essence, 35;
   196; personae of, 216n41; RLHF train-          extensive, 212; humanistic inquiry
   ing of, 185; Turing test and, 80               into, 22; versus intelligence, 93; in
ChatGPT, 3–4; “enlightenment is dia-              learning systems, 23; mapping, 191;
   lectical” results, 179–80; intelligence        “merge” in, 49; outside of conscious-
   of, 4; “ohne Anmeldung Kostenlos”              ness, 20; semiotics of, 17–30, 74–77,
   sequence, 145, 150, 154, 161, 164 (fig.);      211; as simulacrum, 93–100; technical
   panic concerning, 196; RLHF in, 118;           sciences on, 30; use of signs, 22. See
   servile tone of, 11; shutdown of,              also culture-cognition relationship;
   82; summarization of Handelman,                language-cognition relationship
   179–80; university communications           cognitive science: culture debates of,
   by, 178                                        74; empiricism in, 46; literary theory
Chiang, Ted, 19, 228n5                            and, 123; philosophical limitations
Chinese language, combinators of, 134–35          of, 221n82; poststructuralism and, 37;
Chomsky, Noam, 17, 118, 136; approach to          rationalism in, 46; semiology in, 76; as
   language, 36; Cartesian linguistics of,        study of information, 74; understand-
   46; cognitive science of, 37, 44, 46, 53,      ing of intelligence, 92–93
   61; “colorless green ideas” sequence,       cognitive systems, 20; simulation of,
   45, 62–63, 167–68; on continuum of             12–13
   sciences, 77; on creativity, 218n6; on      cognitivism, culture as symptom of, 19
   cultural language, 69; on data-learning    Collingwood, R. C.: reconstruction of
   systems, 61; on deep learning, 50;             Eliot, 142
   on E-language/I-language, 52; on            commodities: digital, 198; ideas as,
   human-machine divide, 30–31, 32; on            198–99; Marx on, 68, 198
   language models, 56; LLMs and, 42,          Common Crawl (data set), 27; grammati-
   49; “Plato’s problem,” 49; rationalism         cal language of, 54; pretraining use, 54
   of, 53; on recursion, 47; Syntactic         communication: biological substrates of,
   Structures, 44, 56; syntax doctrine of,        129; capture-generate dialectic of, 133;
   41, 50–53, 167–68; universal grammar           deep-structural conditions of, 160; de-
   of, 44–45, 46; use of poetic function,         fault channels of, 173; entropy in, 132;
   168–69                                         general situation diagram, 156 (fig.);
Chun, Wendy, 94; on the immaterial, 192;          language as, 61; linguistic response to,
   on software, 189, 190–91                       11; nonintentional, 32; redundancy in,
Church, Alonzo, 201                               133; semantics of, 129–30; of signs, 21;
civilization, writing-based, 40, 103, 206         syntax in, 129–30; universal, 155
classification: AI function for, 38; in deep   computation: capture-generative dialectic
   learning, 101; in digital surround, 101;       of, 203; capture of ideology, 1; classical,
   hypothesis in, 109; information about          216n56; enabling of capitalism, 206; as
   world in, 101–2; by neural nets, 110; of       function of thought, 167; generativity
   representation, 120; role of language          in, 17, 203; grammatology of, 101;
   in, 38, 105–6, 114–21, 120–21; semio-          ideology machines of, 189; images in,
   logical surround of, 109                       103; open form of, 123; production
252                                       Index

   of symbolic order, 216n57; represen-           of, 75; relationship to art, 20, 172–73;
   tation and, 81, 84; return of rhetoric         relationship to language, 5, 64, 69,
   and, 206–12; semiotic function of,             134, 136, 222n89; secularization of
   25. See also language, computational;          metaphysics, 215n38; semiotic, 21,
   language-computation convergence;              22; transmission of, 19; transmission
   meaning, computational                         of content, 21. See also AI culture;
computational-culture interface: of               computational-culture interface
   LLMs, 54; poetics of, 1, 2; reactions       culture, digital: form of language in, 121;
   against, 31; rhetoric and, 210. See also       political economy of, 40
   AI culture; cultural systems                culture, generative, 39, 102, 183; transi-
computational systems: coexistence with           tion to, 187
   language, 25; human participation in,       culture-cognition relationship: binary of,
   38; material/concrete effects of, 105;         2, 19, 27; in cognitive science debates,
   as unfathomable, 33                            74; competition in, 215n38. See also
Conan Doyle, Arthur: The Lost World, 3            cognition
connectionism, 6, 214n8; of machine            culture machines: capitalism and, 34;
   counting systems, 87; in machine               empirical poetics of, 28; theoretical
   learning, 84; search for patterns, 7;          problems of, 18
   subsymbols in, 91                           Curtius, Ernst Robert: European Litera-
consciousness: cognition outside of, 20;          ture and the Latin Middle Ages, 209
   intelligence and, 93; unity of, 51–52,      cybernetic hypothesis, 112
   165                                         cybernetics: Aristotelian rhetoric and,
conspiracy theory, cognitive mapping              211; Derrida on, 70, 72; digital pro-
   and, 191                                       grams of, 211; Jakobson’s, 165; Lacan’s
Constitution, U.S.: probability score for,        engagement with, 221n80; of LLMs,
   186–87                                         197; structuralism and, 214n3; view of
contrastive language–image pretraining            intelligence, 99–100
   (CLIP), 27
creativity: in intelligence, 84; of LLMs, 19   “Daddy’s Car” (AI song), 228n4; neural
critical theory, 91; Adorno’s, 179; Alt           net of, 175
   Right on, 180; meaning/value relation-      DALL-E (transformer model), 120;
   ship in, 206                                   Astronaut Riding a Horse on the Moon,
Culler, Jonathan, on literary theory, 137         27, 28 (fig.)
cultural production: by algorithms, 77;        Darwin, Charles: The Descent of Man, 19
   automatic, 5; by LLMs, 126; in machine      data: automatically generated patterns
   form, 212                                      in, 7; beautiful, 113; culture and,
cultural systems: artifactual nature of,          43–44, 124; derivativeness of, 113;
   53; capture by language models, 5;             engagement with undatafied world,
   Lévi-Strauss’s, 23; linguistics as, 66;        112; generality across domains,
   transmission of meaning in, 21                 27; generated by data, 27; human-
culture: the avant-garde and, 173;                machine remix of, 208; judgmental
   encoding of, 213n1; Enlightenment,             relationships of, 110–11; for learn-
   19; general, 212; identity and, 193;           ing systems, 22–23, 84, 87, 89, 143;
   as imitation, 18; industry of, 175,            presentist bias in, 8; semiotics of, 44,
   192; interaction with information, 6;          105, 179; social, 12; transparency for,
   intersection with economics, 32–33; in         104–5; unfathomable, 153; unsurvey-
   language-computation convergence,              ability of, 213n2
   27–28, 54, 90, 191; in LLMs, 13, 126,       data hypotheses, 58–59; beautiful data
   173; modeling of, 22, 26, 38, 75; poetic       and, 113; concerning structures of
   function in, 159; predigested, 183–84;         representation, 111; determination
   primates’, 22; probabilistic models            and possibility in, 111; judgments in,
                                          Index                                         253

   100; language and, 38, 113; as semiotic     document-term matrices, 60
   surround, 105                               Donald, Merlin, 19
data sets, 27; common topoi of, 187;           doomerism, concerning AI, 30, 36, 37
   grammatical language of, 54; for            Dreyfus, Hubert, 30, 217n64
   LLMs, 50, 54, 150; for machine learn-       Duesterberg, James, 216n50
   ing, 85, 87, 89; for training, 8, 32, 54,   Dupuy, Jean-Pierre, 81
   107, 108–9, 213n2
Deacon, Terrence W., 20, 21, 216n42            economy, platform: commodity-to-digital
deep learning, 1; in algorithmic model-           in, 198; semiotic, 205
   ing, 74; challenge to computing, 207;       economy, restricted and general, 70–71, 73
   classification by, 101; coding and,         E-language, I-language and, 52, 161
   6–7; distributional hypothesis of, 135;     Eliot, T. S., “Sweeney among the Nightin-
   evaluation functions of, 7; generation        gales”: reconstruction of, 142–43
   in, 101; language models in, 61; liter-     Eliza (chatbot), Rogerian therapy pro-
   ary criticism and, 77; pre-computer,          gram of, 79–80
   6; public concern over, 6; role in lan-     Eliza effect (AI), 38, 79, 154, 157–58; digi-
   guage, 38; in symbolic computing, 26;          tal semiotic of, 100; effect on chatbots,
   totalities of, 211. See also learning          88; global, 81, 183; human choice in,
deixis: exclusion of semantics from,              95; language-cognition relationship
   214n25; in pragmatics, 15                      in, 83; notions of intelligence and, 93;
Deleuze, Gilles: ontology of, 90                  semantic package of, 82; semiological
Dennett, Daniel, 95, 96                           operations of, 83; simulation by, 80
denotation: of generated images, 183;          emails, automated, 202
   reference and, 182–83                       empiricism: algorithmic basis for, 131;
Derrida, Jacques, 214n3; conflict with            attitudinal, 53; Bayes’s, 58; in cognitive
   Searle, 126; on cybernetics, 72; “Dif-         science, 46; Kant’s, 53; in language,
   férance,” 71; on machine learning, 135;        42, 131; of structuralism, 67; Vienna
   on metaphysics, 221n84; Of Gram-               School of, 15; view of statistics, 56
   matology, 70–71, 230n19; reading of         English language: entropy of, 132;
   Saussure, 24, 69–73, 220n71; revision          patterns of, 131–32; present state of,
   of structuralism, 73; on signifiers, 69;       8; printed, 134; probability in, 147;
   on signs, 216n50; Spectres of Marx,            propositional logic of, 134; symbolic
   41–42; on writing, 69, 70, 72                  capital of, 222n90; synthetic order of,
digital systems: changing of meaning,             203; tokens in, 162
   91; Disneyfication in, 95–96; dualisms      Enlightenment, view of rhetoric, 208
   of, 112–13; hybrids with statistics, 92;    entertainment: continuity with ma-
   performative contradiction of, 95;             chines, 176; merger with industrial
   semiology of, 31; structuralism and,           knowledge, 175; work and, 174
   213n3; trust in, 93                         entropy: of bad television, 185; in
digital theory: formalism of, 90; natural         communication, 132; relative, 132; in
   language in, 207; relationship to ma-          understanding of language, 132–33
   chine learning, 38                          evolution, semiotic theory of, 216n42
Digital Theory Lab (New York Univer-           externalism (language), 11, 12, 13
   sity), 225n1
Disneyfication: Baudrillard on, 95–96, 99,     Fanon, Frantz: on sociogeny, 113
   192; in digital systems, 95                 Fazi, Beatrice, 104
distributed processing, parallel, 6, 135       Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, 218n26
distributionalism, 57–59, 136; occurrences     film: Adorno on, 175; discrete-to-
   in, 61                                         continuous movement of, 25; kitsch
Dobson, James, 25–26, 91                          of, 184; the Real in, 203; scriptments
Doctorow, Cory, 195                               for, 200; treatments for, 200
254                                       Index

Firth, J. R., 60, 74–75; on context, 149;         See also AI, generative; culture, genera-
   distributional hypothesis of, 55–56            tive; meaning generation
Fisher, Mark: capitalist realism of,           generative fill, 181–83, 193
   187–88; on neoliberal ideology, 229n40      genres (language), 13–14; AI reproduction
Fodor, Jerry, 7; on connectionism, 214n8          of, 4–5
form: Cartesian, 47; developmental, 123;       Gibson, William, 185
   as eidos, 123; external, 123; within gen-   Goedel, Kurt, 39, 94, 124; on formal
   eration, 170; generation of, 106–7, 129;       systems, 139–40; numbering system
   the historical and, 130; in language-         of, 166, 170; scientific philosophy of,
   computation convergence, 39, 138, 165;         166; on syntactic closure, 123, 165; in
   in language processing, 225n4; in liter-       Vienna School, 166
   ary artifacts, 129; literary theory and,    GOFAI (good old-fashioned AI), 84, 85;
   137; in mathematics, 225n1; meaning            relations among meanings in, 90
   and, 12, 120–21; as morphē, 123, 152; in    Goldstein, Rebecca, 228n49
   neural nets, 6–7, 123, 128; predigested,    Goodwin, Ross: 1 the Road, 128
   182; and social life, 123; syntax and,      Google Dream, 115
   123–24; technological creation of,          Gopnik, Alison, 18–19, 22, 27
   106–7; transactions giving rise to, 128     GPTs (generative pretrained trans
Foucault, Michel: on ideology, 188                formers): Communist Manifesto
Frankfurt School, 179                             fed into, 185; draft writing by,
Frege, Gottlob, 15, 16, 130; Carnap and,          199–200, 230n2; goals of, 5; plat-
   14, 166; on function, 110; on syntax,          form aesthetics of, 175; quantitative
   134                                            ideology of, 174; Reddit in, 225n37;
French Revolution, mathematical work              semiology of, 116; training of, 92;
   of, 196, 200–201                               tuning of, 187, 229n22; word-number
Fukuyama, Francis: end-of-history thesis,         synthesis, 5
   42                                          GPT-2: completion of system prompts,
                                                  3–4; progression in output of, 185;
Galloway, Alexander, 90–91                        sources for, 3; ungrounded, 11
Gastaldi, Juan Luis, 39, 134–35, 213n3;        GPT-3, 148; encoding of culture, 213n1;
  on deep learning, 135; structuralist            prediction in, 149; production values
  hypothesis of, 136, 137, 143, 150; on           of, 149; tokens of, 117, 148; “Wallace
  vector space, 147                               Stevens” poem, 126–27
Gebru, Timnit, 31–32, 36                       grammar: autonomous, 50; Chomsky on,
Geertz, Clifford, 21                              44–46; local semantics and, 168; role in
generation: capture and, 118, 141, 203,           meaning, 45–46; universal, 44–45, 46
  204; civilizational effects of, 195;         gramophone: continuous-to-continuous
  computational poetics as, 162; versus           transcription on, 25; the Real in, 203
  creation, 181; in deep learning, 101;        Gramsci, Antonio: on hegemony, 181
  of form, 106–7, 128, 129; form within,       Greenberg, Clement: on the avant-garde,
  170; grounding and, 119; human, 116;            183–84, 193; on kitsch, 39, 173, 181;
  of ideology, 187, 228n4; of images, 101,        Marxism of, 184
  120; irreproducibility of, 228n9; lan-       grounding: as component of meaning,
  guage as matrix of, 105–6, 114–21, 157;         13; generation and, 119; in linguistic
  in language-computation convergence,            functions, 16; symbolic, 10–13, 89
  101, 113, 171, 204; of patterns, 102;        Guillory, John, 222n90; on rhetoric, 207,
  performance of language, 204; by po-            208
  etic function, 159–60; probability and,
  210; of thinking, 203; understanding         Hacking, Ian, 230n7
  and, 131; use of symbols, 105; using ar-     hallucination, 180; in image generation,
  bitrary meaning, 133; of writing, 202.          120; linguistic, 10–11; in LLMs, 119
                                          Index                                        255

Handelman, Matthew: The Mathematical           Hustle Culture, 158
   Imagination, 179–80                         hydrogen bomb, stored-program machine
Handke, Peter: “The Lineup of First Foot-         use, 93
   ball Club . . . 1968,” 141–42, 143, 172     hypomnesis, writing as form of, 72
Harnad, Stevan, 10; on symbolic ground-        hypotheses: formation of, 109–10;
   ing, 89                                        rule and result in, 109. See also data
Harris, Zellig, 60, 64, 72, 227n32; distri-       hypotheses
   butionalism of, 57–59; on meaning, 57;
   structuralism of, 69                        iconicity, diagrammatic, 12
Haugeland, John, 84, 123–24                    idealism: German, 218n16; in language
Hayles, N. Katherine, 20, 21; on bots,            production, 173
   216n41; How We Became Posthuman,            ideas, commodification of, 198–99
   221n82                                      identity: culture and, 193; effect of
headwiring, 37                                    automation on, 197–98; in ideological
Heidegger, Martin: on being-in-the-               state apparatuses, 189; next-word, 141;
   world, 30                                      stability of, 123
heurisis (discovery), Aristotelian, 210        ideology: as actual speech, 188; arbi-
Hill, Felix, 214n13                               trariness of signs in, 182; capture
Hjelmslev, Louis, 135; glossematics of, 75;       of denotation, 182; compositional
   Prolegomena to a Theory of Language,           function of, 188; computation’s
   74–77; syntagmatic/paradigmatic                capture of, 1; conditions of possibility
   diagram, 144 (fig.)                            and, 188; consubstantiality with art,
Horkheimer, Max, 106; critical theory of,         192; as content, 178; critique, 189,
   179; Dialectics of Enlightenment, 179;         191–92; deceitful, 176, 189–90, 193,
   on film, 175; on technology/media              199; empirical, 174; expressive, 40, 173,
   relationship, 174                              174, 181; falsity of, 192–93; formulation
Hui, Yuk, 224n17                                  of knowledge, 188; generated, 228n4;
humanism: analog, 90–91; inquiry into             generation by poetic function, 187;
   cognition, 22                                  kitsch as, 181, 184–85; linguistic envi-
humanism, remainder, 2, 30–37, 137,               ronment of, 180, 192; linking function
   194, 212; as antihumanism, 36, 37; on          of, 188; LLMs’ output of, 39, 173, 180,
   authorship, 95; capitalism in, 34–35;          188; LLMs’ transformation of, 205;
   media systems and, 196; political mo-          neoliberal, 190; nonlinearity in, 187;
   tivations in, 37; racist, 36; reference-      political, 181; as predigested form, 173;
   first language and, 16; retreat from           quantitative measure of, 180; scanning
   machine, 81; sentimentality in, 36, 37;        function of, 188; in semantic packages,
   on simulation/reality duality, 96–97;          186; as service, 198; software as, 26,
   technics and, 69; unscientific nature          189; speech in, 174; symbolic, 189, 190;
   of, 33                                         transcendental, 39, 173–74, 187–88,
humanities: disciplinary isolation of, 42;        194; as truth, 198
   loss of language, 43, 69, 73, 221n89;       Igarashi, Yohei, 207–8
   loss of status, 37, 42; technical lan-      images: algorithmic generation of, 120;
   guage and, 10                                  application of language to, 92; in
human-machine divide: arbitrary, 35;              computation, 103; denotational, 182;
   Chomsky on, 30–31; ethical aspects             extrapolative, 182; as form of reality,
   of, 31–34, 37; internal theory of, 30;         23; generation of, 101, 120; generative
   structuralist insight into, 36. See also       fill, 181–83, 193; ladders of reference
   humanism, remainder                            and, 182–83; paired with texts, 27, 101;
Humboldt, Wilhelm von, 46, 47                     text-conditional generation of, 120.
Husserl, Edmund: on time-                        See also DALL-E
   consciousness, 224n17                       imaginary, the: autonomous, 191; as
256                                        Index

   ideology, 190; self in, 188, 203; sym-         157–58; on poetic function, 138–39,
   bolic register of, 189                         140, 155, 158–60, 172, 226n25; on poet-
index, the: versus icons, 91; relationship        ics, 39, 124; on structuralist phonol-
   to object, 21; symbolic, 214n25                ogy, 159; use of cybernetics, 165
indexicality: across large corpus, 27; of      Jameson, Fredric, 221n78; on postmod-
   attention mechanism, 118; of poetry,           ernism, 190–91, 229n27; on Saussure,
   142; in pragmatics, 15; of semantic            221n78; on symbolic register, 188–89
   packages, 180                               Japanese language, “merge” in, 48
indexing: of numbers, 166, 167 (fig.);         Jones, Matthew, 58
   words to numbers, 72                        judgments: datafication of, 77; in data hy-
induction: hypothesis in, 111–12; by              potheses, 100; made by AI, 105; social
   neural nets, 108, 109                          system of, 112; as units of reference, 14
industrialization: entertainment and,          Jung, Carl: on shadow self, 82–83
   174–75; nature of commodities in,           Justie, Brian, 91, 118
   198; rhetoric’s decline following, 207;
   steam engine, 197, 199 (fig.)               Kafka, Franz: The Castle, 124, 125, 195
Industrial Revolution, 40, 197; computa-       Kahneman, Daniel, 219n51
   tion following, 206                         Kant, Immanuel, 49; categories of under-
information: interaction with culture, 6;         standing, 51; Critique of Pure Reason,
   replacing of rhetoric, 208                     52; empiricism of, 53; on form, 47; on
information retrieval: Bayes’s role in,           intuition, 51–52; linking problem of,
   219n49; relevance in, 60                       51; rationalism of, 58; schema concept
information theory: classical, 131, 175; in       of, 52, 106; on syntax, 52; on unity, 165
   Jakobson’s works, 166; language in,         Karpathy, Andrej, 227n20; “The Unrea-
   131; Shannon’s, 39, 46, 117, 143; signals      sonable Effectiveness of Recurrent
   in, 175; statements outside language           Neural Nets,” 146
   in, 169–70                                  Katz, Yarden, 217n77
intelligence: AI culture and, 81; anthro      Kerouac, Jack: On the Road, 128
   pomorphic, 81; of ChatGPT, 4; versus        keyboard, QWERTY, 203–5
   cognition, 93; cognitive science on,        Kirkwood, Jeffrey, 90, 230n18
   92–93; consciousness and, 93; crea         Kirschenbaum, Matthew, 128; formalism
   tivity in, 84; cultural sense of, 80;          of, 137; “textapocalypse” of, 195, 197
   cybernetic view of, 99–100; digital         Kissinger, Henry, 224n32
   semiotic surround of, 93; formal-          kitsch: as ideology, 181, 184–85; as pre
   semiotic aspect of, 92; incompleteness         digested form, 173, 184
   of, 95; isolation of symbolic systems,      Kittler, Friedrich, 230nn18, 19; anti-
   211; mathematical definition of, 94;           hermeneutics of, 26, 204; on com-
   metaphysical concept of, 99; modeling          puter systems, 25, 101, 203, 207; on
   of, 96–97; of neural nets, 83; opacity         desexuated writing, 230n14; Discourse
   in, 94; quality/quantity in, 98; rela-         Networks, 230n20; Gramophone Film
   tionship to language, 27, 30; semiotic,        Typewriter, 203; on grammatology,
   93–100, 211; as simulacrum, 99; social         207; on language/computer relation-
   sense of, 80; theories of, 80; transpar-       ship, 114; on linguistic signs, 204;
   ency in, 94; values and, 99. See also AI       media theory of, 24–26, 221n80; on
internalism (language), 11–12, 13                 remediated computer, 231n22; “There
interpretability, 215n33; mechanistic, 128        Is No Software,” 114
interpretants: machine, 170; of signs,         Kleist, Heinrich von: on thought, 178, 203
   152–53                                      knowledge: in AI era, 43; cultural theory
                                                  of, 43–44; in ladders of reference, 98;
Jakobson, Roman, 16, 135, 152; on infor-          language as, 169; mechanics of, 97;
  mation theory, 166; on paronomasia,             problem of, 97; proletarianization of
                                           Index                                         257

  workers, 202; role of brain in, 97; as           75; contextual embedding in, 14; data
  simulacrum, 97; in space of represen-            hypotheses and, 38, 113; demystifica-
  tations, 188; steady state of, 52                tion of, 100; dialectical, 68; as discrete
Kockelman, Paul, 216n45                            technology, 91; distributed structure
Koller, Charles, 11, 12                            of, 134; empiricist models of, 56, 75;
Kolmogorov complexity, 226n24                      etiolations of, 126; external forms of,
Kornbluh, Anna, 103–4                              52; extraction of signifiers, 103; factors
Kosoy, Eliza, 18–19                                and functions, 156 (fig.); finite-state,
Kracauer, Siegfried: social geometry of,           46; formal aspects, 139; form in, 42;
  179                                              form versus substance in, 152; freed
Kramnick, Jonathan, 128, 137, 138                  from psychology, 81; general poetics
                                                   of, 127; generative function of, 105–6,
labor: Adam Smith on, 201; as aspect of            114–21, 157; “golden age” of theories,
   language, 40; industrial devaluation            221n84; grounded in sensation, 11;
   of, 197; workers’ relationship to,              hallucinatory, 10–11; human use of,
   202–3; of writing, 195, 196–206                 30–31, 46–47, 118, 120; Humean view
labor, intellectual: integration with              of, 42; indexical combinations of,
   manual, 199–200; subsumed under                 135; innate ability for, 49; internal/
   capital, 202                                    external, 11–12, 13, 205; internalizing
labor, mathematical, 196, 200–201; femi-           function, 171; Kantian view of, 42; as
   nized, 201. See also mathematics                knowledge, 169; labor aspect of, 40;
labor, mental: division of, 207, 230n7             literary, 120; literary theory of, 128,
Lacan, Jacques: The Ego in Freud’s Theory,         137–38; logic and, 45–46; as master
   229n27; on extimate language, 206; on           pattern, 102; as matrix of meaning
   the imaginary, 203; on learning, 190;           generation, 172; “merge” in, 46–49;
   mathematical examples of, 24; on the            metalinguistic function of, 158; moral
   Real, 23, 188, 211, 216n53; semiology           use of, 180; Morris’s divisions of,
   of, 221n80; on signifiers, 69; on the           129–30; nonreferential, 13, 134; non-
   symbolic, 23–24, 26, 29, 216n53, 218n4          syntactic features of, 31; number and,
ladders of reference, 2, 10–17, 128; cogni-        64, 114; numerical production of, 64;
   tive consequences of, 65; equivalence           oppositional relations of, 136; partial-
   and, 158; grounding and, 119; hier             ity of, 225n37; phatic function of, 155;
   archical language in, 13; knowledge in,         physical aspects of, 71; poetic function
   98; in LLMs, 16, 17; reactions to tech-         of, 143, 148, 155; poetic heat map of,
   nology and, 210; theory of language             54, 161, 171; possible states of, 131–32;
   in, 134; in understanding of images,            poststructuralism and, 37–38; real
   182–83. See also reference                      versus artificial, 35; recoding of, 8; re-
LAION-5B (data set), 27; commercial                cursive ability of, 47–48; as redundant
   logics of, 34                                   pattern, 134; reference-first, 16; refer-
Lake, Brenden, 18, 218n26                          ential function, 155, 158; relationship
language: about language, 155; algo-               to intelligence, 27, 30; removal from
   rithmic reproducibility of, 1–2, 139;           consciousness, 81; representational
   animal, 22; application to images, 92;          assumptions concerning, 144–45, 147;
   autonomous, 29; Bayesian view of, 42;           reversibility of, 143; role in classifi-
   bias in, 8, 33, 99, 213n2; as biological        cation, 38, 105–6, 114–21, 120; role in
   adaptation, 41; as “brain-syntax,” 31;          deep learning, 38, 61; second-order
   capture line of, 130; change in, 152;           functions of, 170; self-referential,
   children’s learning of, 49, 218n26;             16–17; in semiological surround, 101;
   in classical information theory, 131,           semiotic functions of, 16; as sequence
   175; as code, 213n2; communicative              of words, 170–71; as service, 40,
   contexts for, 11, 61, 217n73; concrete,         178, 194, 195, 196–206; signal/noise
258                                        Index

   metaphor for, 177; as sign-system, 1,           form in, 39, 138, 165, 225n4; generation
   13, 17, 29, 101; speech as cause of, 71;        in, 101, 113, 171, 204; generic inflection
   statistical approach to, 44, 54–64, 149;        in, 14; interoperability of, 38, 138;
   stoichea of, 204; structuralist theory          language medium of, 165; language of
   of, 2, 134, 143; subsets of, 227n32;            thought in, 7; in LLMs, 166; mediation
   syntagmatic/paradigmatic axes of, 144           by language, 101; minimalist, 47; in
   (fig.); system-conditioned, 75; system/         neural nets, 112; obscurity of, 179;
   process split, 75; technologization of,        operation of other systems, 5; poetics
   81; time dimension of, 152; transmis-           of, 28–29, 38–39; productive interface
   sion technologies, 207, 208; universal,         for, 42; redundancy of language in,
   104; virtual, 75. See also algorithms,          165; reflexivity in, 138; reproducibility
   language; language-cognition relation-         of language in, 115, 194, 205; semi-
   ship; language-computation conver-             ology of, 39, 104; structuralism in,
   gence; LLMs                                     134; of symbols, 29; technical level
language, computational: attention                 of, 10; totalization of language in,
   mechanism in, 155; concrete analysis            192. See also computation; language
   of, 73; generators, 15; inflection in, 14;      automation
   modellable language for, 75; pervasion       language-meaning relationship, 18, 42,
   of digital environment, 5; poetic, 139;         143; deep structure of, 48–49, 53; dif-
   problem of, 29; structuralism in, 135;          ferential, 143; as general communica-
   style in, 14; unintelligent, 80. See also       tion medium, 17; language matrix of,
   LLMs                                            172; in language systems, 57; in neural
language, cultural, 64, 134, 136, 222n89;          nets, 120–21. See also meaning
   Chomsky on, 69; devoid of human cog-         language models: capture of cultural
   nition, 209–10; divorce from cognitive          systems, 5; capture of structure, 63;
   core, 195; systems’ capture of, 5               Chomsky’s, 56; communicative intent
language automation, 53; Goedel/                  in, 32; deep learning in, 61; of human
   Jakobson systems and, 167; in NLP, 59;          word similarity, 18; interpretative
   statistics and, 43–44, 54–64, 220n71;           supremacy in, 54; predictions made by,
   structure and, 43, 64–73; syntax and,           14; probabilistic, 58–60, 61; statistical
   43, 44–54; vectors in, 59. See also             view of, 44, 54–64; vector, 25–26. See
   automation; language-computation                also LLMs
   convergence                                  language systems: local nodes of, 64;
language-cognition relationship, 7, 16,            memory in, 72; restricted economy of,
   61, 155; as biological adaptation, 41;          70, 73; signifying, 66
   digital machine in, 92; divorce within,      Latin language, rhetorical regime of, 207
   1; in Eliza effect, 83; language as object   learning: representational, 96, 112; RLHF,
   in, 42; machine reproduction of, 2;             118; semiotic approach to, 93. See also
   meaning in, 64, 169; mediation by lan-          deep learning
   guage, 101; poetic function and, 169;        learning, machine: analog/digital
   point of contact in, 50; predomination          aspects of, 87; connectionism in, 84;
   of language in, 24; structure in, 65;           datafied language of, 143; data sets
   syntax in, 49. See also cognition               for, 85, 87, 89; Derrida on, 135; master
language-computation convergence, 92;              algorithm of, 104; meanings in, 90;
   as antihermeneutic, 26; attention               neural nets and, 84; the nonsymbolic
   mechanism in, 139; classification in,           in, 89; relationship to digital theory,
   101, 105–6; conceptual development              38; standardized, 89; symbolic AI
   of, 193; cultural, 27–28, 54, 90, 191; in       and, 84
   data environments, 8, 10; data remix         learning systems: cognition in, 23; data
   in, 208; digital machines in, 114, 133;         for, 22–23, 84, 87, 89, 143; modeling of
                                             Index                                        259

    human culture, 26; semiotic approach             of, 38; grounding errors by, 118;
    to, 23; symbolic, 216n56                         hallucination in, 119, 120, 128; harmful
LeCun, Yann, 11, 118                                 speech from, 33; ideology output of,
Leibnitz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 104                     39, 173, 180, 188; image-word pairs in,
leisure, power of mechanization over, 174            101; imitative activity of, 19; the im-
Léon, Jacqueline, 59                                 material in, 196; keys in, 150; labeling
Lévi-Strauss, Claude, 76; cultural sys-              function of, 116; ladders of reference
    tems of, 23; on kinship systems, 70;             in, 16; language and structure in, 73;
    non-Marxism of, 220n66                           language-computation convergence
Lewontin, Richard, 216n42                            in, 166; language filters of, 28–29;
linguistics: Cartesian, 46; cognitive, 42;           language-internal structure of, 17;
    computational, 63; as cultural system,           as large literary machines, 123–38;
    66; descriptive, 14, 50, 55; distribu-           meaning and reference in, 16, 119–20;
    tional, 57; grounding in, 16; internal/          meaningful language from, 176;
    external acts of, 51; poetics in, 2, 16; as      modeling of semantics, 18; naming in,
    science, 62. See also metalinguistics            4; nonlinguistic data in, 196; part and
Linzen, Tal, 12                                      whole in, 193; poetic function of, 143,
LISP (AI programming language), 79                   161, 173; poetic-generative core of, 165;
literary theory: cognitive linguistics and,          political control through, 173, 181; of
    42; deep learning and, 77; evolutionary          postrhetorical era, 208; pragmatic fea-
    psychology and, 215n36; form and, 137;           tures of, 15; predictive function of, 5,
    language in, 137–38; structure and, 137          14–15, 150; present language in, 8; pro-
Liu, Lydia, 134–35, 136, 214n3                       ductivity studies concerning, 32; query
LLMs (large language models), 1; art/                mechanism of, 150–51; reasoning and,
    culture relationship and, 173; atten-            213n2; redundancy of, 140; relations
    tion mechanism in, 150; attention                among words in, 164–65; rhetorical
    scores of, 161, 164, 164 (fig.); capture         topoi of, 207, 209; RLHF-induced
    of deceit, 191–92; capture of meaning,           biases of, 150; semantic packages of,
    56; Chomsky and, 42, 49; cognition               173, 177, 193; semiological operation
    and, 73, 191; cognitive map of, 193;             of, 29, 119; signal and noise in, 177–78;
    compressed model of words in, 164                signifiers in, 71; sign-systems of, 76;
    (fig.); computational semiology of,              social data use, 12; as social problem,
    120; computation-cultural interface of,          18; solving of mathematics prob-
    54; context effects of, 5; creativity of,        lems, 119; as statistical machines, 54;
    19; cultural effects of, 43, 126; cyber-         stochasticity of, 31–34; structuralism
    netics of, 197; data points of, 107; data        of, 170; structure problems of, 136–37;
    sets for, 50, 54, 150; distributionalism         supracognitive mapping by, 191; sym-
    and, 136; energy expended by, 227n26;            bolic grounding of, 10, 12; symbolic
    extension of writing, 202; filters for,          order of, 104; task-output problems of,
    33; formal-semiotic properties of, 17;           127; theoretical thought concerning,
    form and meaning interface, 120–21;              10; theories of culture and, 13; tokens
    form and structure in, 137; for-profit           in, 150, 204; training sets for, 54,
    software, 174; fragility of reference, 130;      150; transformation of ideology, 205;
    generation of concepts, 82; generation           valuations of words, 153; vectors of,
    of form, 129; generation of meaning,             38; whole and part in, 117–18. See also
    32–34, 118; generation of poetry,                language models
    124–27, 225n5; generation of syntagms,       Locke, John, 106
    173; generation of syntax, 50; genera-        logic, quantificational, 97
    tion of values, 124; generative fill func-    love, obsessive: chatbot expression of,
    tion, 181–83, 193; generative systems            82–83
260                                      Index

Lovelace, Ada, 201, 209                         on knowledge, 98–99; on neural net,
LSTM (long short-term memory), 116–17           85; semiotics of, 93
Lutz, Theo: algorithmic poem of, 124,         McGrath, Laura, 213n1
  125–26                                      meaning: attached to rhyme, 158; at-
                                                tached to symbols, 10; bandwidth in,
machines: confrontation with workers,           133; binary, 63; in capitalization, 205;
  176; continuity with entertainment,           capture by generation, 204; capture
  176; object-counting, 85–86; stochas         through use, 56; Chomsky’s theory
  tic, 94. See also human-machine               of, 44; in data distribution, 58; in
  divide; learning, machine; LLMs               deep structure of language, 48–49, 53;
Malabou, Catherine, 106                         digital systems’ changing of, 91; dis-
Malagasy language, “merge” in, 48               tributed, 135–36; form and, 12, 120–21;
Mandelkern, Matthew, 12                         frequency and, 61; global theory of, 17;
Maniglier, Patrice, 26, 50–51, 213n3; on        grounding component of, 13; inside/
  general culture, 212; on semiology,           outside language, 170; in language-
  76; on the signifier, 220n76; on sign-       cognition relationship, 64, 169; in
  systems, 223n3                                machine learning, 90; malleability of,
Manning, Christopher, 55; computational         134; negative, 151; network of connec-
  linguistics, 63; on transformer models,       tions for, 63; non-human, 29; part and
  63                                            whole in, 134; persistence in, 8; poetics
mapping: cognitive, 191; mimetic con-           of, 124–25; presence in, 70; recognition
  ceptions, 190–91; of representational         and, 112; in referential acts, 63; as re-
  codes, 190; supracognitive, 174, 191,         lationship of density, 133; representa-
  197                                           tion systems for, 20; role of grammar
Markov processes, 46, 62, 218n6                 in, 45–46; rules and, 116; self-indexing
Marx, Karl: on commodities, 68, 198;            process for, 165; in semiotics, 22,
  Communist Manifesto, 185; economic            216n45; sound and, 66; structuralist
  base of, 174, 187, 189, 205; on factory       theory of, 17; through statistical rela-
  work, 197, 202; “German Ideology,”            tionships, 17, 55; transmission of, 21;
  181; on new kinds of work, 197; on            underdetermined, 141; ungrounded,
  subsumption of labor, 230n7; on value,        131; as unity of reference, 14; vector
  227n32                                        semantics’ capture of, 145–46
Marxism: cultural, 180; Freudo-, 174, 187;    meaning, computational, 20; aboutness
  poststructuralism and, 220n66                 in, 162; AI generation of, 4, 38, 130–31;
Masterman, Margaret, 134; distributed           generation by probability, 161; LLM
  theory of meaning, 135                        production of, 16, 32–34, 118; similar-
mathematics: biological, 97; critical           ity in, 144; structure of, 5, 147; vector
  theory and, 179; definition of intelli-       semantics’ capture of, 145–46. See also
  gence, 94; exteriority in, 171; of French     computation
  Revolution, 196, 200–201; industrial        meaning generation: in AI, 4, 38, 130–31,
  metaphor for, 196; literary analysis          204; arbitrary, 133; in general poetics,
  and, 225n1; numerical reasoning               171–72; language as matrix of, 172; in
  and, 114; as semiotics, 224n31; social        LLMs, 32–34, 118; in poetic function,
  construct of, 179–80. See also labor,         157, 162; by probability, 161. See also
  mathematical                                  generation
Maturana, Humberto, 86                        media: materialism of, 26; stable digital
McCulloch, Warren, 6; on computational          format for, 89; technology and, 174
  systems, 38; in cybernetics group,          media, social: AI debates on, 79; oral
  97; on embodiment of mind, 97; on             systems of, 159
  experimental epistemology, 90; on           memory: LSTM, 116–17; organic, 72; a
  intelligence, 99; invention of net, 97;       posteriori/a priori functions, 224n15;
                                         Index                                       261

  rhetorical techniques, 207, 208; stor-      neural nets: absorption of language,
  ing of, 72                                    106; backpropagation in, 84, 89, 108;
memos, automated, 202                           capture of redundancy, 140; circu-
Mercer, Robert, 146                             larity of, 98; classification function,
“merge” (language), 46–49; in cognition,        110, 115; connecting of symbols, 91;
  49; recursion of, 48–49; in syntax, 48        data and rule interaction in, 108–10;
messages: about themselves, 157, 169;           data hypothesis of, 104–13; deduction
  code and, 160                                 by, 115; diagram, 107 (fig.); dialec-
metalanguage, 139–40, 162; aboutness of,        tics and, 227n32; digital intelligence
  171; code-clarifying operation of, 157;       and, 83; flexibility of, 128; form in,
  opposition to itself, 171; poetic func-       6–7, 123, 128; grounding problem of,
  tion and, 169; poetry and, 155, 159           109; historical narrative on, 83–84,
metalinguistics: as function of language,       87, 89; hyperparameters of, 108;
  158; in vector semantics, 157. See also       hypothesis formation by, 109–12;
  linguistics                                   image-classifying, 115; induction by,
metamathematics, 140; generation from           108, 109, 115; language/classification
  natural numbers, 167                          relationship of, 114–15; language-
Mikolov, Tomáš: vector semantics of, 144,       computation convergence in, 112;
  146, 150                                      language-meaning relationship in,
Millière, Ralph, 12                             120–21; learning about language,
Minsky, Marvin, 131, 223n16; Perceptrons,       143–44; machine learning and, 84;
  87                                            matrices of, 107–8; memorization in,
misinformation, 195, 210                        116; multilayered, 223n16; open aspect
Mitchell, Melanie, 145–46                       of, 98; pattern identification by, 108;
modeling: Bayesian logic of, 74; of             Perceptron’s, 85; recurrent (RNN), 116,
  culture, 22, 26, 38, 75; of intelligence,     227n26; reprocessing of inputs, 98;
  96–97; of semantics, 18. See also             semiotic systems of, 81, 111, 112; struc-
  language models; LLMs; statistical            turalist hypothesis for, 136; symbolic
  modeling                                      simulations of, 89; tokens in, 90; train-
modernism: in poetry, 127; technical            ing sets of, 107, 108–9; truth-values
  epoch of, 209                                 of, 110; ungrounded meaning of, 131;
Moi, Toril, 220n75                              unreasonable effectiveness of, 147;
Mollo, Dmitri, 12                               vectors of, 107, 143–44; wrong answers
Mona Lisa fill, 181–83, 183 (fig.), 185;        from, 107–8
  denotation in, 183; semantic package        Neurath, Otto, 104
  of, 182                                     Newell, Allan, 90
Monfort, Nick, 225n9                          NLP (natural language processing),
Morris, Charles: pragmatics of, 15,             42; assumptions about language in,
  129–30; on semiotics, 56; “Unity of           146; automatization of language, 59;
  Science” movement, 15                         Bayesian techniques in, 58; statistical
Müggenburg, Jan, 86                              view of, 55; theory of meaning in, 134
Murphy, Gregory, 18                           Norvig, Peter, 55, 61–63, 74
music: AI generated, 175–76, 228n4;           NumaRete (object counting program),
  semantic packages of, 176                      85–86, 88 (fig.), 90

natural language processing (NLP), 17         1 the Road (AI novel), 128
nature, mathematical functions of, 227n20     Ong, Walter: on secondary orality, 208
neoliberalism, ideology of, 190               OpenAI, 3
Nersessian, Anahid, 137, 138; on form,        Ord, Toby: The Precipice, 36
   128–29                                     Osgood, Charles, 219n51; semantics of,
Netflix queries, 149                              59–60
262                                      Index

Papert, Seymour, 223n16; Perceptrons, 87      poetics: AI, 2, 4; computational-cultural
Parallel Distributed Processing (Rumelhart,      forms of, 1, 2; of culture machines,
   Hinton, and Williams), 84–85                  28; of language, 127; of language-
Parisi, Luciana, 109                             computation convergence, 28–29,
paronomasia (poetry), 157–58                     38–39; in linguistics, 2, 16; of mean-
Parrish, Allison, 39, 154, 225n5; on             ing, 124–25; textual-computational,
   machine-generated poetry, 125, 127           162
Pavlick, Ellie, 13, 14                        poetics, general, 28–29, 39; Aristotle’s,
Peirce, Charles Sanders: on abduction,           138; of language, 127; meaning genera-
   109; general poetics of, 138; on the          tion in, 171–72; return of rhetoric and,
   hypothesis, 109–10; on icons, 148; on         210; study of interlocking systems, 212
   induction, 108; on the interpretant,       poetry: denotation and meaning in, 143;
   15, 21; semiotics of, 21, 215n25; on the      diachronic utterances of, 228n39; as
   sign, 129                                     essence of language, 225n5; indexi
Pelisssier, Luc: on language space, 147; on      cality of, 142; machine generated,
   paradigms, 143                                124–27, 154–55; reference in, 143;
Perceptron machine, 85, 86 (fig.)                as resignification, 142–43; of vector
phonology: the literary and, 138; struc-         space, 128
   turalist, 159                              politics: control through LLMs, 173, 181;
Piaget, Jean, 106                                of postmodernism, 191; in remainder
Piantadosi, Steven, 214n13                       humanism, 37
Picasso, Pablo, 181                           Pollock, Jackson, 181
Pinker, Steven, 36, 37; cognitivism of,       positivism: Chicago School of, 15; logical,
   69; on comprehension, 218n10; The             155; Vienna School of, 14, 15
   Language Instinct, 41–42; on language      posthumanism, culture of, 20
   organ, 53; on linking problem, 51; on      postmodernism: Jameson on, 190–91;
   poststructualist semiology, 43; on            political, 191
   syntax, 49                                 poststructuralism, 230n19; automation
Pitts, Walter, 6, 85; in cybernetics group,      and, 135; cognitive science and, 37; on
   97; invention of net, 97; on knowledge,       contemporary culture, 43; distinction
   98–99                                         with structuralism, 220n71; as human
Plato: Cratylus, 66; Phaedrus, 72                ism, 137; and humanities’ loss of
Poe, Edgar Allan: “The Philosophy of             language, 43, 73; language and, 37–38;
   Composition,” 178; “The Raven,”               Marxism and, 220n66; relativism of,
   157–58; use of paronomasia, 157–58            74; semiology of, 41–42, 43
poesis, linguistic, 172                       Pourciau, Sarah, 160, 228n39
poetic function, 158–60; in advertising,      pragmatics (language), 126, 129–30; range
   160; attention mechanism in, 155;             of meanings in, 15–16; semiotic prob-
   banality of, 186; Chomsky’s use of,           lem of, 15; in transformer architecture,
   168–69; code-clarifying operations            130
   and, 157; distribution throughout cul-     pragmatism, American, 50, 106
   ture, 159; equivalences in, 160; genera   Pressman, Jessica, 125
   tive, 157, 159–60, 162, 187; heat maps,    probability: Aristotelian, 210; in English
   64, 161, 171; Jakobson on, 138, 139,          language, 147; generation and, 210;
   140, 226n25; of keyboards, 204, 205; of       reductionist, 55; in statistical models,
   language, 143, 148, 155; of LLMs, 143,        50, 58–62; in syntax, 63
   161–62, 173; metalanguage and, 169;        production: aesthetic mode of, 197, 205;
   positioning of, 160; quasi-natural lan-       digital capitalist mode of, 35. See also
   guage and, 211; for similar sounds, 159;      cultural production
   stickiness of, 159–60, 165, 169, 171       productivity, digital, 205
                                           Index                                         263

proletarianization, 230n7; by knowledge,           212; memory techniques of, 207, 208;
   202; of technologies, 24                        return of, 206–12; technical devices
Putnam, Hilary, 12                                 of, 209; in textual civilization, 40; as
                                                   training system, 195, 207
Quine, Willard V. O., 225n40                    Rieder, Bernhard, 59, 60–61
                                                Riguet, Jacques, 23
race, feedback-based construction of, 113       RLHF (reinforcement learning from
Rashevsky, Nicholas, 97                            human feedback), 118, 213n2, 227n33;
rationalism: Chomsky’s, 53; in cognitive           biases in, 150
   science, 46                                  RNNs (recurrent neural nets), 116, 227n26
Real, the: image form of, 23; Kittler on,       Robinson, Kim Stanley, 36
   25, 203; Lacan on, 23, 188, 211, 216n53;     Rosenblatt, Frank: perception diagram
   unknowable, 189                                 of, 87 (fig.); Perceptron of, 85, 86 (fig.)
recursion (language): deep structure            Rosenzweig, Franz, 179
   of, 48; of “merge,” 48–49; statistical       Rotman, Brian, 224n31
   capture of, 47                               Runway Gen-2, 230n2
Reddit: in data training sets, 54, 82–83; in    Russell, Bertrand: Principia mathematica,
   LLMs, 225n37                                    166
redundancy: in capture-generate dia-
   lectic, 141; capture of structure, 133;      Sapir, Edward, 50
   character, 140; in communication,            Sapir–Whorf hypothesis, semiology and,
   133; in computational language, 165;            217n62
   density of, 170; of LLMs, 140; in neural     Sartre, Jean-Paul: Marxism of, 220n66
   nets, 140; nonidentity of, 193; patterns     Saussure, Ferdinand de, 26, 39; on at-
   of, 134; predictive, 140; signals in, 140;      tention, 139; Derrida’s reading of, 24,
   3-gram pairs of, 140, 226n2; 2-gram             69–73, 220n71; differential hypothesis
   pairs of, 140                                   of, 143, 148, 211; material-conceptual
reference: denotation and, 182–83; fragil-         binary of, 220n75; on meaning, 65, 67,
   ity of, 130; as function of language, 2,        151, 152; on parole, 68; on primacy of
   155, 158; single/double sense of, 14. See       speech, 71; semiology of, 101–2; on
   also ladders of reference                       signifiers, 71–72; on signs, 23, 66–68,
relevance, 150; in GPT-3, 149; in informa-         70, 220n72; on symbolic bias, 102; on
   tion retrieval, 60                              syntagms, 208, 226n8; on systems, 69;
Repin, Ilya, 181                                   on technology, 29; theory of language,
representation: apparatuses of, 131;               135; on value, 65–66, 72, 124, 155, 161
   assumptions concerning language,             schemas: Kant’s concept of, 52, 106;
   144–45, 147; classification of, 120;            Winograd, 63, 162
   computation and, 81, 84; data                schematism, 49
   hypotheses concerning, 111; languages       Schwitters, Kurt: “An Anna Blume,” 125
   of, 190–91; of symbols, 10; by vectors,      science fiction, AI risk in, 36–37
   144–47. See also social-representa-          Searle, John: Chinese room argument of,
   tional systems                                  11; critique of Derrida, 126, 221n84
retina, computation function of, 86–87          Seaver, Nick, 227n27
return, eternal, 70                             Second Cybernetics, 217n65
Rey, Georges, 218n5                             self: the imaginary of, 188, 203; pictorial
rhetoric: Aristotle on, 210, 211; casual           faculty of, 23; shadow, 82–83
   regime of, 208; computational, 209;          semantic packages, 39; in bureaucratic
   as culture of communication, 209; de-           writing, 178; culture war in, 180;
   cline following industrialization, 207;         of Eliza effect, 82; ideology in, 186;
   as Greek technē, 208; in machine form,          indexical flow of, 180; institutional
264                                        Index

   expression by, 178–79; interpretability      signals: in information theory, 175; noise
   in, 228n7; of LLMs, 173, 177, 193; of           and, 175, 177–78, 185
   music, 176; surprise in, 185                 signification: grounding as, 89; human
semantics: coconstitution with structure,          use of, 20; local, 67; past regimes of,
   136; of communication, 129–30; in data          8; physical process of, 68; poetry as,
   science, 147–48; distributional, 37;            142; and reference, 155; rule and, 168;
   exclusion from deictics, 214n25; inde-          Saussure on, 101, 168; separation from
   pendence from syntax, 168; informal,            sciences, 102; sequence and, 136; social
   90–91; LLMs’ modeling of, 18; LLMs’             uses of, 41
   prediction of, 14–15; opposite pairs in,     signifiers: conceptual content and, 76; in-
   59; psychological, 59; uncapturable,            ternal differentiation of, 72; language-
   90–91. See also vector semantics                internal valuation of, 69; material,
semiology: of AI, 38, 171; in cognitive            68, 71; plans of, 75; in semiology, 29;
   science, 76; of digital systems, 31;            structure and, 72
   of GPTs, 116; last-instance, 29;             signifiers and signified, 151–52, 152
   metaphysics outside of, 71; post-              (fig.)168, 220n76; as expression and
   structuralist, 41–42, 43; restricted            content, 75; masking of difference,
   economies of, 71; and Sapir–Whorf               182; Saussure on, 67, 135
   hypothesis, 217n62; and semiotics, 26;       signs: arbitrary, 65–67, 103, 135, 182,
   structuralist, 103; study of language-         220n72; Barthes on, 29; differential,
   computation convergence, 39, 104;               65; distributional hypothesis of,
   study of signifiers, 29; textual basis of,      65–66; generation of other signs, 141;
   103–4; valuation in, 102                        internal division of, 65; interpre-
semiotics: of AI, 16; of cognition, 17–30,         tants of, 152–53; in learning systems,
   74–77; construal of life, 20–21; culture        23; multifunctional, 89; real-world
   in, 22; of data, 44, 105, 179; ghosts,          system of, 53; restricted sets of, 141;
   185; of intelligence, 93–100; mathe            Saussure on, 66–68; self-referring,
   matics as, 224n31; meaning in, 22,              216n50; social order of, 67, 102; struc-
   216n45; of media theory, 89; meta              turalist view of, 65–66; transmission
   relationality within, 21; and semiol-           of, 21; use in cognition, 22; vehicles
   ogy, 26; technicity of, 90; theory of           for, 21
   evolution, 216n42                            sign-systems, 223n3; language as, 1, 13, 17,
sensation: language grounded in, 11;               29; of LLMs, 76
   unfiltered, 102                              Silverstein, Michael, 16
sensemaking, across fields, 129                 Simon, Herbert, 74, 76; on physical sym-
“Shadows on the Way” (machine-                    bol systems, 90
   generated poem), 126–27, 154–55,             Simondon, Gilbert, 222n1; on coding,
   225n9                                           224n15
Shannon, Claude, 185, 214n3; on entropy,        simulacra: cognition as, 93–100; intelli-
   132; on freedom of choice, 57; infor-           gence as, 99; of knowledge, 97; lacking
   mation theory of, 39, 46, 117, 143; on          originals, 38
   interpretation, 61; on patterns, 131; on     simulation, binary with reality, 96–97
   printed English, 134; on quantifiable        smartphones, subservience of television
   logic, 97; on redundancy, 140, 226n3;           to, 175
   on semantics, 55, 133; theory of lan-        Smith, Brian Cantwell, 229n11; Promise of
   guage, 133–34; on universal communi-            Artificial Intelligence, 217n64
   cation, 155                                  social-representational systems: for
Shoemaker, Tyler, 60                               meaning, 20; truth moments of, 192
Shopify (website), 35; commercial logics        social science, replication crisis in,
   of, 34                                          222n94
Siegert, Bernhard: on Kulturtechnik, 215n36     society: computationally enabled, 206;
                                          Index                                       265

   form and ideology in, 192; heuristic,       structure: capture by redundancy, 133;
   210; signs within, 102                         coconstitution with semantics, 136;
software: for-profit, 174; as ideology, 26,       computation’s capture of, 1; confer-
   189                                            ring of value, 155; dialectical theory
Sohn-Rethel, Alfred, 199                          of, 220n66; distribution and, 136;
Solow paradox, 205                                explanation by phonetics, 76; and
sound: automation of, 203; images, 67–68;         humanities’ loss of language, 64–73;
   meaning and, 66                                language automation and, 43, 64–73;
Spears, Britney, 158                              in language-cognition relationship,
speech: in ideology theory, 174; patterns         65; literary theory and, 137; in LLMs,
   in, 45–46; performative, 126, 200;             17, 73, 136–37, 170; signifiers and, 72;
   recognition, 61, 219n48; as system-           theories of, 42; unity with symbols, 98
   conditioned language, 75                    Symbolic Grounding Debate 2.0, 12–13
Spinoza, Baruch, 193                           symbols: connecting of neural nets, 91;
Srnicek, Nick, 196; on platform economy,          connections and, 84–93, 99; crea
   198                                            tion of immediacy, 103–4; in digital
statistical modeling, 54; attention mecha        environment, 92; fixed values of,
   nism in, 63; capture of meaning, 55; as        84; grounding of, 10–13, 89; iconic
   linguistic tool, 62; probability in, 50,       representation of, 10; language-
   58–62; “two cultures” of, 62; vectors in,      computation convergence of, 29;
   64. See also modeling                          meaning attached to, 10; patterns in,
statistics, 42; conflict with syntax, 44,         92; subsymbolic relations among, 87,
   56, 74, 76; differential hypothesis of,        89; unity with structure, 98; use in
   152; distributional hypothesis of,             generation, 105
   55–56; Humean empirical tradition           syntagms, 208, 226n8; LLM production
   of, 56; language automation and,               of, 75
   43–44, 54–64; meaning through, 17, 55;      syntax, 42; children’s acquisition of, 51;
   model-empirical, 64                           Chomsky’s doctrine of, 41, 50–51;
Steyerl, Hito, 211                                cognitive approach to, 17; in communi-
Stiegler, Bernard, 24, 72, 224n17; on             cation, 129–30; conflict with statistics,
   proletarianization, 230n7                      44, 56, 74, 76; in data science, 147–48;
structuralism, 26; analysis of AI, 38;            deep structure of, 51; form and,
   classical linguistic, 135; in computa-         123–24; independence from semantics,
   tional language, 135; cybernetics and,         168; of internal language, 52–53; joint
   214n3; descriptive linguistics of, 50,         action with paradigm, 148; Kantian
   55; dialectical, 37–38, 170, 220n66;           rationalism on, 58; language automa-
   dichotomous, 211; distinction from             tion and, 43, 44–54; linking problem
   poststructuralism, 220n71; as doctrine         of, 51, 53, 64; LLM production of, 50;
   of signs, 66; empirical stance of, 67;         probabilistic, 63; recursive, 47–48
   on external language forms, 52; graph       synthesis a priori, concerning abstract
   theory and, 166; on human-machine              knowledge, 97
   divide, 36; in language-computation         systems: borrowing among, 167; devel-
   convergence, 134; of LLMs, 170; para-          opmental aspects of, 59; rigidity of,
   digms in, 39, 150; signs in, 65–66; the-       93–94; users as function of, 24; writ-
   ory of language in, 2, 134, 143; theory        ing, 69, 70, 72. See also computational
   of meaning in, 17; in understanding of         systems; cultural systems; digital
   digital systems, 213n3                         systems; language systems; learning
structuralism, American, 49–50; Euro-             systems
   pean structuralism and, 64
structuralism, European: theory of             technics, philosophy of, 69
   language, 2, 64                             technodeterminism, in AI discourse, 30
266                                        Index

technology: ladders of reference and, 210;         “Computing Machinery and Intel-
   language as, 91; media and, 174                 ligence,” 117; definition of compu-
technology, cultural, 28, 207; imitation in,       tation, 6, 167; on the digital, 93; on
   19; writing systems as, 72                      human-machine computability, 93; on
technology, digital: delivery mechanisms           intelligence, 93, 98–99, 117; looping
   of, 177; as grammatization, 24; neural          program development, 94; NLP use,
   nets built on, 90; as proletarianiza-           58; on original and copy, 97; use of
   tion, 24                                        term “computing,” 200, 201
Tenen, Dennis Yi, 213n3                         Turing test, 11, 27, 38; automated, 186;
TESCREAL bundles, 36                               chatbots and, 80; ChatGPT and, 82;
texts: as constituent of situation, 55–56;         error in, 94, 95
   detection of human-generated, 186;           Tversky, Amos, 219n51
   digital mediation of, 103; image pairs,      typewriter: discontinuous-to-
   27; intent in, 32; as medium of civiliza-       discontinuous translation by, 25;
   tion, 103; relationship to language, 18.        QWERTY keyboard of, 203–5
   See also words
texts, AI-generated: LLM modeling of,           Udio (music generator), 228n4
   18; poetics in, 4; scientific, 3–5; threat   unconscious, the: in Freudo-Marxism,
   from, 195                                      174, 187; language structure of, 23
“thicc Descartes” fill, 183, 183 (fig.), 185,   Underwood, Ted, 28, 213n3
   189                                          “Unity of Science” movement, 15
Thor: Love and Thunder (film, 2022), 184        universalism: semantic, 29; semiotic, 21
Thorp, Jer, 34                                  universe, digital: symbolic order of, 24
time: consciousness of, 224n17; linguistic,
   152                                          value: of attention mechanism, 151; of
tokenization, 7, 148, 150; unsemantic,             commodities, 227n32; conferred by
   214n9                                           structure, 155; in critical theory, 206;
tokens: in computation, 6; English                 exchangeability of, 153; intelligence
   language, 162; of GPT-3, 117, 148; in           and, 99; Saussure on, 65–66, 72, 124,
   LLMs, 150, 204; in neural nets, 90              155, 161; valuation and, 205
Tomlinson, Gary, 20–21, 216n42; on semi-        Vanderbilt University, use of ChatGPT,
   otic culture, 21                                178
topoi, rhetorical: analytical/cumulative,       vectors: of attention mechanism, 117; in
   208; of LLMs, 207; machine-generated,           continuous space, 144; dimensions of,
   208                                             145, 226n16; in document retrieval,
Torres, Émile, 36                                  60; in language automation, 59; of
transformations, discrete-to-discrete, 91          LLMs, 38; of neural nets, 107; query,
transformer architecture, 7–8, 9 (fig.),           150; representation of words, 144–47;
   56, 146; attention mechanism of, 116,           in statistical modeling, 64; three-
   215n28; comparison function, 8; gen            dimensional spaces, 59
   eration of language, 115–16; internal       vector semantics, 146, 150, 219n51; cap-
   grid of, 161; introductory responses            ture of meaning, 145–46; metalinguis-
   to, 17–18; on language-computation              tic, 157; space in, 145 (fig.); synonyms
   convergence, 139; light grid metaphor           in, 39; word embedding in, 144
   for, 161, 176; pragmatics in, 130; proba-    Vienna School, 15; Goedel in, 166; positiv-
   bilistic techniques, 8; vectors of, 7, 12       ism of, 14, 15
truth: ground, 112; ideology as, 198; in        Vincent, James, 228n4
   social-representational systems, 192         von Foerster, Heinz: Biological Computer
Turing, Alan, 204; atoms analogy of,               Library of, 85–86, 88 (fig.)
   84; Automatic Computing Engine of,           von Neumann, John, 98, 114, 209; “First
   93; on computational systems, 38;               Draft of a Report on the Edvac,” 114
                                       Index                                     267

Weaver, Warren: “Constantinople fishing    world-symbol interface, physical realiza-
  nasty pink” (cfnp) sequence, 132,          tion of, 85
  170–71                                   World Wide Web, user-generated content
web crawl (scraping technique), 225n37       in, 85
Weizenbaum, Joseph, 38, 80                 writing: algorithmic procedure for, 202;
Whitehead, Alfred North: Principia           attending function for, 198; desexu
  mathematica, 166                          ated, 230n14; drafts, 199–200; the
Wiggins, Chris, 58                           external in, 203; fear of deskilling,
Wigner, Eugene, 227n20                       196–97; generation of, 202; ghost
Wikipedia, in LLMs, 225n37                   writing, 200; labor of, 195, 196–206;
Williams, Raymond, 19                        labor versus management of, 200;
Williams, William Carlos, 172; prosody       pharmakon of, 72; spiritual process of,
  of, 154–55                                 203; using LLMs, 153–54, 202
Winograd schemas, 63, 162                  writing systems: Derrida on, 70; as media
Wittgenstein, Ludwig: pragmatics of, 134     systems, 69; as technology, 72
Wolfram, Stephen, 226n2                    Wynter, Sylvia, 113
word embedding: computational tech-
  niques for, 147; paradigms of, 161       Yiu, Eunice, 18–19, 22
words: Augustine on, 66; LLM valua-
  tions of, 153; relay between numbers     Žižek, Slavoj, 221n80; on neoliberal
  and, 103–4; vector representation of,       ideology, 229n40; The Sublime Object of
  144–47. See also texts                       Ideology, 4
word2vec (semantic net), 148, 150
(continued from page ii)

                       61   Radioactive Ghosts
                            Gabriele Schwab
                       60   Gaian Systems: Lynn Margulis, Neocybernetics,
                            and the End of the Anthropocene
                            Bruce Clarke
                       59   The Probiotic Planet: Using Life to Manage Life
                            Jamie Lorimer
                       58   Individuation in Light of Notions of Form and
                            Information. Volume II, Supplemental Texts
                            Gilbert Simondon
                       57   Individuation in Light of Notions of Form and Information
                            Gilbert Simondon
                       56   Thinking Plant Animal Human: Encounters
                            with Communities of Difference
                            David Wood
                       55   The Elements of Foucault
                            Gregg Lambert
                       54   Postcinematic Vision: The Coevolution of
                            Moving-Image Media and the Spectator
                            Roger F. Cook
                       53   Bleak Joys: Aesthetics of Ecology and Impossibility
                            Matthew Fuller and Olga Goriunova
                       52   Variations on Media Thinking
                            Siegfried Zielinski
                       51   Aesthesis and Perceptronium: On the Entanglement
                            of Sensation, Cognition, and Matter
                            Alexander Wilson
                       50   Anthropocene Poetics: Deep Time, Sacrifice Zones,
                            and Extinction
                            David Farrier
                       49   Metaphysical Experiments: Physics and
                            the Invention of the Universe
                            Bjørn Ekeberg
48   Dialogues on the Human Ape
     Laurent Dubreuil and Sue Savage-Rumbaugh
47   Elements of a Philosophy of Technology: On the
     Evolutionary History of Culture
     Ernst Kapp
46   Biology in the Grid: Graphic Design and
     the Envisioning of Life
     Phillip Thurtle
45   Neurotechnology and the End of Finitude
     Michael Haworth
44   Life: A Modern Invention
     Davide Tarizzo
43   Bioaesthetics: Making Sense of Life in Science and the Arts
     Carsten Strathausen
42   Creaturely Love: How Desire Makes Us
     More and Less Than Human
     Dominic Pettman
41   Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in
     More Than Human Worlds
     María Puig de la Bellacasa
40   Of Sheep, Oranges, and Yeast: A Multispecies Impression
     Julian Yates
39   Fuel: A Speculative Dictionary
     Karen Pinkus
38   What Would Animals Say If We Asked
     the Right Questions?
     Vinciane Despret
37   Manifestly Haraway
     Donna J. Haraway
36   Neofinalism
     Raymond Ruyer
35   Inanimation: Theories of Inorganic Life
     David Wills
34   All Thoughts Are Equal: Laruelle and
     Nonhuman Philosophy
     John Ó Maoilearca
33   Necromedia
     Marcel O’Gorman
32   The Intellective Space: Thinking beyond Cognition
     Laurent Dubreuil
31   Laruelle: Against the Digital
     Alexander R. Galloway
30   The Universe of Things: On Speculative Realism
     Steven Shaviro
29   Neocybernetics and Narrative
     Bruce Clarke
28   Cinders
     Jacques Derrida
27   Hyperobjects: Philosophy and Ecology after
     the End of the World
     Timothy Morton
26   Humanesis: Sound and Technological Posthumanism
     David Cecchetto
25   Artist Animal
     Steve Baker
24   Without Offending Humans: A Critique of Animal Rights
     Élisabeth de Fontenay
23   Vampyroteuthis Infernalis: A Treatise, with a Report by
     the Institut Scientifique de Recherche Paranaturaliste
     Vilém Flusser and Louis Bec
22   Body Drift: Butler, Hayles, Haraway
     Arthur Kroker
21   HumAnimal: Race, Law, Language
     Kalpana Rahita Seshadri
20   Alien Phenomenology, or What It’s Like to Be a Thing
     Ian Bogost
19   CIFERAE: A Bestiary in Five Fingers
     Tom Tyler
18   Improper Life: Technology and Biopolitics
     from Heidegger to Agamben
     Timothy C. Campbell
17   Surface Encounters: Thinking with Animals and Art
     Ron Broglio
16   Against Ecological Sovereignty: Ethics, Biopolitics,
     and Saving the Natural World
     Mick Smith
15   Animal Stories: Narrating across Species Lines
     Susan McHugh
14   Human Error: Species-Being and Media Machines
     Dominic Pettman
13   Junkware
     Thierry Bardini
12   A Foray into the Worlds of Animals and Humans,
     with A Theory of Meaning
     Jakob von Uexküll
11   Insect Media: An Archaeology of Animals and Technology
     Jussi Parikka
10   Cosmopolitics II
     Isabelle Stengers
9    Cosmopolitics I
     Isabelle Stengers
8    What Is Posthumanism?
     Cary Wolfe
7    Political Affect: Connecting the Social and the Somatic
     John Protevi
6    Animal Capital: Rendering Life in Biopolitical Times
     Nicole Shukin
5    Dorsality: Thinking Back through Technology and Politics
     David Wills
4   Bíos: Biopolitics and Philosophy
    Roberto Esposito
3   When Species Meet
    Donna J. Haraway
2   The Poetics of DNA
    Judith Roof
1   The Parasite
    Michel Serres
Leif Weatherby is associate professor of German and founding
director of the Digital Theory Lab at New York University. He is
author of Transplanting the Metaphysical Organ: German Romanticism
between Leibniz and Marx.
