CHAPTER V LOCKE AND HUME





[198] A MORE detailed discussion of Descartes, Locke, and Hume—in this and in the succeeding chapter—may make plain how deeply the philosophy of organism is founded on seventeenth-century hought and how at certain critical points it diverges from that thought.

We shall understand better the discussion, if we start with some analysis of the presuppositions upon which Hume's philosophy rests. These presuppositions were not original to Hume, nor have they ceased with him. They were largely accepted by Kant and are widely prevalent in modern philosophy. The philosophy of organism can be best understood by conceiving it as accepting large portions of the expositions of Hume and Kant, with the exception of these presuppositions, and of inferences directly derived from them. Hume is a writer of unrivalled clearness; and, as far as possible, it will be well to allow him to express his ideas in his own words. He writes:

We may observe, that it is universally allowed by philosophers, and is besides pretty obvious of itself, that nothing is ever really present with the mind but its perceptions or impressions and ideas, and that external objects become known to us only by those perceptions they occasion. To hate, to love, to think, to feel, to see; all this is nothing but to perceive.1

Again:

All the perceptions of the human mind resolve themselves into two distinct kinds, which I shall call impressions and ideas. The difference betwixt these consists in [199] the degrees of force and liveliness, with which they strike upon the mind, and make their way into our thought or consciousness. Those perceptions which enter with most force and violence, we may name impressions; and, under this name, I comprehend all our sensations, passions, and emotions, as they make their first appearance in the soul. By ideas, I mean the faint images of these in thinking and reasoning; such as, for instance, are all the perceptions excited by the present discourse, excepting only those which arise from the sight and touch, and excepting the immediate pleasure or uneasiness it may occasion.2

The exceptions made in the above quotation are, of course, due to the fact that the ‘perceptions’ arising in these excepted ways are ‘impressions’ and not ‘ideas.’ Hume immediately draws attention to the fact that he deserts Locke's wide use of the term ‘idea,’ and restores it to its more usual and narrow meaning. He divides both ideas and impressions into ‘simple’ and ‘complex.’ He then adds:

… we shall here content ourselves with establishing one general proposition, That all our simple ideas in their first appearance, are derived from simple impressions, which are correspondent to them, and which they exactly represent.3

When Hume passes on to complex impressions and ideas, his admirable clearness partially deserts him. He fails to distinguish sufficiently between (i) the ‘manner’ (or ‘Order’) in which many simples constitute some one complex perception, i.e., impression or idea; and (ii) the efficacious fact by reason of which this complex perception arises; and (iii) the mere multiplicity of simples which constitute the complex perception in this definite manner. In this respect Hume's followers only differ from Hume by discarding some of that clarity which never wholly deserts him. Each one of these three notions is an essential element in his argument. He writes:

[200] … we may conclude with certainty, that the idea of extension is nothing but a copy of these coloured† points, and of the manner of their appearance.4

Also he writes:

Were ideas entirely loose and unconnected, chancet alone would join them; and it is impossible the same simple ideas should† fall regularly into complex ones (as they commonly do), without some bond of union among them, some associating quality, by which one idea naturally introduces another. This uniting principle among ideas is not to be considered as an inseparable connection; for that has been already5 excluded from the imagination: nor yet are we to conclude, that without it the mind cannot join two ideas; for nothing is more free than that faculty: but we are only to regard it as a gentle force, which commonly prevails, and is the cause why, among other things, languages so nearly correspond to each other; Nature, in a manner, pointing out to every one those simple ideas, which are most proper to be united into a complex one.6

As a final quotation, to illustrate Hume's employment of the third notion, we have:

The idea of a substance as well as that of a mode, is nothing but a collection of simple ideas, that are united by the imagination, and have a particular name assigned them, … But the difference betwixt these ideas consists in this, that the particular qualities, which form at substance, are commonly referred to an unknown something [italics Hume's], in which they are supposed to inhere; or granting this fiction should not take place, are at least supposed to be closely and inseparably connected by the relations of contiguity and causation. The effect of this is, that whatever new simple quality we discover to have the same connection with the rest, we immediately comprehend it among them, even though it did not enter into the first conception of the substance…. The principle of union being regarded as the chief part of the complex [201] idea, gives entrance to whatever quality afterwards occurs, and is equally comprehended by it, as are the others, which first presented themselves….7

In this last quotation, the phrase ‘principle of union’ is ambiguous as between ‘manner’ and ‘efficacious’ reason. In either sense, it is inconsistent with the phrase ‘nothing but a collection,’ which at the beginning of the quotation settles so simply the notion of ‘substance.’

Returning to the first of this sequence of three quotations, we note that any particular ‘manner’ of composition must itself be a simple idea, or impression. For otherwise we require yet another ‘manner’ of composition for the original manner, and so on indefinitely. Thus there is either a vicious infinity or a final simple idea. But Hume admits that there are novel compound ideas which are not copies of compound impressions. Thus he should also admit that there is a novel simple idea conveying the novel ‘manner,’ which is not a copy of an impression. He has also himself drawn attention to another exception in respect to missing shades of colour in a graduated colour scheme. This exception cannot be restricted to colour, and must be extended to sound, and smell, and to all graduations of sensations. Thus Hume's proposition, that simple ideas are all copies of simple impressions, is subject to such considerable qualifications that it cannot be taken for an ultimate philosophical principle, at least not when enunciated in Hume's unguarded fashion. Hume himself, in the passage (Part I, Sect. IV) quoted above for its relevance to his doctrine of the association of ideas, says, “… for nothing is more free than that faculty [i.e., the imagination].” But he limits its freedom to the production of novel complex ideas, disregarding the exceptional case of missing shades. This question of imaginative freedom is obviously treated very superficially by Hume. Imagination is never very free: it does not seem to be limited to complex ideas, as asserted by [202] him; but such freedom as it has in fact seems to establish the principle of the possibility of diverse actual entities with diverse grades of imaginative freedom, some more, some less, than the instances in question.

In this discussion of Hume's doctrine of imaginative freedom, two other points have been left aside. One such point is the difference between various grades of generic abstraction, for example, scarlet, red, colour, sense-datum, manner of connectedness of diverse sense-data. The other point is the contrast between ‘simplicity’ and ‘complexity.’ We may doubt whether ‘simplicity’ is ever more than a relative term, having regard to some definite procedure of analysis. I hold this to be the case; and by reason of this opinion find yet another reason for discarding Hume's doctrine which would debar imagination from the free conceptual production of any type of eternal objects, such as Hume calls ‘simple.’ But there is no such fact as absolute freedom; every actual entity possesses only such freedom† as is inherent in the primary phase ‘given’ by its standpoint of relativity to its actual universe. Freedom, givenness, potentiality, are notions which presuppose each other and limit each other.





Hume, at the end of this passage on the connectedness of ideas, places the sentence “… Nature, in a manner, pointing out to every one those simple ideas, which are most proper to be united into a complex one.” * Hume's philosophy is occupied with the double search, first, for manners of unity, whereby many simples become one complex impression; and secondly, for a standard of propriety by which to criticize the production of ideas.

Hume can find only one standard of propriety, and that is, repetition. Repetition is capable of more or less: the more often impressions are repeated, the more proper it is that ideas should copy them. Fortunately, and without any reason so far as Hume can discover, complex [203] impressions, often repeated, are also often copied by their corresponding complex ideas.

Also the frequency of ideas following upon the frequency of their correlate impressions is also attended by an expectation of the repetition of the impression. Hume also believes, without any reason he can assign, that this expectation is pragmatically justified. It is this pragmatic justification, without metaphysical reason, which constitutes the propriety attaching to ‘repetition.’ This is the analysis of the course of thought involved in Hume's doctrine of the association of ideas in its relation to causation, and in Hume's final appeal to practice.

It is a great mistake to attribute to Hume any disbelief in the importance of the notion of ‘cause and effect.’ Throughout the Treatise he steadily affirms its fundamental importance; and finally, when he cannot fit it into his metaphysics, he appeals beyond his metaphysics to an ultimate justification outside any rational systematization. This ultimate justification is ‘practice.’

Hume writes:

As our senses show us in one instance two bodies, or motions, or qualities, in certain relations of succession and contiguity, so our memory presents us only with a multitude of instances wherein we find like bodies, motions, or qualities, in like relations. From the mere repetition of any past impression, even to infinity, there never will arise any new original idea, such as that of a necessary connection; and the number of impressions has in this case no more effect than if we confined ourselves to one only. But though this reasoning seems just and obvious, yet, as it would be folly to despair too soon, we shall continue the thread of our discourse; and having found, that after the discovery of the constant conjunction of any objects, we always draw an inference from one object to another, we shall now examine the nature of that inference, and of the transition from the impression to the idea. Perhaps it will appear in the end, that the necessary connection depends on the inference, instead of the inference's depending on [204] the necessary connection…. The only connection or relation of objects, which can lead us beyond the immediate impressions of our memory and senses, is that of cause and effect; and that because it is the only one, on which we can found a just inference from one object to another. The idea of cause and effect is derived from experience [italics Hume's], which informs us, that such particular objects, in all past instances, have been constantly conjoined with each other: and as an object similar to one of these is supposed to be immediately present in its impression, we thence presume on the existence of one similar to its usual attendant. According to this account of things, which is, I think, in every point unquestionable, probability is founded on the presumption of a resemblance betwixt those objects of which we have had experience, and those of which we have had none; and, therefore, it is impossible † this presumption can arise from probability.8

Hume's difficulty with ‘cause and effect’ is that it lies “beyond the immediate impressions of our memory and senses.” † In other words, this manner of connection is not given in any impression. Thus the whole basis of the idea, its propriety, is to be traced to the repetition of impressions. At this point of his argument, Hume seems to have overlooked the difficulty that ‘repetition’ stands with regard to ‘impressions’ in exactly the same position as does ‘cause and effect.’ Hume has confused a ‘repetition of impressions’ with an ‘impression of repetitions of impressions.’ In Hume's own words on another topic (Part II, Sect. V):

For whence should it be derived? Does it arise from an impression of sensation or of reflection? Point it out distinctly to us, that we may know its nature and qualities. But if you cannot point out any such impression [Hume's italics], you may be certain you are mistaken, when you imagine you have any such idea.*

Hume's answer to this criticism would, of course, be [205] that he admits ‘memory.’ But the question is what is consistent with Hume's own doctrine. This is Hume's doctrine of memory (Part III, Sect. V): “Since therefore the memory is known, neither by the order of its complex ideas, nor† the nature of its simple ones; it follows, that the difference betwixt it and the imagination lies in its superior force and vivacity.” But (in Part I, Sect. I) he writes: “By ideas I mean the faint images of these [i.e., impressions] in thinking and reasoning,” and later on he expands ‘faint‘ into “degree of force and vivacity.”9 Thus, purely differing in ‘force and vivacity,’ we have the order: impressions, memories, ideas.

This doctrine is very unplausible; and, to speak bluntly, is in contradiction to plain fact. But, even worse, it omits the vital character of memory, namely, that it is memory. In fact the whole notion of repetition is lost in the ‘force and vivacity’ doctrine. What Hume does explain is that with a number of different perceptions immediately concurrent, he sorts them out into three different classes according to force and vivacity. But the repetition character, which he ascribes to simple ideas, and which is the whole point of memory, finds no place in his explanation. Nor can it do so, without an entire recasting of his fundamental philosophic notions.





Hume's argument has become circular. In the beginning of his Treatise, he lays down the ‘general proposition’: “That all our simple ideas in their first appearance, are derived from simple impressions, …” He proves this by an empirical survey. But the proposition itself employs—covertly, so far as language is concerned—the notion of ‘repetition,’ which itself is not an ‘impression.’ Again, later he finds ‘necessary connection’: he discards [206] this because he can find no corresponding impression. But the original proposition was only founded on an empirical survey; so the argument for dismissal is purely circular. Further, if Hume had only attended to his own excellent Part II, Section VI, ‘Of the Idea of Existence, and of external Existence,’† he would have remembered that whatever we do think of, thereby in some sense ‘exists.’ Thus, having the idea of ‘necessary connection,’ the only question is as to its exemplification in the connectedness of our ‘impressions.’ He muddles the importance of an idea with the fact of our entertainment of the idea. We cannot even be wrong in thinking that we think of ‘necessary connection,’ unless we are thinking of ‘necessary connection.’ Of course, we may be very wrong in believing that the notion is important.

The reasons for this examination of Hume, including the prolonged quotations, are (i) that Hume states with great clearness important aspects of our experience; (ii) that the defects in his statements are eminently natural defects which emerge with great clearness, owing to the excellence of his presentation; and (iii) that Hume differs from the great majority of his followers chiefly by the way in which he faces up to the problems raised by his own philosophy.

The first point to notice is that Hume's philosophy is pervaded by the notion of ‘repetition,’ and that memory is a particular example of this character of experience, that in some sense there is entwined in its fundamental nature the fact that it is repeating something. Tear ‘repetition’ out of ‘experience,’ and there is nothing left. On the other hand, ‘immediacy,’ or ‘first-handedness,’ is another element in experience. Feeling overwhelms repetition; and there remains the immediate, first-handed fact, which is the actual world in an immediate complex unity of feeling.

There is another contrasted pair of elements in experience, clustering round the notion of time, namely, ‘endurance’ and ‘change.’ Descartes, who emphasizes the notion [207] of ‘substance,’ also emphasizes ‘change.’ Hume, who minimizes the notion of ‘substance,’ similarly emphasizes ‘change.’ He writes:

Now as time is composed of parts that are not coexistent, an unchangeable object, since it produces none but coexistent impressions, produces none that can give us the idea of time; and, consequently, that idea must be derived from a succession of changeable objects, and time in its first appearance can never be severed from such a succession.10

Whereas Descartes writes:

… for this [i.e., ‘the nature of time or of the duration of things’] is of such a kind that its parts do not depend one upon the other, and never co-exist; and from the fact that we now are, it does not follow that we shall be a moment afterwards, if some cause—the same that first produced us—does not continue so to produce us; that is to say, to conserve us.

And again:

We shall likewise have a very different understanding of duration, order and number, if, in place of mingling with the idea that we have of them what properly speaking pertains to the conception of substance, we merely consider that the duration of each thing is a mode under which we shall consider this thing in so far as it continues to exist; …11

We have certainly to make room in our philosophy for the two contrasted notions, one that every actual entity endures, and the other that every morning is a new fact with its measure of change.

These various aspects can be summed up in the statement that experience involves a becoming, that becoming means that something becomes, and that what becomes involves repetition transformed into novel immediacy.

This statement directly traverses one main presupposition which Descartes and Hume agree in stating explicitly. This presupposition is that of the individual independence of successive temporal occasions. For [208] example, Descartes, in the passage cited above, writes: “[The nature of time is such]† that its parts do not depend one upon the other, …” Also Hume's impressions are self-contained, and he can find no temporal relationship other than mere serial order. This statement about Hume requires qualifying so far as concerns the connection between ‘impressions’ and ‘ideas.’ There is a relation of ‘derivation’ of ‘ideas’ from ‘impressions’ which he is always citing and never discussing. So far as it is to be taken seriously—for he never refers it to a correlate ‘impression’—it constitutes an exception to the individual independence of successive ‘perceptions.’ This presupposition of individual independence is what I have elsewhere12 called, the ‘fallacy of simple location.’ The notion of ‘simple location’ is inconsistent with any admission of ‘repetition’; Hume's difficulties arise from the fact that he starts with simple locations and ends with repetition. In the organic philosophy the notion of repetition is fundamental. The doctrine of objectification is an endeavourt to express how what is settled in actuality is repeated under limitations, so as to be ‘given’ for immediacy. Later, in discussing ‘time,’ this doctrine will be termed the doctrine of ‘Objective immortality.’





The doctrine of the individual independence of real facts is derived from the notion that the subject-predicate form of statement conveys a truth which is metaphysically ultimate. According to this view, an individual substance with its predicates constitutes the ultimate type of actuality. If there be one individual, the philosophy is monistic; if there be many individuals, the philosophy is pluralistic. With this metaphysical presupposition, the relations between individual substances constitute metaphysical nuisances: there is no place for them. Accordingly—in defiance of the most obvious deliverance of our intuitive ‘prejudices’—every [209] respectable philosophy of the subject-predicate type is monistic.

The exclusive dominance of the substance-quality metaphysics was enormously promoted by the logical bias of the mediaeval period. It was retarded by the study of Plato and of Aristotle. These authors included the strains of thought which issued in this doctrine, but included them inconsistently mingled with other notions. The substance-quality metaphysics triumphed with exclusive dominance in Descartes' doctrines. Unfortunately he did not realize that his notion of the ‘res vera—did not entail the same disjunction of ultimate facts as that entailed by the Aristotelian notion of ‘primary substance.’ Locke led a revolt from this dominance, but inconsistently. For him and also for Hume, in the background and tacitly presupposed in all explanations, there remained the mind with its perceptions. The perceptions, for Hume, are what the mind knows about itself; and tacitly the knowable facts are always treated as qualities of a subject—the subject being the mind. His final criticism of the notion of the ‘mind’ does not alter the plain fact that the whole of the previous discussion has included this presupposition. Hume's final criticism only exposes the metaphysical superficiality of his preceding exposition.

In the philosophy of organism a subject-predicate proposition is considered as expressing a high abstraction.

The metaphysical superiority of Locke over Hume is exhibited in his wide use of the term ‘idea,’ which Locke himself introduced and Hume abandoned. Its use marks the fact that his tacit subject-predicate bias is slight in its warping effect. He first (I, I, 8*) explains: “… I have used it [i.e., idea] to express whatever is meant by phantasm, notion, species, or whatever it is which the mind can be employed about in thinking; …” But later (III, III, 6†), without any explicit notice of the widening of use, he writes: “… and ideas become13 [210] general by separating from them the circumstances of time, and place, and any other ideas that may determine them to this or that particular existence.” Here, for Locke, the operations of the mind originate from ideas ‘determined’ to particular existents. This is a fundamental principle with Locke; it is a casual concession to the habits of language with Hume; and it is a fundamental principle with the philosophy of organism. In an earlier section (II, XXIII, 1) Locke expresses more vaguely the same doctrine, though in this context he immediately waters it down into an unexplained notion of ‘going constantly together’: “The mind, being, … furnished with a great number of the simple ideas conveyed in by the senses, as they are found in exterior things, … takes notice, also, that a certain number of these simple ideas go constantly together.”

But Locke wavers in his use of this principle of some sort of perception of ‘particular existents’; and Hume seeks consistency by abandoning it; while the philosophy of organism seeks to reconstruct Locke by abandoning those parts of his philosophy which are inconsistent with this principle. But the principle itself is to be found plainly stated by Locke.

Hume has only impressions of ‘sensation’ and of ‘reflection.’ He writes: “The first kind arises in the soul originally, from unknown causes.”14 Note the tacit presupposition of ’the soul’ as subject, and ‘impression of sensation’ as predicate. Also note the dismissal of any intrinsic relevance to a particular existent, which is an existent in the same sense as the ‘soul’ is an existent; whereas Locke illustrates his meaning by referring (cf. III, III, 7) to a ‘child’—corresponding to ‘the soul’ in Hume's phrase—and to its ‘nurse’ of whom the child has its ‘idea.’

Hume is certainly inconsistent, because he cannot entirely disregard common sense. But his inconsistencies are violent, and his main argument negates Locke's use. [211] As an example of his glaring inconsistency of phraseology, note:

As to those impressions, which arise from the senses, their ultimate cause is, in my opinion, perfectly inexplicable by human reason, and it will always be impossible to decide with certainty, whether they arrive immediately from the object, or are produced by the creative power of the mind, or are derived from the Author of our being.15

Here he inconsistently speaks of the object, whereas he has nothing on hand in his philosophy which justifies the demonstrative word ‘the.’ In the second reference ‘the object’ has emerged into daylight. He writes: “There is no object which implies the existence of any other, if we consider these objects in themselves, and never look beyond the ideas which we form of them.” This quotation exhibits an ingenious confusion whereby Hume makes the best of two metaphysical worlds, the world with Locke's principle, and his own world which is without Locke's principle.

But Locke's principle amounts to this: That there are many actual existents, and that in some sense one actual existent repeats itself in another actual existent, so that in the analysis of the latter existent a component ‘determined to’ the former existent is discoverable. The philosophy of organism expresses this principle by its doctrines of ‘prehension’ and of ‘Objectification.’ Locke always supposes that consciousness is consciousness of the ideas in the conscious mind. But he never separates the ‘ideas’ from the ‘consciousness.’ The philosophy of organism makes this separation, and thereby relegates consciousness to a subordinate metaphysical position; and gives to Locke's Essay a metaphysical interpretation which was not in Locke's mind. This separation asserts Kant's principle: “Gedanken ohne Inhalt sind leer, Anschauungen ohne Begriffe sind blind.”16 But Kant's principle is here applied in exactly the converse way to Kant's own use of it. Kant is obsessed with the mentality [212] of ‘intuition,’ and hence† with its necessary involution in consciousness. His‡ suppressed premise is ‘Intuitions are never blind.’





In one important respect Hume's philosophical conceptions show a marked superiority over those of Locke. In the Essay Concerning Human Understanding, the emphasis is laid upon the morphological structure of ‘human understanding,’ The logical relationships of various sorts of ‘ideas– are examined. Now, whether in physics, biology, or elsewhere, morphology, in the sense of the analysis of logical relationships, constitutes the first stage of knowledge. It is the basis of the new ‘mathematical’ method which Descartes introduced. Morphology deals in analytical propositions, as they are termed by Kant. For example, Locke writes: “The common names of substances, as well as other general terms, stand for sorts: which17 is nothing else but the being made signs of such complex ideas, wherein several particular substances do or might agree, by virtue of which they are capable of being comprehended in one common conception, and be signified by one name.” And again: “Our abstract ideas are to us the measures of species.” And again: “Nor let any one say, that the power of propagation in animals by the mixture of male and female, and in plants by seeds, keeps the supposed real species distinct and entire.”18 In technical language, Locke had no use for genetic evolution.

On the other hand, Hume's train of thought unwittingly emphasizes ‘process.’ His very scepticism is nothing but the discovery that there is something in the world which cannot be expressed in analytic propositions. Hume discovered that “We murder to dissect.” He did not say this, because he belonged to the mid-eighteenth century; and so left the remark to Wordsworth. But, in [213] effect, Hume discovered that an actual entity is at once a process, and is atomic; so that in no sense is it the sum of its parts. Hume proclaimed the bankruptcy of morphology.

Hume's account of the process discoverable in ‘the soul’ is as follows: first, impressions of sensation, of unknown origin; then, ideas of such impressions, ‘derived from’ the impressions; then, impressions of reflection ‘derived from’ the antecedent ideas; and then, ideas of impressions of reflection. Somewhere in this process, there is to be found repetition of impressions, and thence by ‘habit’—by which we may suppose that a particular mode of ‘derivation’ is meant—by habit, a repetition of the correlate ideas; and thence expectancy of the repetition of the correlate impressions. This expectancy would be an ‘impression of reflection.’ It is difficult to understand why Hume exempts ‘habit’ from the same criticism as that applied to the notion of ‘cause.’ We have no ‘impression’ of ‘habit,’ just as we have no ‘impression’ of ‘cause.’ Cause, repetition, habit are all in the same boat.

Somewhat inconsistently, Hume never allows impressions of sensation to be derived from the correlate ideas; though, as the difference between them only consists in ‘force and vivacity,’ the reason for this refusal cannot be found in‡ his philosophy. The truth is that Hume retained an obstinate belief in an external world which his principles forbade him to confess in his philosophical constructions. He reserved that belief for his daily life, and for his historical and sociological writings, and for his Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion.

The merit of Hume's account is that the process described is within ‘the soul.’ In the philosophy of organism ‘the soul’ as it appears in Hume, and ‘the mind’ as it appears in Locke and Hume, are replaced by the phrases ‘the actual entity,’ and ‘the actual occasion,’ these phrases being synonymous.

Two defects, found equally in Locke and in Hume, are, first, the confusion between a Lockian ‘idea’ and [214] consciousness of such an idea; and, secondly, the assigned relations between ‘ideas’ of sensation and ‘ideas’ of reflection.† In Hume's language, this latter point is concerned with the relations between ‘impressions of sensation’ and ‘impressions of reflection.’ Hume and Locke, with the overintellectualist bias prevalent among philosophers, assume that emotional feelings are necessarily derivative from sensations. This is conspicuously not the case; the correlation between such feelings and sensations is on the whole a secondary effect. Emotions conspicuously brush aside sensations and fasten upon the ‘particular’ objects to which—in Locke's phrase—certain ‘ideas’ are ‘determined.’ The confinement of our prehension of other actual entities to the mediation of private sensations is pure myth. The converse doctrine is nearer the truth: the more primitive mode of objectification is via emotional tone, and only in exceptional organisms does objectification, via sensation, supervene with any effectiveness. In their doctrine on this point, Locke and Hume were probably only repeating the mediaeval tradition, and they have passed on the tradition to their successors. None the less, the doctrine is founded upon no necessity of thought, and lacks empirical confirmation. If we consider the matter physiologically, the emotional tone depends mainly on the condition of the viscera which are peculiarly ineffective in generating sensations. Thus the whole notion of prehension should be inverted. We prehend other actual entities more primitively by direct mediation of emotional tone, and only secondarily and waveringly by direct mediation of sense. The two modes fuse with important effects upon our perceptive knowledge. This topic must be reserved (cf. Parts III and IV) for further discussion; but it is fundamental in the philosophy of organism. One difficulty in appealing to modern psychology, for the purpose of a preliminary survey of the nature of experience, is that so much of that science is based upon the presupposition of the sensationalist mythology. Thus the sim- [215] pler, more naïve surveys of Locke and Hume are philosophically the more useful.

Later, in Part III, a ‘prehension’ will be analysed into ‘prehending subject,’ ‘Object prehended,’ and ‘subjective form.’ The philosophy of organism follows Locke in admitting particular ‘exterior things’ into the category of ‘Object prehended.’ It also follows Hume in his admission at the end of his Appendix to the Treatise: “Had I said, that two ideas of the same object can only be different by their different feeling, I should have been nearer the truth.” What Hume here calls ‘feeling’ is expanded in the philosophy of organism into the doctrine of ‘subjective form.’ But there is another ineradicable difference between some prehensions, namely, their diversity of prehending subjects, when the two prehensions are in that respect diverse. The subsequent uses of the term ‘feeling’ are in the sense of the ‘positive’ type of prehensions, and not in the sense in which Hume uses it in the above quotation.

The approximation of the philosophy of organism to Santayana's doctrine of ‘animal faith’ is effected by this doctrine of objectification by the mediation of ‘feeling.’

Santayana would deny that ‘animal faith’ has in it any element of givenness. This denial is presumably made in deference to the sensationalist doctrine, that all knowledge of the external world arises by the mediation of private sensations. If we allow the term ‘animal faith’ to describe a kind of perception which has been neglected by the philosophic tradition, then practically the whole of Santayana's discussion19 is in accord with the organic philosophy.

The divergence from, and the analogy to, Santayana's doctrine can be understood by quoting two sentences:

I propose therefore to use the word existence … to designate not data of intuition but facts or events believed to occur in nature. These facts or events will include, first, intuitions themselves, or instances of con- [216] sciousness, like pains and pleasures and all remembered experiences and mental discourse; and second, physical things and events, having a transcendent relation to the data of intuition which, in belief, may be used as signs for them; …*

It may be remarked in passing that this quotation illustrates Santayana's admirable clarity of thought, a characteristic which he shares with the men of genius of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Now the exact point where Santayana differs from the organic philosophy is† his implicit assumption that ‘intuitions themselves’ cannot be among the ‘data of intuition,’ that is to say, the data of other intuitions. This possibility is what Santayana denies and the organic philosophy asserts. In this respect Santayana is voicing the position which, implicitly or explicitly, pervades modern philosophy. He is only distinguished by his clarity of thought. If Santayana's position be granted, there is a phenomenal veil, a primitive credulity associated with action and valuation, and a mysterious symbolism from the veil to the realities behind the veil. The only difference between such philosophers lies in their reading of the symbolism, some read more and some less. There can be no decision between them, since there are no rational principles which penetrate from the veil to the dark background of reality.

The organic philosophy denies this doctrine because, first, it is contrary to naïve experience; secondly, ‘memory’ is a very special instance of an antecedent act of experience becoming a datum of intuition for another act of experience; thirdly, the rejected doctrine is derived from the misconception of Locke, already noted previously (cf. Part II, Ch. I, Sect. VI), that logical simplicity can be identified with priority in the concrescent process. Locke, in his first two books,† attempts to build up experience from the basic elements of simple ‘ideas’ of sensation. These simple ideas are practically Santayana's ‘intuitions of essences.’ Santayana explicitly [217] repudiates the misconception, but in so doing he knocks away one of the supports of his doctrine. A fourth reason for the rejection of the doctrine is that the way is thereby opened for a rational scheme of cosmology in which a final reality is identified with acts of experience.

1Treatise, Bk. I, Part II, Sect. VI.

2Treatise, Bk. I, Part I, Sect. I.

3Treatise, Bk. I, Part I, Sect. I.

4Treatise, Bk. I, Part II, Sect. III.

5Cf. Hume's previous section.

6Treatise, Bk. I, Part I, Sect. IV.

7Treatise, Bk. I, Part I, Sect. VI. Italics not in edition quoted, except where noted.*

8Treatise, Bk. I, Part III, Sect. VI. Italics not in Treatise.

9This doctrine of ‘force and vivacity’ is withdrawn in the last sentence* of Hume's Appendix to the Treatise. But the argument in the Treatise is substantially built upon it. In the light of the retraction the whole ‘sensationalist’ doctrine requires reconsideration. The withdrawal cannot be treated as a minor adjustment.

10Treatise, Bk. I, Part II, Sect. III.

11Principles, Part I, 21, and 55.

12Cf. Science and the Modem World, Ch. III.

13Italics mine.*

14Treatise, Bk. I, Part I, Sect. II.

15Treatise, Bk. I, Part III, Sect. V; cf. also Sect. VI.†

16Critique of Pure Reason, ‘Transcendental Logic,’ Introduction, Sect. I.†

17Italics mine.

18III, VI, 1, 22, 23.

19Cf. his Scepticism and Animal Faith.
