CHAPTER VI FROM DESCARTES TO KANT





[218] A COMPARISON of the† different ways in which Descartes and Locke respectively conceived the scope of their investigations at once discloses the very important shift which Locke introduced into the tradition of philosophic thought. Descartes asked the fundamental metaphysical question, What is it to be an actual entity? He found three kinds of actual entities, namely, cogitating minds, extended bodies, and God. His word for an actual entity was ‘substance.’ The fundamental proposition, whereby the analysis of actuality could be achieved, took the form of predicating a quality of the substance in question. A quality was either an accident or an essential attribute. In the Cartesian philosophy there was room for three distinct kinds of change: one was the change of accidents of an enduring substance; another was the origination of an individual substance; and the third was the cessation of the existence of an enduring substance. Any individual belonging to either of the first two kinds of substances did not require any other individual of either of these kinds in order to exist. But it did require the concurrence of God. Thus the essential attributes of a mind were its dependence on God and its cogitations; and the essential attributes of a body were its dependence on God and its extension. Descartes does not apply the term ‘attribute’ to the ‘dependence on God’; but it is an essential element in his philosophy. It is quite obvious that the accidental relationships between diverse individual substances form a great difficulty for Descartes. If they are to be included in his scheme of the actual [219] world, they must be qualities of a substance. Thus a relationship is the correlation of a pair of qualities,† one belonging exclusively to one individual, and the other exclusively to the other individual. The correlaton itself must be referred to God as one of his accidental qualities. This is exactly Descartes' procedure in his theory of representative ideas. In this theory, the perceived individual has one quality; the perceiving individual has another† quality which is the ‘idea’ representing this quality; God is aware of the correlation; and the perceiver's knowledge of God guarantees for him the veracity of his idea. It is unnecessary to criticize this very artificial account of what common sense believes to be our direct knowledge of other actual entities. But it is the only account consistent with the metaphysical materials provided by Descartes, combined with his assumption of a multiplicity of actual entities. In this assumption of a multiplicity of actual entities the philosophy of organism follows Descartes. It is, however,† obvious that there are only two ways out of Descartes' difficulties; one way is to have recourse to some form of monism; the other way is to reconstruct Descartes' metaphysical machinery.

But Descartes asserts one principle which is the basis of all philosophy: he holds that the whole pyramid of knowledge is based upon the immediate operation of knowing which is either an essential (for Descartes), or a contributory, element in the composition of an immediate actual entity. This is also a first principle for the philosophy of organism. But Descartes allowed the subject-predicate form of proposition, and the philosophical tradition derived from it, to dictate his subsequent meta-physical development. For his philosophy, ‘actuality’ meant ‘to be a substance with inhering qualities.’ For the philosophy of organism, the percipient occasion is its own standard of actuality. If in its knowledge other actual entities appear, it can only be because they conform to its standard of actuality. There can only be [220] evidence of a world of actual entities, if the immediate actual entity discloses them as essential to its own composition. Descartes' notion of an unessential experience of the external world is entirely alien to the organic philosophy. This is the root point of divergence; and is the reason why the organic philosophy has to abandon any approach to the substance-quality notion of actuality. The organic philosophy interprets experience as meaning the ‘self-enjoyment of being one among many, and of being one arising out of the composition of many.’ Descartes interprets experience as meaning the ‘self-enjoyment, by an individual substance, of its qualification by ideas.’†





Locke explicitly discards metaphysics. His enquiry has a limited scope: This therefore being my purpose, to inquire into the original, certainty, and extent of human knowledge, together with the grounds and degrees of belief, opinion, and assent, I shall not at present meddle with the physical consideration of the mind, or trouble myself to examine wherein its essence consists, … It shall suffice to my present purpose, to consider the discerning faculties of a man as they are employed about the objects which they have to do with; …1

The enduring importance of Locke's work comes from the candour, clarity, and adequacy with which he stated the evidence, uninfluenced by the bias of metaphysical theory. He explained, in the sense of stating plainly, and not in the more usual sense of ‘explaining away.’ By an ironic development in the history of thought, Locke's successors, who arrogated to themselves the title of ‘empiricists,’ have been chiefly employed in explaining away the obvious facts of experience in obedience to the a priori doctrine of sensationalism, inherited from the mediaeval philosophy which they despised. Locke's Essay is the invaluable storehouse for those who wish to [221] confront their metaphysical constructions by a recourse to the facts.

Hume clipped his explanation by this a priori theory, which he states explicitly in the first quotation made from his Treatise in the previous chapter. It cannot be too often repeated:

We may observe, that it is universally allowed by philosophers, and is besides pretty obvious of itself, that nothing is ever really present with the mind but its perceptions† or impressions and ideas, and that external objects become known to us only by those perceptions they occasion. To hate, to love, to think, to feel, to see; all this is nothing but to perceive.

Hume, in agreement with what ‘is universally allowed by philosophers,’ interprets this statement in a sensationalist sense. In accordance with this sense, an impression is nothing else than a particular instance of the mind's awareness of a universal, which may either be simple, or may be a manner of union of many simple universals. For Hume, hating, loving, thinking, feeling, are nothing but perceptions derivate from these fundamental impressions. This is the a priori sensationalist dogma, which bounds all Hume's discoveries in the realm of experience. It is probable that this dogma was in Locke's mind throughout the earlier portion of his Essay. But Locke was not seeking consistency with any a priori dogma. He also finds in experience ‘ideas’ with characteristics which ‘determine them to this or that particular existent.’ Such inconsistency with their dogma shocks empiricists, who refuse to admit experience, naked and unashamed, devoid of their a priori figleaf. Locke is merely stating what, in practice, nobody doubts. But Locke would have agreed with Hume in refusing to admit that ‘ideas of reflection’ may be directly ‘determined to some particular existent,’ without the intervention of ‘ideas of sensation.’ In this respect, Locke was a sensationalist, and the philosophy of organism is not sensationalist. But Locke's avoidance of metaphysics only led him up to a stage of thought for which meta- [222] physics is essential to clarity. The questions as to the status of a ‘particular existent,’ and of an ‘idea determined to a particular existent,’ demand metaphysical discussion. Locke is never tired of disparaging the notion of ‘substance’; but he gives no hint of alternative categories which he would employ to analyse† the notions of an ‘actual entity’ and of ‘reality.’ But his Essay, however, does contain a line of thought which can be developed into a metaphysic. In the first place, he distinctly holds that ideas of particular existents—for example, the child's idea of its mother—constitute the fundamental data which the mental functioning welds into a unity by a determinate process of absorption, including comparison, emphasis, and abstraction. He also holds that ‘powers’ are to be ascribed to particular existents whereby the constitutions of other particulars are conditioned. Correlatively, he holds that the constitutions of particular existents must be described so as to exhibit their ‘capacities’ for being conditioned by such ‘powers’ in other particulars. He also holds that all qualities have in some sense a relational element in them. Perhaps, though Locke does not say so, this notion of the relational element in qualities is illustrated in the following passage: “Besides, there is scarce any particular thing existing, which, in some of its simple ideas, does not communicate with a greater, and in others with a less, number of particular beings: …”2 Locke here expresses the notion of an identity between two simple ideas in the form of a ‘communication’ between the particular existents which possess that common quality. This passage also illustrates Locke's habit of employing the term ‘idea’† in a sense other than particular content of an act of awareness. Finally, Locke's notion of the passage of time is that something is ‘perpetually perishing.’ If he had grasped the notion that the actual entity ‘perishes’ in the passage of time, so that no actual entity changes, he would have arrived [223] at the point of view of the philosophy of organism. What he does say, is “perpetually perishing parts of succession.”3 Here, as elsewhere, Locke's neglect of ultimate questions revenges itself upon him. Nothing can make the various parts of his Essay mutually consistent. He never revises the substance-quality categories which remain presupposed throughout his Essay. In the first two books of the Essay, he professes to lay the foundations of his doctrine of ideas. These books are implicitly dominated by the notion of the ideas as mere qualifications of the substrate mind. In the third book of the Essay he is apparently passing on to the application of his established doctrine of ideas to the subordinate question of the function of language. But he tacitly introduces a new doctrine of ideas, which is difficult to conciliate with the sensationalist doctrine of the preceding books. Hume concentrates upon the doctrine of Locke's earlier books; the philosophy of organism concentrates upon that of the later books in the Essay. If Locke's Essay is to be interpreted as a consistent scheme of thought, undoubtedly Hume is right; but such an interpretation offers violence to Locke's contribution to philosophy.





In the philosophy of organism it is assumed that an actual entity is composite. ‘Actuality’ is the fundamental exemplification of composition; all other meanings of ‘composition’ are referent to this root-meaning. But ‘actuality’ is a general term, which merely indicates this ultimate type of composite unity: there are many composite unities to which this general term applies. There is no general fact of composition, not expressible in terms of the composite constitutions of the individual occasions. Every proposition is entertained in the constitution of some one actual entity, or severally in the constitutions of many actual entities. This is only [224] another rendering of the ‘ontological principle.’ It follows from the ontological principle, thus interpreted, that the notion of a ‘common world’ must find its exemplification in the constitution of each actual entity, taken by itself for analysis. For an actual entity cannot be a member of a ‘common world,’ except in the sense that the ‘common world’ is a constituent of its own constitution. It follows that every item of the universe, including all the other actual entities, is a constituent† in the constitution of any one actual entity. This conclusion has already been employed under the title of the ‘principle of relativity.’ This principle of relativity is the axiom by which the ontological principle is rescued from issuing in an extreme monism. Hume adumbrates this principle in his notion of ‘repetition.’

Some principle is now required to rescue actual entities from being undifferentiated repetitions, each of the other, with mere numerical diversity. This requisite is supplied by the ‘principle of intensive relevance.’ The notion of intensive relevance is fundamental for the meaning of such concepts as ‘alternative possibilities,’ ‘more or less,’ ‘important or negligible.’ The principle asserts that any item of the universe, however pre-posterous as an abstract thought, or however remote as an actual entity, has its own gradation of relevance, as prehended, in the constitution of any one actual entity: it might have had more relevance; and it might have had less relevance, including the zero of relevance involved in the negative prehension; but in fact it has just that relevance whereby it finds its status in the constitution of that actual entity. It will be remembered that Hume finds it necessary to introduce the notion of variations in ‘force and vivacity.’ He is here making a particular application—and, as I believe, an unsuccessful application—of the general principle of intensive relevance.

There is interconnection between the degrees of relevance of different items in the same actual entity. This fact of interconnection is asserted in the ‘principle of [225] compatibility and contrariety.’ There are items which, in certain respective gradations of relevance, are contraries to each other; so that those items, with their respective intensities of relevance, cannot coexist in the constitution of one actual entity. If some group of items, with their variety of relevance, can coexist in one actual entity, then the group, as thus variously relevant, is a compatible group. The various specific essences of one genus, whereby an actual entity may belong to one or other of the species but cannot belong to more than one, illustrate the incompatibility between two groups of items. Also in so far as a specific essence is complex, the specific essence is necessarily composed of compatible items, if there has been any exemplification of that species. But ‘feelings’ are the entities which are primarily ‘compatible’ or ‘incompatible.’ All other usages of these terms are derivative.

The words ‘real’ and ‘potential’ are, in this exposition, taken in senses which are antithetical. In their primary senses, they qualify the ‘eternal objects.’ These eternal objects determine how the world of actual entities enters into the constitution of each one of its members via its feelings. And they also express how the constitution of any one actual entity is analysable into phases, related as presupposed and presupposing. Eternal objects express how the predecessor-phase is absorbed into the successor-phase† without limitation of itself, but with additions necessary for the determination of an actual unity in the form of individual satisfaction. The actual entities enter into each others' constitutions under limitations imposed by incompatibilities4 of feelings. Such incompatibilities relegate various elements in the constitutions of felt objects to the intensive zero, which is termed ‘irrelevance.’ The preceding phases enter into their successors with additions which eliminate the inde- [226] terminations. The how of the limitations, and the how of the additions, are alike the realization of eternal objects in the constitution of the actual entity in question. An eternal object in abstraction from any one particular actual entity is a potentiality for ingression into actual entities. In its ingression into any one actual entity, either as relevant or as irrelevant, it retains its potentiality of indefinite diversity of modes of ingression, a potential indetermination rendered determinate in this instance. The definite ingression into a particular actual entity is not to be conceived as the sheer evocation of that eternal object from ‘not-being’ into ‘being’; it is the evocation of determination out of indetermination. Potentiality becomes reality; and yet retains its message of alternatives which the actual entity has avoided. In the constitution of an actual entity:—whatever component is red, might have been green; and whatever component is loved, might have been coldly esteemed. The term ‘universal’ is unfortunate in its application to eternal objects; for it seems to deny, and in fact it was meant to deny, that the actual entities also fall within the scope of the principle of relativity. If the term ‘eternal objects’ is disliked, the term ‘potentials’ would be suitable. The eternal objects are the pure potentials of the universe; and the actual entities differ from each other in their realization of potentials. Locke's term ‘idea,’ in his primary use of it in the first two books of the Essay, means the determinate ingression of an eternal object into the actual entity in question. But he also introduces the limitation† to conscious mentality, which is here abandoned.

Thus in the philosophy of organism, Locke's first use of the term ‘idea’ is covered by the doctrine of the ‘ingression’ of eternal objects into actual entities; and his second use of the same term is covered by the doctrine of the ‘objectification’ of actual entities. The two doctrines cannot be explained apart from each other: they constitute explanations of the two fundamental principles—[227] the ontological principle and the principle of relativity.

The four stages constitutive of an actual entity have been stated above in Part II, Chapter III, Section I. They can be named, datum, process, satisfaction, decision. The two terminal stages have to do with ‘becoming’ in the sense of the transition from the settled actual world to the new actual entity relatively to which that settlement is defined. But such ‘definition’ must be found as an element in the actual entities concerned. The ‘settlement’ which an actual entity ‘finds’ is its datum. It is to be conceived as a limited perspective of the ‘settled’ world provided by the eternal objects concerned. This datum is ‘decided’ by the settled world. It is ‘prehended’ by the new superseding entity. The datum is the objective content of the experience. The decision, providing the datum, is a transference of self-limited appetition; the settled world provides the ‘real potentiality’ that its many actualities be felt compatibly; and the new concrescence starts from this datum. The perspective is provided by the elimination of incompatibilities. The final stage, the ‘decision,’ is how the actual entity, having attained its individual ‘satisfaction,’ thereby adds a determinate condition to the settlement for the future beyond itself. Thus the ‘datum’ is the ‘decision received,’ and the ‘decision’ is the ‘decision transmitted.’ Between these two decisions, received and transmitted, there lie the two stages, ‘process’ and ‘satisfaction.’ The datum is indeterminate as regards the final satisfaction. The ‘process’ is the addition of those elements of feeling whereby these indeterminations are dissolved into determinate linkages attaining the actual unity of an individual actual entity. The actual entity, in becoming itself, also solves the question as to what it is to be. Thus process is the stage in which the creative idea works towards the definition and attainment of a determinate individuality. Process is the growth and attainment of a final end. The progressive defini- [228] tion of the final end is the efficacious condition for its attainment. The determinate unity of an actual entity is bound together by the final causation towards an ideal progressively defined by its progressive relation to the determinations and indeterminations of the datum. The ideal, itself felt, defines what ‘self’ shall arise from the datum; and the ideal is also an element in the self which thus arises.

According to this account, efficient causation expresses the transition from actual entity to actual entity; and final causation expresses the internal process whereby the actual entity becomes itself. There is the becoming of the datum, which is to be found in the past of the world; and there is the becoming of the immediate self from the datum. This latter becoming is the immediate actual process. An actual entity is at once the product of the efficient past, and is also, in Spinoza's phrase, causa sui. Every philosophy recognizes, in some form or other, this factor of self-causation, in what it takes to be ultimate actual fact. Spinoza's words have already been quoted. Descartes' argument, from the very fact of thinking, assumes that this freely determined operation is thereby constitutive of an occasion in the endurance of an actual entity. He writes (Meditation II): “I am, I exist, is necessarily true each time that I pronounce it, or that I mentally conceive it.” Descartes in his own philosophy conceives the thinker as creating the occasional thought. The philosophy of organism inverts the order, and conceives the thought as a constituent operation in the creation of the occasional thinker. The thinker is the final end whereby there is the thought. In this inversion we have the final contrast between a philosophy of substance and a philosophy of organism. The operations of an organism are directed towards the organism as a ‘superject,’ and are not directed from the organism as a ‘subject.’ The operations are directed from antecedent organisms and to the immediate organism. They are ‘vectors,’ in that they convey the many [229] things into the constitution of the single superject. The creative process is rhythmic: it swings from the publicity of many things to the individual privacy; and it swings back from the private individual to the publicity of the objectified individual. The former swing is dominated by the final cause, which is the ideal; and the latter swing is dominated by the efficient cause,† which is actual.





From the point of view of the philosophy of organism, the credit must be given to Hume that he emphasized the ‘process’ inherent in the fact of being a mind. His analysis of that process is faulty in its details. It was bound to be so; because, with Locke, he misconceived his problem to be the analysis of mental operations. He should have conceived it as the analysis of operations constituent of actual entities. He would then have found mental operations in their proper place. Kant followed Hume in this misconception; and was thus led to balance the world upon thought—oblivious to the scanty supply of thinking. But Hume, Kant, and the philosophy of organism agree that the task of the critical reason is the analysis of constructs; and ‘construction’ is ‘process.’ Hume's analysis of the construct which constitutes a mental occasion is: impressions of sensation, ideas of impressions of sensation, impressions of reflection, ideas of impressions of reflection. This analysis may be found obscurely in Locke. But Hume exhibits it as an orderly process; and then endeavours—and fails—to express in terms of it our ordinary beliefs, in which he shares.

For subsequent empiricists the pleasure of the dogma has overcome the metaphysical rule of evidence: that we must bow to those presumptions, which, in despite of criticism, we still employ for the regulation of our lives. Such presumptions are imperative in experience. Rationalism is the search for the coherence of such presumptions. Hume, in his series of ideas and of impressions,† derivates from impressions of sensation, implicitly allows [230] that the building-up of experience is a process of addition to original data. The philosophy of organism, in this respect, agrees with Hume. It disagrees with Hume as to the proper characterization of the primary data. In Hume's philosophy the primary impressions are characterized in terms of universals, e.g., in the first section of his Treatise he refers to the colour ‘red’ as an illustration. This is also the doctrine of the first two books of Locke's Essay. But in Locke's third book a different doctrine appears, and the primary data are explicitly said to be ‘ideas of particular existents.’ According to Locke's second doctrine, the ideas of universals are derived from these primary data by a process of comparison and analysis. The philosophy of organism agrees in principle with this second doctrine of Locke's. It is difficult, and trifling, to determine the exact extent of the agreement; because the expositions of Locke and Hume bring in the very derivative operations involving consciousness. The organic philosophy does not hold that the ‘particular existents’ are prehended apart from universals; on the contrary, it holds that they are prehended by the mediation of universals. In other words, each actuality is prehended by means of some element of its own definiteness. This is the doctrine of the ‘objectification’ of actual entities. Thus the primary stage in the concrescence of an actual entity is the way in which the antecedent universe enters into the constitution of the entity in question, so as to constitute the basis of its nascent individuality. A converse way of looking at this truth is that the relevance to other actual entities of its own status in the actual world† is the initial datum in the process of its concrescence. When it is desired to emphasize this interpretation of the datum, the phrase ‘objective content’ will be used synonymously with the term ‘datum.’ Of course, strictly speaking, the universals, to which Hume confines the datum, are also ‘objects’; but the phrase ‘objective content’ is meant to emphasize the doctrine of ‘objectification’ of actual entities. If experi- [231] ence be not based upon an objective content, there can be no escape from a solipsist subjectivism. But Hume, and Locke in his main doctrine, fail to provide experience with any objective content. Kant, for† whom ‘process’ is mainly a process of thought, accepts Hume's doctrine as to the ‘datum’ and turns the ‘apparent’ objective content into the end of the construct. So far, Kant's ‘apparent’ objective content seems to take the place of the ‘satisfaction’ in the philosophy of organism. In this way there can be no real escape from the solipsist difficulty. But Kant in his appeal to ‘practical reason’ admits also the ‘satisfaction’ in a sense analogous to that in the philosophy of organism; and by an analysis of its complex character he arrives at ultimate actualities which, according to his account, cannot be discovered by any analysis of ‘mere appearance.’ This is a very complex doctrine, which has been reproduced in all philosophies derivative from Kant. The doctrine gives each actual entity two worlds, one world of mere appearance, and the other world compact of ultimate substantial fact. On this point, as to the absence of ‘objective content’ in the datum for experience, Santayana5 seems to agree with Hume and Kant. But if his introduction of ‘animal faith’ is to be taken as a re-examination of the datum under the influence of the sceptical conclusion from Hume's doctrine, then he, as his second doctrine, is practically reasserting Locke's second doctrine. But if he is appealing to ‘practice’ away from the critical examination of our sources of information, he must be classed with Hume and Kant, although differing from them in every detail of procedure.

In view of the anti-rationalism of Hume's contented appeal to ‘practice,’ it is very difficult to understand—except as another example of anti-rationalism—the strong objection, entertained by Hume and by his ‘empiricist’ followers, to the anti-rationalistic basis of some forms of religious faith. This strain of anti-rationalism [232] which Locke and Hume explicitly introduced into philosophy marks the final triumph of the anti-rationalistic reaction against the rationalism of the Middle Ages. Rationalism is the belief that clarity can only be reached by pushing explanation to its utmost limits. Locke, who hoped to attain final clarity in his analysis of human understanding in divorce from metaphysics, was, so far, an anti-rationalist. But Hume, in so far as he is to be construed as remaining content with two uncoordinated sets of beliefs, one based on the critical examination of our sources of knowledge, and the other on the uncritical‡ examination of beliefs involved in ‘practice,’ reaches the high watermark of anti-rationalism in philosophy; for ‘explanation’ is the analysis of coordination.





The process whereby an actual entity, starting from its objective content, attains its individual satisfaction, will be more particularly analysed in Part III. The primary character of this process is that it is individual to the actual entity; it expresses how the datum, which involves the actual world, becomes a component in the one actual entity. There must therefore be no further reference to other actual entities; the elements available for the explanation are simply, the objective content, eternal objects, and the selective concrescence of feelings whereby an actual entity becomes itself. It must be remembered that the objective content is analysable into actual entities under limited perspectives provided by their own natures; these limited perspectives involve eternal objects in grades of relevance. If the ‘process’ were primarily a process of understanding, we should have to note that ‘grades of relevance’ are only other eternal objects in grades of relevance, and so on indefinitely. But we have not the sort of understandings which embrace such indefinite progressions. Accordingly there is here a vicious regress, if the process be essentially a process of understanding. But this is not the primary [233] description of it; the process is a process of ‘feeling.’ In feeling, what is felt is not necessarily analysed; in understanding, what is understood is analysed, in so far as it is understood. Understanding is a special form of feeling. Thus there is no vicious regress in feeling, by reason of the indefinite complexity of what is felt. Kant, in his ‘Transcendental Aesthetic,’† emphasizes the doctrine that in intuition a complex datum is intuited as one.

Again the selection involved in the phrase ‘selective concrescence’ is not a selection among the components of the objective content; for, by hypothesis, the objective content is a datum. The compatibilities and incompatibilities which impose the perspective, transforming the actual world into the datum, are inherent in the nature of things. Thus the selection is a selection of relevant eternal objects whereby what is a datum from without is transformed into its complete determination as a fact within. The problem which t the concrescence solves is, how the many components of the objective content are to be unified in one felt content with its complex subjective form. This one felt content is the ‘satisfaction,’ whereby the actual entity is its particular individual self; to use Descartes' phrase, ‘requiring nothing but itself in order to exist.’ In the conception of the actual entity in its phase of satisfaction, the entity has attained its individual separation from other things; it has absorbed the datum, and it has not yet lost itself in the swing back to the ‘decision’ whereby its appetition becomes an element in the data of other entities superseding it. Time has stood still—if only it could.

Thus process is the admission of eternal objects in their new rôle of investing the datum with the individuality of the subject. The datum,* qua‡ mere datum, includes the many individualities of the actual world. The satisfaction includes these many individualities as subordinate contributors to the one individuality. The process admits or rejects† eternal objects which by their absorption into the subjective forms of the many feelings [234] effect this integration. The attainment of satisfaction relegates all eternal objects which are not ‘felt’ either as determinants of definiteness in the data,† or as determinants of definiteness in the subjective form of the satisfaction, into the status of contraries to the eternal objects which are thus felt. Thus all indeterminations respecting the potentialities of the universe are definitely solved so far as concerns the satisfaction of the subject in question.

The process can be analysed genetically into a series of subordinate phases which presuppose their antecedents. Neither the intermediate phases, nor the datum which is the primary phase of all, determine the final phase of determinate individualization. Thus an actual entity, on its *subjective side, is nothing else than what the universe is for it, including its own reactions. The reactions are the subjective forms of the feelings, elaborated into definiteness through stages of process. An actual entity achieves its own unity by its determinate feelings respecting every item of the datum. Every individual objectification in the datum has its perspective defined by its own eternal objects with their own relevance compatible with the relevance of other objectifications. Each such objectification, and each such complex of objectifications, in the datum is met with a correspondent feeling, with its determinate subjective form, until the many become one experience, the satisfaction. The philosophies of substance presuppose a subject which then encounters a datum, and then reacts to the datum. The philosophy of organism presupposes a datum which is met with feelings, and progressively attains the unity of a subject. But with this doctrine, ‘superject’ would be a better term than ‘subject.’ Locke's ‘ideas of reflection’ are the feelings, in so far as they have entered into consciousness.

It is by reference to feelings that the notion of ‘immediacy’ obtains its meaning. The mere objectification of actual entities by eternal objects lacks ‘immediacy.’ It is ‘repetition’; and this is a contrary to ‘immediacy.’ [235] But ‘process’ is the rush of feelings whereby second-handedness attains subjective immediacy; in this way, subjective form overwhelms repetition, and transforms it into immediately felt satisfaction; objectivity is absorbed into subjectivity. It is useful to compare this analysis of the construction of an act of experience with Kant's. In the first place Kant's act of experience is essentially knowledge. Thus whatever is not knowledge is necessarily inchoate, and merely on its way to knowledge. In comparing Kant's procedure with that of the philosophy of organism, it must be remembered that an ‘apparent’ objective content is the end of Kant's process, and thus takes the place of ‘satisfaction’ in the process as analysed in the philosophy of organism. In Kant's phraseology at the beginning of the Critique of Pure Reason, this ‘apparent’ objective content is referred to as ‘objects.’ He also accepts Hume's sensationalist account of the datum. Kant places this sentence at the commencement of the Critique: “Objects therefore are given to us through our sensibility. Sensibility alone supplies us with intuitions. These intuitions become thought through the understanding, and hence arise conceptions.”6 This is expanded later in a form which makes Kant's adhesion to Hume's doctrine of the datum more explicit:

And here we see that the impressions of the senses give the first impulse to the whole faculty of knowledge with respect to them, and thus produce experience which consists of two very heterogeneous elements, namely, matter for knowledge, derived from the senses [eine Materie† zur Erkenntniss aus den Sinnen], and a certain form according to which it is arranged, derived from the internal source of pure intuition and pure thought, first brought into action by the former, and then producing concepts.7

Also:

Thoughts with- [236] out content are empty, intuitions without concepts are blind.8

In this last statement the philosophy of organism is in agreement with Kant; but for a different reason. It is agreed that the functioning of concepts is an essential factor in knowledge, so that ‘intuitions without concepts are blind.’ But for Kant, apart from concepts there is nothing to know; since objects related in a knowable world are the product of conceptual functioning whereby categoreal form is introduced into the sensedatum, which otherwise is intuited in the form of a mere spatio-temporal flux of sensations. Knowledge requires that this mere flux be particularized by conceptual functioning, whereby the flux is understood as a nexus of ‘objects.’ Thus for Kant the process whereby there is experience is a process from subjectivity to apparent objectivity. The philosophy of organism inverts this analysis, and explains the process as proceeding from objectivity to subjectivity, namely, from the objectivity, whereby the external world is a datum, to the subjectivity, whereby there is one individual experience. Thus, according to the philosophy of organism, in every act of experience there are objects for knowledge; but, apart from the inclusion of intellectual functioning in that act of experience, there is no knowledge.

We have now come to Kant, the great philosopher who first, fully and explicitly, introduced into philosophy the conception of an act of experience as a constructive functioning, transforming subjectivity into objectivity, or objectivity into subjectivity; the order is immaterial in comparison with the general idea. We find the first beginnings of the notion in Locke and in Hume. Indeed, in Locke, the process is conceived in its correct order, at least in the view of the philosophy of organism. But the whole notion is only vaguely and inadequately conceived. The full sweep of the notion is due to Kant. The second half of the modern period of philosophical thought is to be dated from Hume and Kant. In it the [237] development of cosmology has been hampered by the stress laid upon one, or other, of three misconceptions:

The substance-quality doctrine of actuality.

The sensationalist doctrine of perception.

The Kantian doctrine of the objective world as a construct from subjective experience.

The combined influence of these allied errors has been to reduce philosophy to a negligible influence in the formation of contemporary modes of thought. Hume himself introduces the ominous appeal to ‘practice’—not in criticism of his premises, but in supplement to his conclusions. Bradley, who repudiates Hume, finds the objective world in which we live, and move, and have our being, ‘inconsistent if taken as real.’ Neither side conciliates philosophical conceptions of a real world with the world of daily experience.

1Essay, I, I, 2.

2Essay, III, IX, 14.

3II, XIV, 1.

4Dr. H. M. Sheffer has pointed out the fundamental logical importance of the notion of ‘incompatibility’; cf. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.,† Vol. XIV, pp. 481-488; and Introduction to Vol. I of Principia Mathematica (2nd edition).

5Cf. Scepticism and Animal Faith.

6“Vermittelst der Sinnlichkeit also werden uns Gegenstände gegeben, und sie allein liefert uns Anschauungen;† durch den Verstand aber werden sie gedacht, und von ihm entspringen Begriffe.” Translation in the text is Max Müller's.

7‘Transcendental Analytic,’† Ch. II, Sect. I (Max Müller).

8‘Transcendental Logic,’ Introduction, Sect. I.*
