CHAPTER IX THE PROPOSITIONS





[280] A LIVING occasion is characterized by a flash of novelty among the appetitions of its mental pole. Such ‘appetitions,’ i.e., ‘conceptual prehensions,’ can be ‘pure’ or ‘impure.’ An ‘impure’ prehension arises from the integration of a ‘pure’ conceptual prehension with a physical prehension originating in the physical pole. The datum of a pure conceptual prehension is an eternal object; the datum of an impure prehension is a proposition, otherwise termed a ‘theory.’

The integration of a conceptual and physical prehension need not issue in an impure prehension: the eternal object as a mere potentiality, undetermined as to its physical realization, may lose its indetermination, i.e., its universality, by integration with itself as an element in the realized definiteness of the physical datum of the physical prehension. In this case we obtain what in Part III is termed a ‘physical purpose.’ In a physical purpose the subjective form has acquired a special appetition—adversion or aversion—in respect to that eternal object as a realized element of definiteness in that physical datum. This acquisition is derived from the conceptual prehension. The ‘abruptness’ of mental operations is here illustrated. The physical datum in itself illustrates an indefinite number of eternal objects. The ‘physical purpose’ has focussed appetition upon an abruptly selected eternal object.

But with the growth of intensity in the mental pole, evidenced by the flash of novelty in appetition, the appetition takes the form of a ‘propositional prehension.’ [281] These prehensions will be studied more particularly in Part III. They are the prehensions of ‘theories.’ It is evident, however, that the primary function of theories is as a lure for feeling, thereby providing immediacy of enjoyment and purpose. Unfortunately theories, under their name of ‘propositions,’ have been handed over to logicians, who have countenanced the doctrine that their one function is to be judged as to their truth or falsehood. Indeed Bradley does not mention ‘propositions’ in his Logic.† He writes only of ‘judgments.’ Other authors define propositions as a component in judgment. The doctrine here laid down is that, in the realization of propositions, ‘judgment’ is a† very rare component, and so is ‘consciousness.’ The existence of imaginative literature should have warned logicians that their narrow doctrine is absurd. It is difficult to believe that all logicians as they read Hamlet's speech, …To be, or not to be: …” commence by judging whether the initial proposition be true or false, and keep up the task of judgment throughout the whole thirty-five lines. Surely, at some point in the reading, judgment is eclipsed by aesthetic delight. The speech, for the theatre audience, is purely theoretical, a mere lure for feeling.

Again, consider strong religious emotion—consider a Christian meditating on the sayings in the Gospels. He is not judging ‘true or false’; he is eliciting their value as elements in feeling. In fact, he may ground his judgment of truth upon his realization of value. But such a procedure is impossible, if the primary function of propositions is to be elements in judgments.

The ‘lure for feeling’ is the final cause guiding the concrescence of feelings. By this concrescence the multifold datum of the primary phase is gathered into the unity of the final satisfaction of feeling. The ‘objective lure’ is that discrimination among eternal objects introduced into the universe by the real internal constitutions of the actual occasions forming the datum of the concrescence under review. This discrimination also in- [282] volves eternal objects excluded from value in the temporal occasions of that datum, in addition to involving the eternal objects included for such occasions.

For example, consider the Battle of Waterloo. This battle resulted in the defeat of Napoleon, and in a constitution of our actual world grounded upon that defeat. But the abstract notions, expressing the possibilities of another course of history which would have followed upon his victory, are relevant to the facts which actually happened. We may not think it of practical importance that imaginative historians should dwell upon such hypothetical alternatives. But we confess their relevance in thinking about them at all, even to the extent of dismissing them. But some imaginative writers do not dismiss such ideas. Thus, in our actual world of today, there is a penumbra of eternal objects, constituted by relevance to the Battle of Waterloo. Some people do admit elements from this penumbral complex into effective feeling, and others wholly exclude them. Some are conscious of this internal decision of admission or rejection; for others the ideas float into their minds as day-dreams without consciousness of deliberate decision; for others, their emotional tone, of gratification or regret, of friendliness or hatred, is obscurely influenced by this penumbra of alternatives, without any conscious analysis of its content. The elements of this penumbra are propositional prehensions, and not pure conceptual prehensions; for their implication of the particular nexus which is† the Battle of Waterloo is an essential factor.

Thus an element in this penumbral complex is what is termed a ‘proposition.’ A proposition is at new kind of entity. It is a hybrid between pure potentialities and actualities. A ‘singular’ proposition is the potentiality of an actual world including a definite set of actual entities in a nexus of reactions involving the hypothetical ingression of a definite set of eternal objects.

A ‘general’ proposition only differs from a ‘singular’ proposition by the generalization of One definite set of [283] actual entities' into ‘any set belonging to a certain sort of sets.’ If the sort of sets includes all sets with potentiality for that nexus of reactions, the proposition is called ‘universal.’

For the sake of simplicity, we will confine attention to singular propositions; although a slight elaboration of explanation will easily extend the discussion to include general and universal propositions.

The definite set of actual entities involved are called the ‘logical subjects of the proposition’; and the definite set of eternal objects involved are called the ‘predicates of the proposition.’ The predicates define a potentiality of relatedness for the subjects. The predicates form one complex eternal object: this is ‘the complex predicate.’ The ‘singular’ proposition is the potentiality of this complex predicate finding realization in the nexus of reactions between the logical subjects, with assigned stations in the pattern for the various logical subjects.

In a proposition the various logical subjects involved are impartially concerned. The proposition is no more about one logical subject than another logical subject. But according to the ontological principle, every proposition must be somewhere. The ‘locus’ of a proposition consists of those actual occasions whose actual worlds include the logical subjects of the proposition. When an actual entity belongs to the locus of a proposition, then conversely the proposition is an element in the lure for feeling of that actual entity. If by the decision of the concrescence, the proposition has been admitted into feeling, then the proposition constitutes what the feeling has felt. The proposition constitutes a lure for a member of its locus by reason of the germaneness of the complex predicate to the logical subjects, having regard to forms of definiteness in the actual world of that member, and to its antecedent phases of feeling.

The interest in logic, dominating overintellectualized philosophers, has obscured the main function of propositions in the nature of things. They are not primarily [284] for belief, but for feeling at the physical level of unconsciousness. They constitute a source for the origination of feeling which is not tied down to mere datum. A proposition is ‘realized’ by a member of its locus, when it is admitted into feeling.

There are two types of relationship between a proposition and the actual world of a member of its locus. The proposition may be conformal or non-conformal to the actual world, true or false.

When a conformal proposition is admitted into feeling, the reaction to the datum has simply resulted in the conformation of feeling to fact, with some emotional accession or diminution, by which the feelings inherent in alien fact are synthesized in a new individual valuation. The prehension of the proposition has abruptly emphasized one form of definiteness illustrated in fact.

When a non-conformal proposition is admitted into feeling, the reaction to the datum has resulted in the synthesis of fact with the alternative potentiality of the complex predicate. A novelty has emerged into creation. The novelty may promote or destroy order; it may be good or bad. But it is new, a new type of individual, and not merely a new intensity of individual feeling. That member of the locus has introduced a new form into the actual world; or,† at least, an old form in a new function.

The conception of propositions as merely material for judgments is fatal to any understanding of their rôle in the universe. In that purely logical aspect, non-conformal propositions are† merely wrong, and therefore worse than useless. But in their primary rôle, they pave the way along which the world advances into novelty. Error is the price which we pay for progress.

The term ‘proposition’ suits these hybrid entities,† provided that we substitute the broad notion of ‘feeling’ for the narrower notions of ‘judgment’ and ‘belief.’ A proposition is an element in the objective lure proposed for feeling, and when admitted into feeling it constitutes [285] what is felt. The ‘imaginative’ feeling (cf. Part III) of a proposition is one of the ways of feeling it; and intellectual belief is another way of† feeling the proposition, a way which presupposes imaginative feeling. Judgment is the decision admitting a proposition into intellectual belief.

Anyone who at bedtime consciously reviews the events of the day is subconsciously projecting them against the penumbral welter of alternatives. He is also unconsciously deciding feelings so as to maximize his primary feeling, and to secure its propagation beyond his immediate present occasion. In considering the life-history of occasions, forming the historic route of an enduring physical object, there are three possibilities as to the subjective aims which dominate the internal concrescence of the separate occasions. Either (i), the satisfactions† of the antecedent occasions may be uniform with each other, and each internally without discord or incitement to novelty. In such a case, apart from novel discordance introduced by the environment, there is the mere conformal transformation of the feeling belonging to the datum into the identical feeling belonging to the immediate subject. Such pure conformation involves the exclusion of all the contraries involved in the lure, with their various grades of proximity and remoteness. This is an absolute extreme of undifferentiated endurance, of which we have no direct evidence. In every instance for which we can analyse, however imperfectly, the formal constitutions of successive occasions, these constitutions are characterized by contraries supervening upon the aboriginal data, but† with a regularity of alternation which procures stability in the life-history. Contrast is thus gained. In physical science, this is ‘vibration.’ This is the main character of the life-histories of an inorganic physical object, stabilized in type.

Or (ii), there is a zest for the enhancement of some dominant element of feeling, received from the data, enhanced by decision admitting non-conformation of [286] conceptual feeling to other elements in the data, and culminating in a satisfaction transmitting enhancement of the dominant element by reason of novel contrasts and inhibitions. Such a life-history involves growth dominated by a single final end. This is the main character of a physical object in process of growth. Such physical objects are mainly ‘organic,’ so far as concerns our present knowledge of the world.

Or (iii), there is a zest for the elimination of all dominant elements of feeling, received from the data. In such a case, the route soon loses its historic individuality. It is the case of decay.

The first point to be noticed is that the admission of the selected elements in the lure, as felt contraries, primarily generates purpose; it then issues in satisfaction; and satisfaction qualifies the efficient causation. But a felt ‘contrary’ is consciousness in germ. When the contrasts and identities of such feelings are themselves felt, we have consciousness. It is the knowledge of ideas, in Locke's sense of that term. Consciousness requires more than the mere entertainment of theory. It is the feeling of the contrast of theory, as mere theory, with fact, as mere fact. This contrast holds whether or no the theory be correct.

A proposition, in abstraction from any particular actual entity which may be realizing it in feeling, is a manner of germaneness of a certain set of eternal objects to a certain set of actual entities. Every proposition presupposes those actual entities which are its logical subjects. It also presupposes certain definite actual entities, or a certain type of actual entities,† within a wide systematic nexus. In an extreme case, this nexus may comprise any actual entity whatsoever.

The presupposed logical subjects may not be in the actual world of some actual entity. In this case, the proposition does not exist for that actual entity. The pure concept of such a proposition refers in the hypothetical future beyond that actual entity. The propo- [287] sition itself awaits its logical subjects. Thus propositions grow with the creative advance of the world. They are neither pure potentials, nor pure actualities; they are a manner of potential nexus involving pure potentials and pure actualities. They are a new type of entities. Entities of this impure type presuppose the two pure types of entities.

The primary mode of realization of a proposition in an actual entity† is not by judgment, but by entertainment. A proposition is entertained when it is admitted into feeling. Horror, relief, purpose, are primarily feelings involving the entertainment of propositions.

In conclusion, there are four main types of entities in the universe, of which two are primary types and two are hybrid types. The primary types are actual entities and pure potentials (eternal objects); the hybrid types are feelings and propositions (theories). Feelings are the ‘real’ components of actual entities. Propositions are only realizable as one sort of ‘objective’ datum for feelings.

The primary element in the ‘lure for feeling’ is the subject's prehension of the primordial nature of God. Conceptual feelings are generated, and by integration with physical feelings a subsequent phase of propositional feelings supervenes. The lure for feeling develops with the concrescent phases of the subject in question. I have spoken of it elsewhere (cf. Science and the† Modern World, Ch. XI).

It is this realized extension of eternal relatedness beyond the mutual relatedness of the actual occasions which prehends into each occasion the full sweep of eternal relatedness. I term this abrupt* realization the ‘graded envisagement’ which each occasion prehends into its synthesis. This graded† envisagement is how the actual includes what (in one sense) is ‘not-being’ as a positive factor in its own achievement. It is the source of error, of truth, of art, of ethics, and of religion. By it, fact is confronted with alternatives. [288]





All metaphysical theories which admit a disjunction between the component elements of individual experience on the one hand,† and on the other hand the component elements of the external world, must inevitably run into difficulties over the truth and falsehood of propositions, and over the grounds for judgment. The former difficulty is metaphysical, the latter epistemological. But all difficulties as to first principles are only camouflaged metaphysical difficulties. Thus also the epistemological difficulty is only solvable by an appeal to ontology. The first difficulty poses the question as to the account of truth and falsehood, and the second difficulty poses the question as to the account of the intuitive perception of truth and falsehood. The former concerns propositions, the latter concerns judgments. There is a togetherness of the component elements in individual experience. This ‘togetherness’ has that special peculiar meaning of ‘togetherness in experience.’ It is a togetherness of its own kind, explicable by reference to nothing else. For the purpose of this discussion it is indifferent whether we speak of a ‘stream’ of experience, or of an ‘occasion’ of experience. With the former alternative there is togetherness in the stream, and with the latter alternative there is togetherness in the occasion. In either case, there is the unique ‘experiential togetherness.’

The consideration of experiential togetherness raises the final metaphysical question: whether there is any other meaning of ‘togetherness.’ The denial of any alternative meaning, that is to say, of any meaning not abstracted from the experiential meaning, is the ‘subjectivist’ doctrine. This reformed version of the subjectivist doctrine is the doctrine of the philosophy of organism.

The contrary doctrine, that there is a ‘togetherness’ not derivative from experiential togetherness, leads to the disjunction of the components of subjective experience from the community of the external world. This dis- [289] junction creates the insurmountable difficulty for epistemology. For intuitive judgment is concerned with togetherness in experience, and there is no bridge between togetherness in experience, and togetherness of the non-experiential sort.

This difficulty is the point of Kant's ‘transcendental’ criticism. He adopted a subjectivist position, so that the temporal world was merely experienced. But according to his form of the subjectivist doctrine, in the Critique of Pure Reason, no element in the temporal world could itself be an experient. His temporal world, as in that Critique, was in its essence dead, phantasmal, phenomenal. Kant was a mathematical physicist, and his cosmological solution was sufficient for the abstractions to which mathematical physics is confined.

The difficulties of the subjectivist doctrine arise when it is combined with the ‘sensationalist’ doctrine concerning the analysis of the components which are together in experience. According to that analysis in such a component the only elements not stamped with the particularity of that individual ‘occasion’—or ‘stream’—of experience are universals such as ‘redness’ or ‘shape.’ With the sensationalist assumption, or with any generalization of that doctrine, so long as the elements in question are universals, the only alternatives are, either Bradley's doctrine of a single experient, the absolute, or Leibniz's doctrine of many windowless monads. Kant, in his final metaphysics, must either retreat to Leibniz, or advance to Bradley. Either alternative stamps experience with a certain air of illusoriness.† The Leibnizian solution can mitigate the illusoriness only by recourse to a pious dependence upon God. This principle was invoked by Descartes and by Leibniz, in order to help out their epistemology. It is a device very repugnant to a consistent rationality. The very possibility of knowledge should not be an accident of God's goodness; it should depend on the interwoven natures of things. After all, God's knowledge has equally to be explained.

[290] The philosophy of organism admits the subjectivist doctrine (as here stated), but rejects the sensationalist doctrine: hence its doctrine of the objectification of one actual occasion in the experience of another actual occasion. Each actual entity is a throb of experience including the actual world within its scope. The problems of efficient causation and of knowledge receive a common explanation by reference to the texture of actual occasions. The theory of judgment in the philosophy of organism can equally well be described as a ‘correspondence’ theory or as a ‘coherence’ theory. It is a correspondence theory, because it describes judgment as the subjective form of the integral prehension of the conformity, or of the non-conformity, of a† proposition and an objectified nexus. The prehension in question arises from the synthesis of two prehensions, one physical and the other mental. The physical prehension is the prehension of the nexus of objectified actual occasions. The mental prehension is the prehension of the proposition. This latter prehension is necessarily ‘impure,’ and it arises from a history of antecedent synthesis whereby a pure conceptual prehension transfers its datum as a predicate of hypothetical relatedness for the actualities in the datum of some physical prehension (cf. Part III). But the origination of a propositional prehension does not concern us in this description of judgment. The sole point is the synthesis of a physical prehension and propositional prehension into an ‘intellectual’ prehension (cf. Part III) whose subjective form involves judgment.

This judgment is concerned with a conformity of two components within one experience. It is thus a ‘coherence’ theory. It is also concerned with the conformity of a proposition, not restricted to that individual experience, with a nexus whose relatedness is derived from the various experiences of its own members and not from that of the judging experient.† In this sense there is a ‘correspondence’ theory. But, at this point of the argument, a distinction must be made. We shall say that a [291] proposition can be true or false, and that a judgment can be correct, or incorrect, or suspended. With this distinction we see that there is a ‘correspondence’ theory of the truth and falsehood of propositions, and a ‘coherence’ theory of the correctness, incorrectness and suspension† of judgments.

In the ‘organic’ doctrine, a clear distinction between a judgment and a proposition has been made. A judgment is a feeling in the ‘process’ of the judging subject, and it is correct or incorrect respecting that subject. It enters, as a value, into the satisfaction of that subject; and it can only be criticized by the judgments of actual entities in the future. A judgment concerns the universe in process of prehension by the judging subject. It will primarily concern a definite selection of objectified actual entities, and of eternal objects; and it affirms the physical objectification—for the judging subject—of those actual entities by the ingression of those eternal objects; so that there is one objectified nexus of those actual entities, judged to be really interconnected, and qualified, by those eternal objects. This judgment affirms, correctly or incorrectly, a real fact in the constitution of the judging subject. Here there is no room for any qualification of the categorical character of the judgment. The judgment is made about itself by the judging subject, and is at feeling in the constitution of the judging subject. The actual entities, with which the judgment is explicitly concerned, comprise the ‘logical’ subjects of the judgment, and the selected eternal objects form the ‘qualities’ and ‘relations’ which are affirmed of the logical subjects.

This affirmation about the logical subjects is obviously ‘affirmation’ in a sense derivative from the meaning of ‘affirmation’ about the judging subject. Identification of the two senses will lead to error. In the latter** sense there is abstraction from the judging subject. The subjectivist principle has been transcended, and the judgment has shifted its emphasis from the objectified nexus [292] to the truth-value of the proposition in question. Having regard to the fact that judgment concerns the subjective form of an impure feeling arising from the integration of simpler feelings, we note that judgments are divisible into two sorts. These are (i) intuitive judgments and (ii) derivative judgments. In an intuitive judgment the integration of the physical datum with the proposition elicits into feeling the full complex detail of the proposition in its comparison of identity, or diversity, in regard to the complex detail of the physical datum. The intuitive judgment is the consciousness of this complex detailed comparison involving identity and diversity. Such a judgment is in its nature correct. For it is the consciousness of what is.

In a derivative judgment the integration of the physical datum with the proposition elicits into feeling the full complex detail of the proposition, but does not elicit into feeling the full comparison of this detail with the complex detail of the physical fact. There is some comparison involving the remainder of the detail. But the subjective form embraces the totality of the proposition, instead of assuming a complex pattern which discriminates between the compared and the uncompared components. In derivative judgments there can be error. Logic is the analysis of the relationships between propositions in virtue of which derivative judgments will not introduce errors, other than those already attaching to the judgments in‡ the premises. Most judgments are derivative; such judgments illustrate the doctrine that the subjective form of a feeling is affected by the totality of the actual occasion. This has been termed the ‘sensitivity’ of feelings in one occasion. In an intuitive judgment the subjective form of assent or dissent has been restrained, so as to derive its character solely from the contrasts in the datum. Even in this case, the emotional force of the judgment, as it passes into purpose, is derived from the whole judging subject.

Further, the judging subject and the logical subjects [293] refer to a universe with the general metaphysical character which represents its ‘patience’ for those subjects, and also its ‘patience’ for those eternal objects. In each judgment the universe is ranged in a hierarchy of wider and wider societies, as explained above (cf. Part II, Ch. III). It follows that the distinction between the logical subjects, with their qualities and relations, and the universe as systematic background, is not quite so sharply defined as the previous explanation suggests. For it is a matter of convention as to which of the proximate societies are reckoned as logical subjects and which as background. Another way of stating this shading off of logical subjects into background† is to say that the patience of the universe for a real fact in a judging subject is a hierarchical patience involving systematic gradations of character. This discussion substantiates the statement made above (cf. Part I, Ch. I, Sect. V), that a verbal statement is never the full expression of a proposition.

We now recur to the distinction between a proposition and a judgment. A proposition emerges in the analysis of a judgment; it is the datum of the judgment in abstraction from the judging subject and from the subjective form. A judgment1 is a synthetic feeling, embracing two subordinate feelings in one unity of feeling. Of these subordinate feelings one is propositional, merely entertaining the proposition which is its datum. The same proposition can constitute the content of diverse judgments by diverse judging entities respectively. The possibility of diverse judgments by diverse actual entities, having the same content (of ‘proposition’ in contrast with ‘nexus’), requires that the same complex of logical subjects, objectified via the same eternal objects, can enter as a partial constituent into the ‘real’ essences of diverse actual entities. The judgment is a decision of feeling, the proposition is what is felt; but it is only part of the datum felt.

But, since each actual world is relative to standpoint, [294] it is Only some actual entities which will have the standpoints so as to include,† in their actual world, the actual entities which constitute the logical subjects of the proposition. Thus every proposition defines the judging subjects for which it is a proposition. Every proposition presupposes some definite settled actual entities in the actual world of its judging subject; and thus its possible judging subjects must have these actual entities in the actual world of each of them. All judgment requires knowledge of the presupposed actual entities. Thus in addition to the requisite composition of the actual world presupposed by a proposition, there must be the requisite knowledge of that world presupposed by a judgment, whether the judgment be correct or incorrect. For actual entities, whose actual worlds have not the requisite composition, the proposition is non-existent; for actual entities, without the requisite knowledge, the judgment is impossible. It is quite true that a more abstract proposition can be modelled on the lines of the original proposition, so as to avoid the presupposition of some or all of these settled actual entities which are the logical subjects in the original proposition. This new proposition will have meaning for a wider group of possible subjects than the original proposition. Some propositions seem to us to have meaning for all possible judging subjects. This may be the case; but I do not dare to affirm that our metaphysical capacities are sufficiently developed to warrant any certainty on this question. Perhaps we are always presupposing some wide society beyond which our imaginations cannot leap. But the vagueness of verbal statements is such that the same form of words is taken to represent a whole set of allied propositions of various grades of abstractness.

A judgment weakens or strengthens the decision whereby the judged proposition, as a constituent in the lure, is admitted as an efficient element in the concrescence, with the reinforcement of knowledge. A judgment is the critique of a lure for feeling.





[295] It now remains to consider the sense in which the actual world, in some systematic aspect, enters into each proposition. This investigation is wholly concerned with the notion of the logical subjects of the proposition. These logical subjects are, in the old sense of the term, ‘particulars.’ They are not concepts in comparison with other concepts; they are particular facts in a potential pattern.

But particulars must be indicated; because the proposition concerns just those particulars and no others. Thus the indication belongs to the proposition; namely, ‘Those particulars as thus indicated in such-and-such a predicative pattern’ constitutes the proposition. Apart from the indication there is no proposition because there are no determinate particulars. Thus we have to study the theory of indication.

Some definitions are required:

A ‘relation’ between occasions is an eternal object illustrated in the complex of mutual prehensions by virtue of which those occasions constitute a nexus.

A relation is called a ‘dual relation’ when the nexus in which it is realized consists of two, and only two, actual occasions. It is a ‘triple relation’ when there are three occasions, and so on.

There will, in general, be an indefinite number of eternal objects thus illustrated in the mutual prehensions of the occasions of any one nexus; that is to say, there are an indefinite number of relations realized between the occasions of any particular nexus.

A ‘general principle’ is an eternal object which is only illustrated through its ‘instances,’ which are also eternal objects. Thus the realization of an instance is also the realization of the general principle of which that eternal object is an instance. But the converse is not true; namely, the realization of the general principle does not involve the realization of any particular instance, though [296] it does necessitate the realization of some instance. Thus the instances each involve the general principle, but the general principle only involves at least one instance. In general, the instances of a general principle are mutually exclusive, so that the realization of one instance involves the exclusion of the other instances. For example, colour is a general principle and colours are the instances. So if all sensible bodies exhibit the general principle, which is colour, each body exhibits some definite colour. Also each body exhibiting a definite colour is thereby ‘coloured.’

A nexus exhibits an ‘indicative system’ of dual relations among its members, when (i) one, and only one, relation of the system relates each pair of its members; and (ii) these relations are instances of a general principle; and (iii) the relation (in the system) between any member A and any other member B does not also relate A and a member of the nexus other than B; and (iv) the relations (in the system) between A and B and between A and C suffice to define the relation (in the system) between B and C, where A, B, and C are any three members of the nexus.

Thus if A and X be any two members of the nexus, and if X has knowledge of A's systematic relation to it and also of A's systematic relations to B, C, and D, where B, C, and D are members of the nexus, then X has knowledge of its own systematic relations to B, C, and D, and of the mutual systematic relations between B, C, and D. Such a nexus admits of the precise indication of its members from the standpoint of any one of them. The relative ‘where’ presupposes a nexus exhibiting an indicative system. More complex types of indicative systems can be denned; but the simplest type suffices to illustrate the principle involved. We have been defining Aristotle's category of ‘position.’ It will be noticed that in a nexus with an indicative system of relations, the subjective aspect of experience can be eliminated from propositions involved. For a knowledge of B and C and D as from A [297] yields a proposition concerning C and D as from B. Thus the prevalent notion, that the particular subject of experience can, in the nature of the case, never be eliminated from the experienced fact, is quite untrue.

Every proposition presupposes some general nexus with an indicative relational system. This nexus includes its locus of judging subjects and also its logical subjects. This presupposition is part of the proposition, and the proposition cannot be entertained by any subject for which the presupposition is not valid. Thus in a proposition certain characteristics are presupposed for the judging subject and for the logical subjects. This presupposition of character can be carried further than the mere requirements of indication require. For example, in ‘Socrates is mortal’ the mere spatio-temporal indicative system may be sufficient to indicate ‘Socrates.’ But the proposition may mean ‘The man Socrates is mortal,’ or ‘The philosopher Socrates is mortal.’ The superfluous indication may be part of the proposition. Anyhow, the principle that a proposition presupposes the actual world as exhibiting some systematic aspect has now been explained.

This discussion can be illustrated by the proposition, ‘Caesar has crossed the Rubicon.’ This form of words symbolizes an indefinite number of diverse propositions. In its least abstract form ‘Caesar’ stands for a society of settled actual entities in the actual world from the standpoint of the judging subject, with their objectifications consciously perceived by the subject. The whole theory of perception will come up for further discussion in a later chapter (cf. Part III); at this point it can be assumed. The word ‘Rubicon’ is to be explained in the same way as the word ‘Caesar.’ The only points left ambiguous respecting ‘Caesar’ and ‘Rubicon’ are that these societies—either or both, and each with its defining characteristic—may be conjecturally supposed to be prolonged up to the world contemporary with the judging subject, or, even more conjecturally, into the future [298] world beyond the subject. The past tense of the word ‘has’ shows that this point of ambiguity is irrelevant, so that the proposition can be framed so as to ignore it. But it need not be so framed: one of Caesar's old soldiers may in later years have sat on the bank of the river and meditated on the assassination of Caesar, and on Caesar's passage over the little river tranquilly flowing before his gaze. This would have been a different proposition from the more direct one which I am now considering. Nothing could better illustrate the hopeless ambiguity pf language; since both propositions fit the same verbal phraseology. There is yet a third proposition: a modern traveller sitting on the bank of the Rubicon, and meditating on his direct perceptions of actual occasions can locate, relatively to himself by spatio-temporal specifications, an event which inferentially and conjecturally he believes to include a portion of the past history of the Rubicon as directly known to him. He also, by an analogous process of inference and conjecture, and of spatio-temporal specification, locates relatively to himself another event which he believes to contain the life of Caesar of whom he has no direct knowledge. The proposition meditated on by this traveller sitting on the bank of the modern river is evidently a different proposition to that in the mind of Caesar's old soldier. Then there is the proposition which might have been in the mind of one of the crowd who listened to Antony's speech, a man who had seen Caesar and not the Rubicon.

It is obvious that in this way an indefinite number of highly special propositions can be produced, differing from each other by fine gradations. Everything depends upon the differences in direct perceptive knowledge which these various propositions presuppose for their subjects. But there are propositions of a† more general type, for which ‘Caesar’ and ‘Rubicon’ have more generalized, vaguer meanings. In these vaguer meanings, ‘Caesar’ and ‘Rubicon’ indicate the entities, if any, located by any one member of a type of routes, starting from a [299] certain type of inference and conjecture. Also there are some such propositions in which the fact of there being such entities, to be thus located, is part of the content whereby the judgment is true or false; and there are other propositions in which even this requisite is evaded, so far as truth or falsehood is concerned. It is by reason of these various types of more abstract propositions that we can conceive the hypothetical existence of the more special propositions which for some of us, as judging subjects, would be meaningless.

This discussion should show the futility of taking any verbal statement, such as ‘Caesar has crossed the Rubicon,’ and arguing about the meaning. Also any proposition, which satisfies the verbal form so as to be one of its possibilities of meaning, defines its own locus of subjects; and only for such subjects is there the possibility of a judgment whose content is that proposition.

A proposition is the potentiality of the objectification of certain presupposed actual entities via certain qualities and relations, the objectification being for some unspecified subject for which the presupposition has meaning in direct experience. The judgment is the conscious affirmation by a particular subject—for which the presupposition holds—that this potentiality is, or is not, realized for it. It must be noticed that ‘realized’ does not mean ‘realized in direct conscious experience,’ but does mean ‘realized as being contributory to the datum out of which that judging subject originates.’ Since direct† conscious experience is usually absent, a judgment can be erroneous.

Thus a proposition is an example of what Locke calls an ‘idea determined to particular existences.’ It is the potentiality of such an idea; the realized idea, admitted to decision in a given subject, is the judgment, which may be a true or false idea about the particular things. The discussion of this question must be resumed (cf. Part III) when conceptual activity is examined. But it is evident that a proposition is a complex entity which [300] stands between the eternal objects and the actual occasions. Compared to eternal objects a proposition shares in the concrete particularity of actual occasions; and compared to actual occasions a proposition shares in the abstract generality of eternal objects. Finally, it must be remembered that propositions enter into experience in other ways than through judgment-feelings.‡





A metaphysical proposition—in the proper, general sense of the term† ‘metaphysical’—signifies a proposition which (i) has meaning for any actual occasion, as a subject entertaining it, and (ii) is ‘general,’ in the sense that its predicate potentially relates any and every set of actual occasions, providing the suitable number of logical subjects for the predicative pattern, and (iii) has a ‘uniform’ truth-value, in the sense that, by reason of its form and scope, its truth-value is identical with the truth-value of each of the singular propositions to be obtained by restricting the application of the predicate to any one set of logical subjects. It is obvious that, if a metaphysical proposition be true, the third condition is unnecessary. For a general proposition can only be true if this condition be fulfilled. But if the general proposition be false, then it is only metaphysical when in addition each of the derivate singular propositions is false. The general proposition would be false, if any one of the derivate singular propositions were false. But the third condition is expressed in the proposition without any dependence upon the determination of the proposition's truth or falsehood.

There can be no cosmic epoch for which the singular propositions derived from a metaphysical proposition differ in truth-value† from those of any other cosmic epoch.

We certainly think that we entertain metaphysical propositions: but, having regard to the mistakes of the past respecting the principles of geometry, it is wise to [301] reserve some scepticism on this point. The propositions which seem to be most obviously metaphysical are the arithmetical theorems. I will therefore illustrate the justification both for the belief, and for the residual scepticism, by an examination of one of the simplest of such theorems: One and one make two.2

Certainly, this proposition, construed in the sense ‘one entity and another entity make two entities,’ seems to be properly metaphysical without any shadow of limitation upon its generality, or truth. But we must hesitate even here, when we notice that it is usually asserted, with equal confidence as to the generality of its metaphysical truth, in a sense which is certainly limited, and sometimes untrue. In our reference to the actual world, we rarely consider an individual actual entity. The objects of our thoughts are almost always societies, or looser groups of actual entities. Now, for the sake of simplicity, consider a society of the ‘personal’ type. Such a society will be a linear succession of actual occasions forming a historical route in which some defining characteristic is inherited by each occasion from its predecessors. A society of this sort is an ‘enduring object.’ Probably, a simple enduring object is simpler than anything which we ordinarily perceive or think about. It is the simplest type of society; and for any duration of its existence it requires that its environment be largely composed of analogous simple† enduring objects. What we normally consider is the wider society in which many strands of enduring objects are to be found, a ‘corpuscular society.’

Now consider two distinct enduring objects. They will be easier to think about if their defining characteristics are different. We will call these defining characteristics a and b, and also will use these letters, a and b, as the names of the two enduring objects. Now the proposition ‘one entity and another entity make two [302] entities’ is usually construed in the sense that, given two enduring objects, any act of attention which consciously comprehends an actual occasion from each of the two historic routes will necessarily discover two actual occasions, one from each of the two distinct routes. For example, suppose that a cup and a saucer are two such enduring objects, which of course they are not; we always assume that, so long as they are both in existence and are sufficiently close to be seen in one glance, any act of attention, whereby we perceive the cup and perceive the saucer, will thereby involve the perception of two actual entities, one the cup in one occasion of its existence and the other the saucer in one occasion of its existence. There can be no reasonable doubt as to the truth of this assumption in this particular example. But in making it, we are very far from the metaphysical proposition from which we started. We are in fact stating a truth concerning the wide societies of entities amid which our lives are placed. It is a truth concerning this cosmos, but not a metaphysical truth.

Let us return to the two truly simple enduring objects, a and b. Also let us assume that their defining characteristics, a and b, are not contraries, so that both of them can qualify the same actual occasion. Then there is no general metaphysical reason why the distinct routes of a and b should not intersect in at least one actual occasion. Indeed, having regard to the extreme generality of the notion of a simple enduring object, it is practically certain that—with the proper choice for the defining characteristics, a and b—intersecting historic routes for a and b must have frequently come into existence. In such a contingency a being who could consciously distinguish the two distinct enduring objects a and b, so as to have knowledge of their distinct defining characteristics and their distinct historic routes, might find a and b exemplified in one actual entity. It is as though the cup and the saucer were at one instant identical; and then, later on, resumed their distinct existence.

[303] We hardly ever apply arithmetic in its pure metaphysical sense, without the addition of presumptions which depend for their truth on the character of the societies dominating the cosmic epoch in which we live. It is hardly necessary to draw attention to the fact, that ordinary verbal statements make no pretence of discriminating the different senses in which an arithmetical statement can be understood.

There is no difficulty in imagining a world—i.e., a cosmic epoch—in which arithmetic would be an interesting fanciful topic for dreamers, but useless for practical people engrossed in the business of life. In fact, we seem to have been only barely rescued from such a state of things. For amid the actual occasions located in the wilds of so-called ‘empty space,’ and well removed from the enduring objects which go to form the enduring material bodies, it is quite probable that the contemplation of arithmetic would not direct attention to any very important relations of things. It is, of course, a mere speculation that any actual entity, occurring in such an environment of faintly coordinated achievement, achieves the intricacy of constitution required for conscious mental operations.





We ask the metaphysical question, What is there in the nature of things, whereby an inductive inference, or a judgment of general truth, can be significantly termed ‘correct’ or ‘incorrect’? For example, we believe now—July 1, 1927—that the railway time-tables for the United States, valid for the previous months of May and June, represent the facts as to the past running of the trains, within certain marginal limits of unpunctuality, and allowing for a few individual breakdowns. Also we believe that the current time-tables for July will be exemplified, subject to the same qualifications. On the evidence before us our beliefs are justified, provided that we introduce into our judgments some estimate of the [304] high probability which is all that we mean to affirm. If we are considering astronomical events, our affirmations will include an estimate of a higher probability. Though even here some margin of uncertainty may exist. The computers of some famous observatory may have made an unprecedented error; or some unknown physical law may have important relevance to the condition of the star mainly concerned, leading to its unexpected explosion.3

This astronomical contingency, and the beliefs which cluster round it, have been stated with some detail, because—as thus expressed—they illustrate the problem as it shapes itself in philosophy. Also the example of the railway time-tables illustrates another point. For it is possible momentarily, in Vermont on July 1, 1927, to forget that the unprecedented Mississippi floods happened during that May and June; so that although the estimate as to error in punctuality was justified by the evidence consciously before us, it did not in fact allow for the considerable derangement of the traffic in some states in the Union.4 The point of this illustration from railway trains is that there is a conformity to matter of fact which these judgments exhibit, even if the events concerned have not happened, or will not happen. These considerations introduce the fundamental principle concerning ‘judgment.’ It is that all judgment is categorical; it concerns a proposition true or false in its application to the actual occasion which is the subject making the judgment. This doctrine is not so far from Bradley's doctrine of judgment, as explained in his Logic. According to Bradley, the ultimate subject of every judgment is the one ultimate substance, the absolute. Also, according to him, the judging subject is a mode of the absolute, self-contradictory if taken to be independently actual. For Bradley, the judging subject has only a [305] derivative actuality, which is the expression of its status as an affection of the absolute. Thus,† in Bradley's doctrine, a judgment is an operation by which the absolute, under the limitations of one of its affections, enjoys self-consciousness of its enjoyment of affections. It will be noticed that in this bald summary of Bradley's position, I am borrowing Spinoza's phrase, ‘affectiones substantiae.’

In the philosophy of organism, an actual occasion—as has been stated above—is the whole universe in process of attainment of a particular satisfaction. Bradley's doctrine of actuality is simply inverted. The final actuality is the particular process with its particular attainment of satisfaction. The actuality of the universe is merely derivative from its solidarity in each actual entity. It must be held that judgment concerns the universe as objectified from the standpoint of the judging subject. It concerns the universe through that subject.

With this doctrine in mind, we pass to the discussion of the sense in which probability can be a positive fact in an actual entity; so that a proposition expressing the probability of some other proposition can in this respect agree or disagree with the constitution of the judging entity. The notion of ‘probability,’ in the widest sense of that term, presents a puzzling philosophical problem. The mathematical theory of probability is based upon certain statistical assumptions. When these assumptions hold, the meaning of probability is simple; and the only remaining difficulties are concerned with the technical mathematical development. But it is not easy to understand how the statistical theory can apply to all cases to which the notion of more or less probability is habitually applied. For example, when we consider—as we do consider—the probability of some scientific conjecture as to the internal constitution of the stars, or as to the future of human society after some unprecedented convulsion, we seem to be influenced by some analogy which it is very difficult to convert into an appeal to any definite statistical fact. We may consider that it is probable [306] that the judgment could be justified by some statistical appeal, if we only knew where to look. This is the belief that the statistical probability is itself probable. But here, evidently, there is an appeal to a wider meaning of probability in order to support the statistical probability applicable to the present case. It is arguable that this wider probability is itself another statistical probability as to the existence of the special statistics relevant to such types of scientific argument. But in this explanation puzzling questions are accumulating; and it is impossible to avoid the suspicion that we are being put off with one of those make-believe explanations, so useful to reasoners who are wedded to a theory. The philosophy of organism provides two distinct elements in the universe from which an intuition of probability can originate. One of them is statistical. In this and the next two sections,‡ an attempt will be made to justify the statistical theory. It is therefore the more imperative to survey carefully the difficulties which have to be met.

In the first place, probability is always relative‡ to evidence; so, on the statistical theory, the numerical probability will mean the numerical ratio of favourable to unfavourable cases in the particular class of ‘cases’ selected as the ‘ground’ for statistical comparison. But alternative ‘grounds’ certainly exist. Accordingly we must provide a reason,† not based upon ‘probability,’ why one ‘ground’ is selected rather than another. We may admit such a chain of vaguer and vaguer probabilities, in which our first ground is selected as statistically probable in respect to its superiority to other ‘grounds’ of other types. We are thus driven back to a second-order ‘ground’ of probability. We may logically proceed to third-order ‘grounds,’ and so on. But if the statistical theory is to be substantiated, after a finite number of steps we must reach a ‘ground’ which is not selected for any reason of probability. It must be selected because it is the ‘ground’ presupposed in all our reasonings. [307] Apart from some such ultimate ‘ground,’ the statistical theory, viewed as an ultimate explanation for all our uses of the notion of ‘probability,’ must inevitably fail. This failure arises by reason of the complete arbitrariness of the ultimate ‘ground’ upon which the whole estimate of probability finally rests.

Secondly, the primary requisite for a ‘ground’ suitable for statistical probability seems itself to appeal to probability. The members of the class, called the ‘ground,’ must themselves be ‘cases of equal probability,’ some favourable and some unfavourable, with the possibility of the limiting types of ‘ground’ in which all members are favourable, or all members are unfavourable. The proposition in question, whose probability is to be estimated, must be known to be a member of the ‘ground’; but no other evidence, as to the set—favourable or unfavourable—to which† the proposition belongs, enters into consideration. It is evident that, for the ultimate ground, the phrase ‘cases of equal probability’ must be explicable without reference to any notion of probability. The principle of such an explanation is easily found by reference to the six faces of dice. A die is a given fact; and its faces do not differ, qua faces, in any circumstance relative to their fall with one face upwards or another face upwards. Also beyond this given fact, there is ignorance. Thus again we are driven to an ultimate fact: there must be an ultimate species, and the specific character must be irrelevant to the ‘favourableness’ or ‘unfavourableness’ of the members of the species in their capacity of cases. All this must be given in direct knowledge without any appeal to probability. Also there must be equally direct knowledge of the proportion of favourable or unfavourable cases within the species—at least within the limits of precision or vagueness presupposed in the conclusion.

Thirdly, it is another requisite for a ‘ground’ that the number of instances which it includes be finite. The whole theory of the ratios of cardinal numbers, on which [308] statistical probability depends, breaks down when the cardinal numbers are infinite.

Fourthly, the method of ‘sampling’ professes to evade two objections. One of them is the breakdown, mentioned above, when the number of cases in the ‘ground’ is infinite. The other objection, thus evaded, is that in practice the case in question is novel and does not belong to the ‘ground’ which is in fact examined. According to this second objection, unless there is some further evidence, the statistical state of the ‘ground’ is bogus evidence as to the probability of the case in question. To sum up: The method of sampling professes to overcome† (i) the difficulty arising from the infinity of the ground; and (ii) that arising from the novelty of the case in question, whereby it does not belong to the ground examined. In the discussion it must be remembered that we are considering that ultimate ground which must not require any appeal to probability beyond itself. Thus the statistical facts as to the ground† must be ‘given’ and not merely ‘probable.’

(i) When we have an† infinite ‘ground,’ containing an infinite number of favourable cases and an infinite number of unfavourable cases, ‘random’ sampling can give no help towards the establishment of statistical probability; for one reason because no such notion of ratios can apply to these infinities; and for another reason, no sample is ‘random’; it has only followed a complex method. A finite number of samples each following some method of its own, however complex each method may be, will give a statistical result entirely dependent upon those methods. In so far as repetitions of so-called random samplings give concordant results, the only conclusion to be drawn is that there is a relevant, though concealed, analogy between the ‘random’ methods. Thus a finite ‘ground’ is essential for statistical probability. It must be understood that this argument implies no criticism on a properly interpreted method of sampling applied to a finite ‘ground.’

[309] (ii) When the ‘case’ in question does not belong to the ground examined, there† can, apart from further information, be no rational inference from the ‘ground’ to the novel case. If probability be in truth purely statistical, and if there be no additional information, there can be no escape from this conclusion. But we certainly do unhesitatingly argue from a ‘ground’ which does not include the case in question, to a probable conclusion concerning the case in question. Thus either such an inference is irrational, futile, useless; or, when there is justification, there is additional information. This is the famous dilemma which perplexes the theories of induction t and of probability.





It is evident that the ultimate ‘ground’ to which all probable judgments must refer can be nothing else than the actual world as objectified in judging subjects. A judging subject is always passing a judgment upon its own data. Thus, if the statistical theory is to hold, the relations between the judging subject and its data must be such as to evade the difficulties which beset that theory.

Every actual entity is in its nature essentially social; and this in two ways. First, the outlines of its own character are determined by the data which its environment provides for its process of feeling. Secondly, these data are not extrinsic to the entity; they constitute that display of the universe which is inherent in the entity. Thus the data upon which the subject passes judgment are themselves components conditioning the character of the judging subject. It follows that any general presupposition as to the character of the experiencing subject also implies a general presupposition as to the social environment providing the display for that subject. In other words, a species of subject requires a species of data as its preliminary phase of concrescence. But such data are nothing but the social environment under the [310] abstraction effected by objectification. Also the character of the abstraction itself depends on the environment. The species of data requisite for the presumed judging subject presupposes an environment of a certain social character.

Thus, according to the philosophy of organism, inductive reasoning gains its validity by reason of a suppressed premise. This tacit presupposition is that the particular future which is the logical subject of the judgment, inductively justified, shall include actualities which have close analogy to some contemporary subject enjoying assigned experience; for example, an analogy to the judging subject in question, or to some sort of actuality presupposed as in the actual world which is the logical subject of the inductive judgment. It is also presumed that this future is derived from the present by a continuity of inheritance in which this condition is maintained. There is thus the presupposition of the maintenance of the general social environment—either by reference to judging subjects, or by more direct reference to the preservation of the general type of material world requisite for the presupposed character of one or more of the logical subjects of the proposition.

In this connection, I can only repeat, as a final summary, a paragraph from my Science and the Modern World (Ch. III):

You will observe that I do not hold induction to be in its essence the divination† of general laws. It is the derivation of some characteristics of a particular future from the known characteristics of a particular past. The wider assumption of general laws holding for all cognizable occasions appears a very unsafe addendum to attach to this limited knowledge. All we can ask of the present occasion is that it shall determine a particular community of occasions, which are in some respects mutually qualified by reason of their inclusion within that same community.

It is evident that, in this discussion of induction, the philosophy of organism [311] appears as an enlargement of the premise in ethical discussions: that man is a social animal. Analogously, every actual occasion is social, so that when we have presumed the existence of any persistent type of actual occasions, we have thereby made presumptions as to types of societies comprised in its environment. Another way of stating this explanation of the validity of induction is, that in every forecast there is a presupposition of a certain type of actual entities, and that the question then asked is, Under what circumstances will these entities find themselves? The reason that an answer can be given is that the presupposed type of entities requires a presupposed type of data for the primary phases of these actual entities; and that a presupposed type of data requires a presupposed type of social environment. But the laws of nature are the outcome of the social environment. Hence when we have presupposed a type of actual occasions, we have already some information as to the laws of nature in operation throughout the environment.

In every inductive judgment, there is therefore contained a presupposition of the maintenance of the general order of the immediate environment, so far as concerns actual entities within the scope of the induction. The inductive judgment has regard to the statistical probabilities inherent in this given order. The anticipations are devoid of meaning apart from the definite cosmic order which they presuppose. Also survival requires order, and to presuppose survival, apart from the type of order which that type of survival requires, is a contradiction. It is at this point that the organic philosophy differs from any form of Cartesian ‘substance-philosophy.’ For if a substance requires nothing but itself in order to exist, its survival can tell no tale as to the survival of order in its environment. Thus no conclusion can be drawn respecting the external relationships of the surviving substance to its future environment. For [312] the organic philosophy, anticipations as to the future of a piece of rock presuppose an environment with the type of order which that piece of rock requires. Thus the completely unknown environment never enters into an inductive judgment. The induction is about the statistical probabilities of this environment, or about the graded relevance to it of eternal objects.

Thus the appeal to the mere unknown is automatically ruled out. The question, as to what will happen to an unspecified entity in an unspecified environment, has no answer. Induction always concerns societies of actual entities which are important for the stability of the immediate environment.





In the preceding section there has been a covert appeal to probability. It is the purpose of this section to explain how the probability, thus invoked, can be explained according to the statistical theory. First, we have to note exactly where this appeal to probability enters into the notion of induction. An inductive argument always includes a hypothesis, namely, that the environment which is the subject-matter considered contains a society of actual occasions analogous to a society in the present. But analogous societies require analogous data for their several occasions; and analogous data can be provided only by the objectifications provided by analogous environments. But the laws of nature are derived from the characters of the societies dominating the environment. Thus the laws of nature dominating the environment in question have some analogy to the laws of nature dominating the immediate environment.

Now the notions of ‘analogy’ and of ‘dominance’ both leave a margin of uncertainty. We can ask, How far analogous? and How far dominant? If there were exact analogy, and complete dominance, there would be a mixture of certainty as to general conditions and of complete ignorance as to specific details. But such a descrip- [313] tion does not apply either to our knowledge of the immediate present, or of the past, or to our inductive knowledge of the future. Our conscious experience involves a baffling mixture of certainty, ignorance, and probability.

Now it is evident that the theory of cosmic epochs, due to the dominance of societies of actual occasions, provides the basis for a statistical explanation of probability. In any one epoch there are a definite set of dominant societies in certain ordered interconnections. There is also an admixture of chaotic occasions which cannot be classified as belonging to any society. But, having regard to the enormous extension of any cosmic epoch, we are practically dealing with infinities, so that some method of sampling is required, rooted in the nature of the case and not arbitrarily adopted.

This natural method of sampling is provided by the data which form the primary phase of any one actual occasion. Each actual occasion objectifies the other actual occasions in its environment. This environment can be limited to the relevant portion of the cosmic epoch. It is a finite region of the extensive continuum, so far as adequate importance is concerned in respect to individual differences among actual occasions. Also, in respect to the importance of individual differences, we may assume that there is a lower limit to the extension of each relevant occasion within this region. With these two presumptions, it follows that the relevant objectifications, forming the relevant data for any one occasion, refer to a finite sample of actual occasions in the environment. Accordingly our knowledge of the external world, and of the conditions upon which its laws depend,† is, through and through, of that numerical character which a statistical theory of probability requires. Such a theory does not require that exact statistical calculations be† made. All that is meant by such a theory is that our probability judgments are ultimately derivable from vague estimates of ‘more or less’ in a numerical sense. [314] We have an unprecise intuition of the statistical basis of the sort of way in which things happen.

NOTE.—By far the best discussion of the philosophical theory of probability is to be found in Mr. J. Maynard Keynes' book, A Treatise on Probability. This treatise must long remain the standard work on the subject. My conclusions in this chapter do not seem to me to differ fundamentally from those of Mr. Keynes as set out towards the conclusion of his Chapter XXI. But Mr. Keynes here seems to revert to a view of probability very analogous to that form of the ‘frequency theory’ which, as suggested by me,† he criticized acutely (and rightly, so far as concerned that special form) in his Chapter VIII.





So far the argument of the three‡ preceding sections has been devoted to the explanation of the statistical ground for a probability judgment. But the same discussion also discloses an alternative non-statistical ground for such a judgment.

The main line of thought has been (i) that each actual occasion has at the base of its own constitution the environment from which it springs; (ii) that in this function of the environment abstraction has been made from its indefinite multiplicity of forms of definiteness, so as to obtain a concordant experience of the elements retained; (iii) that any actual occasion belonging to an assigned species requires an environment adapted to that species, so that the presupposition of a species involves a presupposition concerning the environment; (iv) that in every inductive judgment, and in every judgment of probability, there is a presupposition, implicit or explicit, of one, or more, species of actual occasions implicated in the situation considered, so that, by (iii),† there is a presupposition of some general type of environment.

Thus the basis of all probability and induction is the fact of analogy between an environment presupposed and an environment directly experienced.

The argument, as to the statistical basis of probability, then recurred to the doctrine of social order. According to this doctrine, all social order depends on the statistical dominance in the environment of occasions belonging [315] to the requisite societies. The laws of nature are statistical laws derived from this fact. Thus the judgment of probability can be derived from an intuition—in general vague and unprecise—as to the statistical basis of the presupposed environment. This judgment can be derived from the analogy with the experienced environment. There will be such factors in experience adequate to justify a judgment of the inductive type.

But there is another factor from which, in combination with the four premises, a non-statistical judgment of probability can be derived. The principle of the graduated ‘intensive relevance’ of eternal objects to the primary physical data of experience expresses a real fact as to the preferential adaptation of selected eternal objects to novel occasions originating from an assigned environment.

This principle expresses the prehension by every creature of the graduated order of appetitions constituting the primordial nature of God. There can thus be an intuition of an intrinsic suitability of some definite outcome from a presupposed situation. There will be nothing statistical in this suitability. It depends upon the fundamental graduation of appetitions which lies at the base of things, and which solves all indeterminations of transition.

In this way, there can be an intuition of probability respecting the origination of some novelty. It is evident that the statistical theory entirely fails to provide any basis for such judgments.

It must not be thought that these non-statistical judgments are in any sense religious. They lie at a far lower level of experience than do the religious emotions. The secularization of the concept of God's functions in the world is at least as urgent a requisite of thought as is the secularization of other elements in experience. The concept of God is certainly one essential element in religious feeling. But the converse is not true; the concept of religious feeling is not an essential element in the con- [316] cept of God's function in the universe. In this respect religious literature has been sadly misleading to philosophic theory, partly by attraction and partly by repulsion.

1Cf. Part III, Ch. V.†

2For the proof of this proposition, cf. Principia Mathematica, Vol. II, * 110.643.

3Since this sentence was written in July, 1927, a star has unexpectedly split in two, in March, 1928.

4Still less, at the time of writing this sentence, were the Vermont floods of November, 1927, foreseen.
