CHAPTER IV PROPOSITIONS AND FEELINGS





[391] THE nature of consciousness has not yet been adequately analysed. The initial basic feelings, physical and conceptual, have been mentioned, and so also has the final synthesis into the affirmation-negation contrast. But between the beginning and the end of the integration into consciousness, there lies the origination of a ‘propositional feeling.’ A propositional feeling is a feeling whose objective datum is a proposition. Such a feeling does not in itself involve consciousness. But all forms of consciousness arise from ways of integration of propositional feelings with other feelings, either physical feelings or conceptual feelings. Consciousness belongs to the subjective forms of such feelings.

A proposition enters into experience as the entity forming the datum of a complex feeling derived from the integration of a physical feeling with a conceptual feeling.1 Now a conceptual feeling does not refer to the actual world, in the sense that the history of this actual world has any peculiar relevance to its datum. This datum is an eternal object; and an eternal object refers only to the purely general any among undetermined actual entities. In itself an eternal object evades any selection among actualities or epochs. You cannot know what is red by merely thinking of redness. You can only find red things by adventuring amid physical experiences in this actual world. This doctrine is the ultimate ground of empiricism; namely, that eternal objects tell no tales as to their ingressions.

[392] But now a new kind of entity presents itself. Such entities are the tales that perhaps might be told about particular actualities. Such entities are neither actual entities, nor eternal objects, nor feelings. They are propositions. A proposition must be true or false. Herein a proposition differs from an eternal object; for no eternal object is ever true or false. This difference between propositions and eternal objects arises from the fact that truth and falsehood are always grounded upon a reason. But according to the ontological principle (the eighteenth† ‘category of explanation’), a reason is always a reference to determinate actual entities. Now an eternal object, in itself, abstracts from all determinate actual entities, including even God. It is merely referent to any such entities, in the absolutely general sense of any. Then there can be no reason upon which to found the truth or falsehood of an eternal object. The very diversity of eternal objects has for its reason their diversity of functioning in this actual world.

Thus the endeavour to understand eternal objects in complete abstraction from the actual world results in reducing them to mere undifferentiated nonentities. This is an exemplification of the categoreal principle, that the general metaphysical character of being an entity is ‘to be a determinant in the becoming of actualities.’ Accordingly the differentiated relevance of eternal objects to each instance of the creative process requires their conceptual realization in the primordial nature of God. He does not create eternal objects; for his nature requires them in the same degree that they require him. This is an exemplification of the coherence of the categoreal types of existence. The general relationships of eternal objects to each other, relationships of diversity and of pattern, are their relationships in God's conceptual realization. Apart from this realization, there is mere isolation indistinguishable from nonentity.

But a proposition, while preserving the indeterminateness of an eternal object, makes an incomplete abstrac- [393] tion from determinate actual entities. It is a complex entity, with determinate actual entities among its components. These determinate actual entities, considered formaliter and not as in the abstraction of the proposition, do afford a reason determining the truth or falsehood of the proposition. But the proposition in itself, apart from recourse to these reasons, tells no tale about itself; and in this respect it is indeterminate like the eternal objects.

A prepositional feeling (as has been stated) arises from a special type of integration synthesizing a physical feeling with a conceptual feeling. The objective datum of the physical feeling is either one actual entity, if the feeling be simple, or is a determinate nexus of actual entities, if the physical feeling be more complex. The datum of the conceptual feeling is an eternal object which is referent (qua possibility)‡ to any actual entities, where the any is absolutely general and devoid of selection. In the integrated objective datum the physical feeling provides its determinate set of actual entities, indicated by their felt physical relationships to the subject of the feeling. These actual entities are the logical subjects of the proposition. The absolute generality of the notion of any, inherent in an eternal object, is thus eliminated in the fusion. In the proposition, the eternal object, in respect to its possibilities as a determinant of nexūs,† is restricted to these logical subjects. The proposition may have the restricted generality of referring to any among these provided logical subjects; or it may have the singularity of referring to the complete set of provided logical subjects as potential relata, each with its assigned status, in the complex pattern which is the eternal object. The proposition is the potentiality of the eternal object, as a determinant of definiteness, in some determinate mode of restricted reference to the logical subjects. This eternal object is the ‘predicative pattern’ of the proposition. The set of logical subjects is either completely singled out as these logical subjects in this predicative pattern or is collec- [394] tively singled out as any of these logical subjects in this pattern, or as some of these logical subjects in this pattern. Thus the physical feeling indicates the logical subjects and provides them respectively with that individual definition necessary to assign the hypothetic status of each in the predicative pattern. The conceptual feeling provides the predicative pattern. Thus in a proposition the logical subjects are reduced to the status of food for a possibility. Their real rôle in actuality is abstracted from; they are no longer factors in fact, except for the purpose of their physical indication. Each logical subject becomes a bare ‘it’ among actualities, with its assigned hypothetical relevance to the predicate.2

It is evident that the datum of the conceptual feeling reappears as the predicate in the proposition which is the datum of the integral, prepositional feeling. In this synthesis the eternal object has suffered the elimination of its absolute generality of reference. The datum of the physical feeling has also suffered elimination. For the peculiar objectification of the actual entities, really effected in the physical feeling, is eliminated, except in so far as it is required for the services of the indication. The objectification remains only to indicate that definiteness which the logical subjects must have in order to be hypothetical food for that predicate. This necessary indication of the logical subjects requires the actual world as a systematic environment. For there can be no definite position in pure abstraction. The proposition is the possibility of that predicate applying in that assigned way to those logical subjects. In every proposition, as such and without going beyond it, there is complete indeterminateness so far as concerns its own realization in a propositional feeling, and as regards its own truth. The logical subjects are, nevertheless, in fact actual entities which are definite in their realized mutual relatedness. Thus the proposition is in fact true, or false. But its own [395] truth, or its own falsity, is no business of a proposition. That question concerns only a subject entertaining a propositional feeling with that proposition for its datum. Such an actual entity is termed a ‘prehending subject’ of the proposition. Even a prehending subject is not necessarily judging the proposition. That particular case has been discussed earlier in Chapter IX of Part II. In that chapter the term ‘judging subject’ was used in place of the wider term ‘prehending subject.’

To summarize this discussion of the general nature of a proposition: A proposition shares with an eternal object the character of indeterminateness, in that both are definite potentialities for actuality with undetermined realization in actuality. But they differ in that an eternal object refers to actuality with absolute generality, whereas a proposition refers to indicated logical subjects. Truth and falsehood always require some element of sheer givenness. Eternal objects cannot demonstrate what they are except in some given fact. The logical subjects of a proposition supply the element of givenness requisite for truth and falsehood.





A proposition has neither the particularity of a feeling, nor the reality of a nexus. It is at datum for feeling, awaiting a subject feeling it. Its relevance to the actual world by means of its logical subjects makes it a lure for feeling. In fact many subjects may feel it with diverse feelings, and with diverse sorts of feelings. The fact that propositions were first considered in connection with logic, and the moralistic preference for true propositions, have obscured the rôle of propositions in the actual world. Logicians only discuss the judgment of propositions. Indeed some philosophers fail to distinguish propositions from judgments; and most logicians consider propositions as merely appanages to judgments. The result is that false propositions have fared badly, thrown into the dustheap, neglected. But in the real world it is more important [396] that a proposition be interesting than that it be true. The importance of truth is, that it adds to interest. The doctrine here maintained is that judgment-feelings form only one subdivision of propositional feelings; and arise from the special sort of integration of propositional feelings with other feelings. Propositional feelings are not, in their simplest examples, conscious feelings. Consciousness only arises in some integrations in which propositional feelings are among the components integrated. Another point to notice is that the physical feeling, which is always one component in the history of an integral propositional feeling, has no unique relation to the proposition in question, nor has the subject of that feeling, which is also a subject prehending the proposition. Any subject with any physical feeling which includes in its objective datum the requisite logical subjects† can in a supervening phase entertain a propositional feeling with that proposition as its datum. It has only to originate a conceptual feeling with the requisite predicative pattern as its datum, and then to integrate the two feelings into the required propositional feeling.

Evidently new propositions come into being with the creative advance of the world. For every proposition involves its logical subjects; and it cannot be the proposition which it is, unless those logical subjects are the actual entities which they are. Thus no actual entity can feel a proposition, if its actual world does not include the logical subjects of that proposition. The proposition ‘Caesar crossed the Rubicon’ could not be felt by Hannibal in any occasion of his existence on earth. Hannibal could feel propositions with certain analogies to this proposition, but not this proposition. It is, further, to be noticed that the form of words in which propositions are framed also includes an incitement to the origination of an affirmative judgment-feeling. In imaginative literature, this incitement is inhibited by the general context, and even by the form and make-up of the material book. Sometimes there is even a form of words designed [397] to inhibit the formation of a judgment-feeling, such as ‘once upon a time.’ The verbal statement also includes words and phrases to symbolize the sort of physical feelings necessary to indicate the logical subjects of the proposition. But language is always elliptical, and depends for its meaning upon the circumstances of its publication. For example, the word ‘Caesar’ may mean a puppy dog, or a negro slave, or the first Roman emperor.

The actual entities whose actual worlds include the logical subjects of a proposition will be said to fall within the ‘locus’ of that proposition. The proposition is prehensible by them. Of those actual entities which fall within the locus of a proposition, only some will prehend it positively. There are two kinds of pure propositional feelings, namely, ‘imaginative feelings’ and ‘perceptive feelings.’ These kinds are not sharply distinguished, but their extreme instances function very differently.





A propositional feeling can arise only in a late phase of the process of the prehending subject. For it requires, in earlier phases: (α) a physical feeling whose objective datum includes the requisite logical subjects; and (Β) a physical feeling involving a certain eternal object among the determinants of the definiteness of its datum; and (γ) the conceptual feeling of this eternal object, necessarily derivate from the physical feeling under heading (Β), according to categoreal condition IV; and perhaps (δ), some conceptual feeling which is a reversion from the former conceptual feeling, according to categoreal condition V, involving another eternal object as its datum.

The physical feeling under the heading (α) will be termed the ‘indicative feeling’; the physical feeling under heading (Β) will be called the ‘physical recognition.’ The physical recognition is the physical basis of the conceptual feeling which provides the predicative pattern.

[398] The ‘predicative pattern’ is either the eternal object which is the datum of the conceptual feeling under the heading (γ), or it is the eternal object which is the datum of the conceptual feeling under the heading (δ). In the former case, the second conceptual feeling, namely, that under the heading (δ), is irrelevant to the consideration of the propositional feeling. In either case, that conceptual feeling whose datum is the predicative pattern is called the ‘predicative feeling.’

In this account of the origin of the predicative feeling, we are in general agreement with Locke and Hume, who hold that every conceptual feeling has a physical basis. But Hume lays down the principle that all eternal objects are first felt physically, and thus would only allow of the origination of the predicative feeling under heading (γ). However he makes two concessions which ruin his general principle. For he allows the independent origination of intermediate ‘shades’ in a scale of shades, and also of new ‘manners’ of pattern. Both of these cases are allowed for by the principle of ‘reversion,’ which is appealed to under heading (δ). The propositional feeling arises in the later phase in which there is integration of the ‘indicative feeling’ with the ‘predicative feeling.’ In this integration the two data are synthesized by a double elimination involving both data. The actual entities involved in the datum of the indicative feeling are reduced to a bare multiplicity in which each is a bare ‘it’ with the elimination of the eternal object really constituting the definiteness of that nexus. But the integration rescues them from this mere multiplicity by placing them in the unity of a proposition with the given predicative† pattern. Thus the actualities, which were first felt as sheer matter of fact, have been transformed into a set of logical subjects with the potentiality for realizing an assigned predicative pattern. The predicative pattern has also been limited by elimination. For as a datum in the conceptual feeling, it held its possibility for realization in respect to absolutely any actual entities; but in [399] the proposition its possibilities are limited to just these logical subjects.

The subjective form of the propositional feeling will depend on circumstances, according to categoreal condition VII. It may, or may not, involve consciousness; it may, or may not, involve judgment. It will involve aversion, or adversion, that is to say, decision. The subjective form will only involve consciousness when the ‘affirmation-negation’ contrast has entered into it. In other words, consciousness enters into the subjective forms of feelings, when those feelings are components in an integral feeling whose datum is the contrast between a nexus which is, and a proposition which in its own nature negates the decision of its truth or falsehood. The logical subjects of the proposition are the actual entities in the nexus. Consciousness is the way of feeling that particular real nexus, as in contrast with imaginative freedom about it. The consciousness may confer importance upon what the real thing is, or upon what the imagination is, or upon both.





A proposition, as such, is impartial between its prehending subjects, and in its own nature it does not fully determine the subjective forms of such prehensions. But the different propositional feelings, with the same proposition as datum, in different prehending subjects, are widely different according to differences of their histories in these subjects. They can be divided into two main types, here termed, respectively, ‘perceptive feelings’ and ‘imaginative feelings.’ This difference is founded on the comparison between the ‘indicative feeling’ from which the logical subjects are derived, and the ‘physical recognition’ from which the predicative pattern is derived.

[400]‡ These physical feelings are either identical or different. If they be one and the same feeling, the derived propositional feeling is here called a ‘perceptive feeling.’ For in this case, as will be seen, the proposition predicates of its logical subject's a character derived from the way in which they are physically felt by that prehending subject.

If the physical feelings be different, the derived propositional feeling is here called an ‘imaginative feeling.’ For in this case, as will be seen, the proposition predicates of its logical subjects a character without any guarantee of close relevance to the logical subjects. Since these physical feelings are complex, there are degrees of difference between them. Two physical feelings may be widely diverse or almost identical. Thus the distinction between the two types of propositional feelings is not as sharp-cut as it might be. This distinction is still further blurred by noting that three distinct cases arise which differentiate perceptive feelings into three species, which in their turn shade off into each other.

Since we are now dealing with perceptive feelings, we have on hand only one physical feeling which enjoys the rôle both of the indicative feeling, and of the physical recognition. In the first place, suppose that the predicative pattern is derived straight from the physical recognition under the heading (γ), so that there is no reversion and the heading (δ) is irrelevant. In this case the derived propositional feeling will be termed an ‘authentic perceptive feeling.’ Such a feeling, by virtue of its modes of origination, has as its datum a proposition whose predicate is in some way realized in the real nexus of its [401] logical subjects. Thus the proposition felt proposes a predicate derived from the real nexus, and not refracted by the prehending subject. But nevertheless the proposition need not be true, so far as concerns the way in which it implicates the logical subjects with the predicate. For the primary physical feeling of that nexus by the prehending subject may have involved ‘transmutation’ according to categoreal condition VI. In this case, the proposition ascribes to its logical subjects the physical enjoyment of a nexus with the definition of its predicate; whereas that predicate may have only been enjoyed conceptually by these logical subjects. Thus, what the proposition proposes as a physical fact in the nexus, was in truth only a mental fact. Unless it is understood for what it is, error arises. Such understanding belongs to the subjective form.

But if the primary physical feeling involves no reversion in any stage, then the predicate of the proposition is that eternal object which constitutes the definiteness of that nexus. In this case, the proposition is, without qualification, true. The authentic perceptive feeling will then be termed ‘direct.’ Thus there are ‘indirect’ perceptive feelings (when ‘reversion’ is involved), and ‘direct’ perceptive feelings; and feelings of both these species are termed ‘authentic.’ In the case of these ‘authentic’ feelings, the predicate has realization in the nexus, physically or ideally, apart from any reference to the prehending subject.

‡Thirdly, and lastly, the predicative feeling may have arisen in the prehending subject by reversion, according to the heading (δ) of the previous section. In this case the predicate has in it some elements which really contribute to the definiteness of the nexus; but it has also some elements which contrast with corresponding elements in the nexus. These latter elements have been introduced in the concrescence of the prehending subject. The predicate is thus distorted from the truth by the subjectivity of the prehending subject. Such a perceptive feeling will be termed ‘unauthentic.’

Unauthentic feelings are feelings derived from a ‘tied’ imagination, in the sense that there is only one physical basis for the whole origination, namely, that physical feeling which is both the ‘indicative’ feeling† and the ‘physical recognition.’ The imagination is tied to one ultimate fact.





Imaginative feelings belong to the general case when the indicative feeling and the physical recognition differ. [402] But there are degrees of difference, which can vary from the case when the two nexus, forming the objective data of the two feelings respectively, enjoy the extreme of remote disconnection, to the case at the other extreme when the two nexus are almost identical. But in so far as there is diversity between the feelings, there is some trace of a free imagination. The proposition which is the objective datum of an imaginative feeling has a predicate derived, with or without reversions, from a nexus which in some respects differs from the nexus providing the logical subjects. Thus the proposition is felt as an imaginative notion concerning its logical subjects. The proposition in its own nature gives no suggestion as to how it should be felt. In one prehending subject it may be the datum of a perceptive feeling, and in another prehending subject it may be the datum of an imaginative feeling. But the subjective forms of the two feelings will differ according to the differences in the histories of the origination of those feelings in their respective subjects.

The subjective forms of propositional feelings are dominated by valuation, rather than by consciousness. In a pure propositional feeling the logical subjects have preserved their indicated particularity, but have lost their own real modes of objectification. The subjective form lies in the twilight zone between pure physical feeling and the clear consciousness which apprehends the contrast between physical feeling and imagined possibility. A propositional feeling is a lure to creative emergence in the transcendent future. When it is functioning as a lure, the propositional feeling about the logical subjects of the proposition may in some subsequent phase promote decision involving intensification of some physical feeling of those subjects in the nexus. Thus, according to the various categoreal conditions, propositions intensify, attenuate, inhibit, or transmute, without necessarily entering into clear consciousness, or encountering judgment.

It follows that in the pursuit of truth even physical [403] feelings must be criticized, since their evidence is not final apart from an analysis of their origination. This conclusion merely confirms what is a commonplace in all scientific investigation, that we can never start from dogmatic certainty. Such certainty is always an ideal to which we approximate as the result of critical analysis. When we have verified that we depend upon an authentic perceptive feeling, whose origination involves no reversions, then we know that the proposition which is the datum of that feeling is true. Thus there can be no immediate guarantee of the truth of a proposition, by reason of the mode of origination of the propositional feeling, apart from a critical scrutiny of that mode of origination.

The feeling has to be (i) perceptive, (ii) authentic, and (iii) direct, where a definite meaning has, in the preceding section, been assigned to each of these conditions.

‡ There is, however, always this limitation to the security of direct knowledge, based on direct physical feeling, namely, that the creative emergence can import into the physical feelings of the actual world pseudo-determinants which arise from the concepts entertained in that actual world, and not from the physical feelings in that world.

This possibility of error is peculiarly evident in the case of that special class of physical feelings which belong to the mode of ‘presentational immediacy.’

The proposition which is the datum of an imaginative feeling may be true. The two questions of the origination of consciousness in the subjective forms of feelings, and of the intuitive judgment of a proposition, apart from the mode of origination of the feeling of it, must now be considered.





Language, as usual, is always ambiguous as to the exact proposition which it indicates. Spoken language is merely a series of squeaks. Its function is (α) to arouse in the prehending subject some physical feeling indicative of the logical subjects of the proposition, (Β) to arouse in the prehending subject some physical feeling which plays the part of the ‘physical recognition.’ (γ) to promote the sublimation of the ‘physical recognition’ into the conceptual ‘predicative feeling,’ (δ) to promote the integration of the indicative feeling and the predicative feeling into the required propositional feeling. But in this complex function there is always a tacit reference to [404] the environment of the occasion of utterance. Consider the traditional example, ‘Socrates is mortal.’

This proposition may mean ‘It is mortal.’ In this case the word ‘Socrates’ in the circumstances of its utterance merely promotes a physical feeling indicating the it which is mortal.

The proposition may mean ‘It is Socratic and mortal’; where ‘Socratic’ is an additional element in the predicative pattern.

We now turn to the words denoting the predicative pattern, namely, either ‘mortal,’ or ‘Socratic and mortal.’ The slightest consideration discloses the fact that it is pure convention to suppose that there is only one logical subject to the proposition. The word ‘mortal’ means a certain relationship to the general nexus of actual entities in this world which is† possible for any one of the actual entities. ‘Mortal’ does not mean ‘mortal in any possible world,’ it means ‘mortal in this world.’ Thus there is a general reference to this actual world as exemplifying a scheme of things which render ‘mortality’ realizable in it.

The word ‘Socratic’ means ‘realizing the Socratic predicate in Athenian society.’ It does not mean ‘Socratic, in any possible world’; nor does it mean ‘Socratic, anywhere in this world’: it means ‘Socratic, in Athens.’ Thus ‘Socratic,’ as here used, refers to a society of actual entities realizing certain general systematic properties such that the Socratic predicate is realizable in that environment. Also the ‘Athenian society’ requires that this actual world exemplifies a certain systematic scheme, amid which ‘Athenianism’ is realizable.

Thus in the one meaning of the phrase ‘Socrates is mortal,’ the logical subjects are one singular It (Socrates) and the actual entities of this actual world, forming a society amid which mortality is realizable and including the former ‘It.’ In the other meaning, there are also included among the logical subjects the actual entities forming the Athenian society. These actual entities are [405] required for the realization of the predicative pattern ‘Socratic and mortal’ and are the definitely indicated logical subjects. They also require that the general scheme of this actual world be such as to support ‘Athenianism’ in conjunction with ‘mortality.’‡

1Cf.† also ‘Physical Purposes’ considered in Ch. V.

2Cf. my Concept of Nature, Ch. I, for another exposition of this train of thought.
