CHAPTER IV STRAINS





[472] THERE is nothing in the real world which is merely an inert fact. Every reality is there for feeling: it promotes feeling; and it is felt. Also there is nothing which belongs merely to the privacy of feeling of one individual actuality. All origination is private. But what has been thus originated, publicly pervades the world. Thus the geometrical facts concerning straight and flat loci are public facts characterizing the feelings of actual entities. It so happens that in this epoch of the universe the feelings involving them are of dominating importance. A feeling in which the forms exemplified in the datum concern geometrical, straight, and flat loci will be called a ‘strain.’ In a strain qualitative elements, other than the geometrical forms, express themselves as qualities implicated in those forms; also the forms are the forms ingredient in particular nexus forming the objective data of the physical feelings in question. It is to be remembered that two points determine a complete straight line, that three non-collinear points determine a complete plane, and that four non-coplanar points determine a complete three-dimensional flat locus.

Thus a strain has a complex distribution of geometrical significance. There is the geometrical ‘seat’ which is composed of a limited set of loci which are certain sets of points. These points belong to the volume defining the standpoint of the experient subject. A strain is a complex integration of simpler feelings; and it includes in its complex character simpler feelings in which the qualities concerned are more particularly associated with [473] this seat. But the geometrical interest which dominates the growth of a strain lifts into importance the complete lines, planes, and three-dimensional flats, which are defined by the seat of the strain. In the process of integration, these wider geometrical elements acquire implication with the qualities originated in the simpler stages. The process is an example of the Category of Transmutation; and is to be explained by the intervention of intermediate conceptual feelings. Thus extensive regions, which are penetrated by the geometrical elements concerned, acquire objectification by means of the qualities and geometrical relations derived from the simpler feelings. This type of objectification is characterized by the close association of qualities and definite geometrical relations. It is the basis of the so-called ‘projection’ of sensa. This projection of sensa in a strain takes many forms according to the differences among various strains. Sometimes the ‘seat’ retains its individual importance; sometimes in the final synthesis it has been almost eliminated from the final synthesis of feelings into the one strain. Sometimes the whole extensive region indicated by the wider geometrical elements is only vaguely geometricized. In this case, there is feeble geometrical indication: the strain then takes the vague form of feeling certain qualities which are vaguely external. Sometimes the extensive region is geometricized without any corresponding elimination of importance from the seat. In this case,† there is a dual reference, to the seat here, and to some objectified region there. The here is usually some portion of an animal body; whereas the geometricized region may be within, or without, the animal body concerned.

It is obvious that important feelings of strain involve complex processes of concrescence. They are accordingly only to be found in comparatively high-grade actual entities. They do not in any respect necessarily involve consciousness, or even that approach to consciousness which we associate with life. But we shall find that the [474] behaviour of enduring physical objects is only explicable by reference to the peculiarities of their strains. On the other hand, the occurrences in empty space require less emphasis on any peculiar ordering of strains. But the growth of ordered physical complexity is dependent on the growth of ordered relationships among strains. Fundamental equations in mathematical physics, such as Maxwell's electromagnetic equations, are expressions of the ordering of strains throughout the physical universe.





Presentational immediacy is our perception of the contemporary world by means of the senses. It is a physical feeling. But it is a physical feeling of a complex type to the formation of which conceptual feelings, more primitive physical feelings, and transmutation have played their parts amid processes of integration. Its objective datum is a nexus of contemporary events, under the definite illustration of certain qualities and relations: these qualities and relations are prehended with the subjective form derived from the primitive physical feelings, thus becoming our ‘private’ sensations. Finally, as in the case of all physical feelings, this complex derivative physical feeling acquires integration with the valuation inherent in its conceptual realization† as a type of experience.

Naïve common sense insists, first, on the ‘subject’ entertaining this feeling; and, secondly, on the analytic components in the order: (i) region in contemporary world as datum, (ii) sensations as derivative from, and illustrative of, this datum, (iii) integral feeling involving these elements, (iv) appreciative subjective form, (v) interpretative subjective form, (vi) purposive subjective form. But this analysis of presentational immediacy has not exhausted the content of the feeling. For we feel with the body. There may be some further specialization into a particular organ of sensation; but in any case the ‘withness’ of the body is an ever-present, [475] though elusive, element in our perceptions of presentational immediacy. This ‘withness’ is the trace of the origination of the feeling concerned, enshrined by that feeling in its subjective form and in its objective datum. But in itself this ‘withness of the body’ can be isolated as a component feeling in the final ‘satisfaction.’ From this point of view, the body, or its organ of sensation, becomes the objective datum of a component feeling; and this feeling has its own subjective form. Also this feeling is physical, so that we must look for an eternal object, to be a determinant of the definiteness of the body, as objective datum. This component feeling will be called the feeling of bodily efficacy. It is more primitive than the feeling of presentational immediacy which issues from it. Both in common sense and in physiological theory, this bodily efficacy is a component presupposed by the presentational immediacy and leading up to it. Thus, in the immediate subject, the presentational immediacy is to be conceived as originated in a late phase, by the synthesis of the feeling of bodily efficacy with other feelings. We have now to consider the nature of the other feelings, and the complex eternal object concerned in the feeling of bodily efficacy.

In the first place, this eternal object must be partially identified with the eternal object in the final feeling of presentational immediacy. The whole point of the connection between the two feelings is that the presentational immediacy is derivative from the bodily efficacy. The present perception is strictly inherited from the antecedent bodily functioning, unless all physiological teaching is to be abandoned. Both eternal objects are highly complex; and the complex elements of the second eternal object must at least be involved in the complex elements of the former eternal object.

This complex eternal object is analysable into a sense-datum and a geometrical pattern. In physics, the geometrical pattern appears as a state of strain of that actual occasion in the body which is the subject of the [476] feeling. But this feeling of bodily efficacy in the final percipient is the reenaction of an antecedent feeling by an antecedent actual entity in the body. Thus in this antecedent entity there is a feeling concerned with the same sense-datum and a highly analogous state of strain. The feeling must be a ‘strain’ in the sense defined in the previous section. Now this strain involves a geometricized region, which in this case also involves a ‘focal’ region as part of itself. This ‘focal’ region is a region of dense concurrence of straight lines defined by the ‘seat.’ It is the region onto which there is so-called ‘projection.’

These lines enter into feeling through a process of integration of yet simpler feelings which primarily concern the ‘seat’ of the pattern. These lines have a twofold function as determinants of the feeling. They define the ‘strain’ of the feeler, and they define the focal region which they thus relate to the feeler. In so far as we are merely considering an abstract pattern, we are dealing with an abstract eternal object. But as a determinant of a concrete feeling in a concrete percipient, we are dealing with the feeling as relating its subject (which includes the ‘seat’ in its volume) to a definite spatial region (the focal region) external to itself. This definite contemporary focal region is a nexus which is part of the objective datum. Thus the feeling of bodily efficacy is the feeling of the sense-datum as generally implicated in the whole region (of antecedent ‘seats’ and focal regions) geometrically defined by the inherited strains. This patterned region is peculiarly dominated by the final ‘seat’ in the body of the feeler, and by the final ‘focal’ region. Thus the sense-datum has a general spatial relation, in which two spatial regions are dominant. Feelings of this sort are inherited by many strands from the antecedent bodily nerves. But in considering one definite feeling of presentational immediacy, these many strands of transmission of bodily efficacy, in their final deliverance to the ultimate percipient, converge upon the same focal region as picked out by the many bodily ‘strains.’

[477] In the integration of these feelings a double act of transmutation is achieved. In each of the successive feelings transmitted along the successive actual entities of a bodily nervous strand there are two regions mainly concerned; and there is a relation between them constituted by intermediate regions picked out by the linkage of the pattern. One region is the focal region already, discussed, the other region is the seat in the immediate subject, constituting its geometrical standpoint. The ‘strain’ of the final actual entity defines the ‘seat’ and the ‘focal region’ and the intermediary regions, and more vaguely the whole of a ‘presented’ space. This final feeling of bodily strain—in the sense of ‘strain’ defined in the previous section—is the last of a route of analogous feelings inherited one from the other along the series of bodily occasions along some nerve, or other path in the body. There will be parallel routes of such analogous feelings, which finally converge with concurrent reinforcement upon the single occasion, or route of occasions, which is the ultimate percipient.

Each of these bodily strain-feelings defines its own seat and its own focal region and intermediaries. The sense-datum is vaguely associated with the external world as thus felt and defined. But as such feelings are ‘transmuted,’ either gradually, or at critical nodes in the body, there is an increasing development of special emphasis. Now emphasis is valuation, and can only be changed by renewed valuation. But valuation arises in conceptual feelings. The conceptual counterpart of these physical feelings can be analysed into many conceptual feelings, associating the sense-datum with various regions defined by the strain. This conceptual feeling, by its reference to definite regions, belongs to the secondary type termed ‘propositional feelings.’ One subordinate propositional feeling associates the sense-datum with the ‘seat’ of the feeler, another with the ‘focal’ region of the feeler, another with the intermediary region of the feeler, another with the seats of the antecedent elements of the [478] nervous strand, and so on. The total association of the sense-datum with space-time is analysable into a bewildering variety of associations with definite regions, contemporary and antecedent. In general, and apart from high-grade organisms, this spatio-temporal association of the sense-datum is integrated into a vague sense of externality. The component valuations have in such cases failed to differentiate themselves into grades of intensity. But in high-grade† cases, in which presentational immediacy is prominent, one of three cases happens. Either (i) the association of the sense-datum with the seats of some antecedent sets of feelers is exclusively emphasized, or (ii) the association of the sense-datum with the focal region of the final percipient is exclusively emphasized, or (iii) the association of the sense-datum both with the seats of antecedent feelers and with the focal region of the immediate feeler is emphasized.

But these regions are not apprehended in abstraction from the general spatio-temporal continuum. The prehension of a region is always the prehension of systematic elements in the extensive relationship between the seat of the immediate feeler and the region concerned. When these valuations have been effected, the Category of Transmutation provides for the transmission to the succeeding subject of a feeling of these regions qualified by (i.e., contrasted with) that sense-datum. In the first case, there are purely bodily sensations; in the second case, there are ‘projected’ sensations, involving regions of contemporary space beyond the body; in the third case, there are both bodily feelings and sensations externally projected. Thus in the case of all sensory feeling, there is initial privacy of conceptual emphasis passing into publicity of physical feeling.

Thus, by the agency of the Category of Transmutation, there are two types of feelings, for which the objective datum is a nexus with undiscriminated actual entities. The feelings of the first type are feelings of ‘causal efficacy’; and those of the second type are those of ‘presenta- [479] tional immediacy.’ In the first type, the analogous elements in the various feelings of the various actualities of the bodily nexus are transmuted into a feeling ascribed to the bodily nexus as one entity. In the second type, the transmutation is more elaborate and shifts the nexus concerned from the antecedent bodily nexus (i.e., the ‘seat’) to the contemporary focal nexus.

Both these types of feeling are the outcome of a complex process of massive simplification which is characteristic of higher grades of actual entities. They apparently have but slight importance in the constitutions of actual occasions in empty space; but they have dominating importance in the physical feelings belonging to the life-history—of enduring organisms—the inorganic and organic, alike.

In respect to the sensa concerned, there is a gradual transformation of their functions as they pass from occasion to occasion along a route of inheritance up to some final high-grade experient. In their most primitive form of functioning, a sensum is felt physically with emotional enjoyment of its sheer individual essence. For example, red is felt with emotional enjoyment of its sheer redness. In this primitive prehension we have aboriginal physical feeling in which the subject feels itself as enjoying redness. This is Hume's ‘impression of sensation’ stripped of all spatial relations with other such impressions. In so far as they spring up in this primitive, aboriginal way, they—in Hume's words—“arise in the soul from unknown causes.” But in fact we can never isolate such ultimate irrationalities. In our experience, as in distinct analysis, physical feelings are always derived from some antecedent experient. Occasion B prehends occasion A as an antecedent subject experiencing a sensum with emotional intensity. Also B's subjective form of emotion is conformed to A's subjective form. Thus there is a vector transmission of emotional feeling of a sensum from A to B. In this way B feels the sensum as derived from A and feels it with an emotional form [480] also derived from A. This is the most primitive form of the feeling of causal efficacy. In physics it is the transmission of a form of energy. In the bodily transmission from occasion to occasion of a high-grade animal body, there is a gradual modification of these functions of sensa. In their most primitive functioning for the initial occasions within the animal body, they are qualifications of emotion—types of energy, in the language of physics;† in their final functioning for the high-grade experient occasion at the end of the route, they are qualities ‘inherent’ in a presented, contemporary nexus. In the final percipient any conscious feeling of the primitive emotional functioning of the sensum is often entirely absent. But this is not always the case; for example, the perception of a red cloak may often be associated with a feeling of red irritation.

To return to Hume's doctrine (cf. Treatise, Part III, Sect. V) of the origination of ‘impressions of sensation’ from unknown causes, it is first necessary to distinguish logical priority from physical priority. Undoubtedly an impression of sensation is logically the simplest of physical prehensions. It is the percipient occasion feeling the sensum as participating in its own concrescence. This is the enjoyment of a private sensation.

There is a logical simplicity about such a sensation which makes it the primitive, aboriginal type of physical feeling. But there are two objections to Hume's doctrine which assigns to them a physical priority. First, there is the empirical objection. Hume's theory of a complex of such impressions elaborated into a supposition of a common physical world is entirely contrary to naïve experience. We find ourselves in the double rôle of agents and patients in a common world, and the conscious recognition of impressions of sensation is the work of sophisticated elaboration. This is also Locke's doctrine in the third and fourth books of his Essay. The child first dimly elucidates the complex externality of particu- [481] lar things exhibiting a welter of forms of definiteness, and then disentangles his impressions of these forms in isolation. A young man does not initiate his experience by dancing with impressions of sensation, and then proceed to conjecture a partner. His experience takes the converse route. The unempirical character of the philosophical school derived from Hume cannot be too often insisted upon. The true empirical doctrine is that physical feelings are in their origin vectors, and that the genetic process of concrescence introduces the elements which emphasize privacy.

Secondly, Hume's doctrine is necessarily irrational. For if the impressions of sensation arise from unknown causes (cf. Hume, loc. cit.) a stop is put to the rationalistic search for a rational cosmology. Such a cosmology requires that metaphysics shall provide a doctrine of relevance between a form and any occasion in which it participates. If there be no such doctrine, all hope of approximating to a rational view of the world vanishes.

Hume's doctrine has no recommendation except the pleasure which it gives to its adherents.

The philosophy of organism provides for this relevance by means of two doctrines, (i) the doctrine of God embodying a basic completeness of appetition, and (ii) the doctrine of each occasion effecting a concrescence of the universe, including God. Then, by the Category of Conceptual Reproduction, the vector prehensions of God's appetition, and of other occasions, issue in the mental pole of conceptual prehensions; and by integration of this pole with the pure physical prehensions there arise the primitive physical feelings of sensa, with their subjective forms,† emotional and purposive. These feelings, with their primitive simplicity, arise into distinctness by reason of the elimination effected by this integration of the vector prehensions with the conceptual appetitions. Such primitive feelings cannot be separated from their subjective forms. The subject never loses its triple character of recipient, patient, and agent. These primitive feel- [482] ings have already been considered under the name of ‘physical purposes’ (cf. Part III, Ch. V). They correspond to Hume's ‘impressions of sensation.’ But they do not originate the process of experience.

We see that a feeling of presentational immediacy comes into being by reason of an integration of a conceptual feeling drawn from bodily efficacy with a bare regional feeling which is also a component in a complex feeling of bodily efficacy. Also this bare regional feeling is reinforced with the general regional feeling which is the whole of our direct physical feeling of the contemporary world; and the conceptual feeling is reinforced by the generation of physical purpose. This integration takes the form of the creative imputation of the complex eternal object, ingredient in the bodily efficacy, onto some contemporary focal region felt in the strainfeeling. Also the subjective form is transmitted from the conceptual valuation and the derivate ‘physical purpose.’ But this subjective form is that suitable to the bodily efficacy out of which it has arisen. Thus the mere region with its imputed eternal object is felt as though there had been a feeling of its efficacy. But there is no mutual efficacy of contemporary regions. This transference of subjective form is termed ‘symbolic transference.’1

An additional conceptual feeling, with its valuation, arises from this physical feeling of presentational immediacy. It is the conceptual feeling of a region thus characterized. This is the aesthetic valuation proper to the bare objective datum of the presentational immediacy. But this valuation is less primitive than that gained from the conceptual prehension by symbolic transference. The primitive subjective form includes a valuation as though the contemporary region, by its own proper constitution, were causally effective on the percipient sub- [483] ject. The secondary valuation is the aesthetic appreciation of the bare fact: this bare fact is merely that region, thus qualified. Thus the contemporary world, as felt through the senses, is valued for its own sake, by means of a later conceptual feeling; but it is also valued for its derivation from antecedent efficacy, by means of transmutation from earlier conceptual feeling combined with derivate ‘physical purpose.’

But none of these operations can be segregated from nature into the subjective privacy of a mind. Mental and physical operations are incurably intertwined; and both issue into publicity, and are derived from publicity. The vector character of prehension is fundamental.





It is the mark of a high-grade organism to eliminate, by negative prehension, the irrelevant accidents in its environment, and to elicit massive attention to every variety of systematic order. For this purpose, the Category of Transmutation is the master-principle. By its operation each nexus can be prehended in terms of the analogies among its own members, or in terms of analogies among the members of other nexūs but yet relevant to it. In this way the organism in question suppresses the mere multiplicities of things, and designs its own contrasts. The canons of art are merely the expression, in specialized forms, of the requisites for depth of experience. The principles of morality are allied to the canons of art, in that they also express, in another connection, the same requisites. Owing to the principle that contemporary actual entities occur in relative independence, the nexus of contemporary actual entities are peculiarly favourable for this transference of systematic qualities from other nexus to themselves. For a difficulty arises in the operation of the Category of Transmutation, when a characteristic prevalent among the individual entities of one nexus is to be transferred to another nexus treated as a unity. The difficulty is that the individual actuali- [484] ties of the recipient nexus are also respectively objectified in the percipient subject by systematic characteristics which equally demand the transference to their own nexus; but this is the nexus which should be the recipient of the other transference. Thus there are competing qualities struggling to effect the objectification of the same nexus. The result is attenuation and elimination.

When the recipient nexus is composed of entities contemporary with the percipient subject, this difficulty vanishes. For the contemporary entities do not enter into the constitution of the percipient subject by objectification through any of their own feelings. Thus their only direct connection with the subject is their implication in the same extensive scheme. Thus a nexus of actual entities, contemporary with the percipient subject, puts up no alternative characteristics to inhibit the transference to it of characteristics from antecedent nexūs.

A high-grade percipient is necessarily an occasion in the historic route of an enduring object. If this route is to propagate itself successfully into the future, it is above all things necessary that its decisions in the immediate occasion should have the closest relevance to the concurrent happenings among contemporary occasions. For these contemporary entities will, in the near future, form the ‘immediate past’ for the future embodiment of the enduring object. This ‘immediate past’ is of overwhelming influence; for all routes of transmission from the more remote past must pass through it. Thus the contemporary occasions tell nothing; and yet are of supreme importance for the survival of the enduring object.

This gap in the experience of the percipient subject is bridged by presentational immediacy. This type of experience is the lesson of the past reflected into the present. The more important contemporary occasions are those in the near neighborhood. Their actual worlds [485] are practically identical with that of the percipient subject. The percipient prehends the nexūs of contemporary occasions by the mediation of eternal objects which it inherits from its own past. Also it selects the contemporary nexūs thus prehended by the efficacy of strains whose focal regions are important elements in the past of those nexūs. Thus, for successful organisms, presentational immediacy—though it yields no direct experience about the contemporary world, and though in unfortunate instances the experience which it does yield may be irrelevant—does yield experience which expresses how the contemporary world has in fact emerged from its own past.

Presentational immediacy works on the principle that it is better to obtain information about the contemporary world, even if occasionally it be misleading.





Depth of experience is gained by concentrating emphasis on the systematic structural systems in the environment, and discarding individual variations. Every element of systematic structure is emphasized, every individual aberration is pushed into the background. The variety sought is the variety of structures, and never the variety of individuals. For example,† we neglect empty space in comparison with the structural systematic nexus which is the historic route of an enduring object. In every possible way, the more advanced organisms simplify their experience so as to emphasize those nexūs with some element of tightness of systematic structure.

In pursuance of this principle, the regions, geometricized by the various strains in such an organism, not only lie in the contemporary world,† but they coalesce so as to emphasize one unified locus in the contemporary world. This selected locus is penetrated by the straight lines, the planes, and the three-dimensional flat loci associated with the strains. This is the ‘strain-locus’ belonging to an occasion in the history of an enduring object. [486] This occasion is the immediate percipient subject under consideration. Each such occasion has its one strain-locus which serves for all its strains. The focal regions of the various strains all lie within this strain-locus, and are in general distinct. But the strain-locus as a whole is common to all the strains. Each occasion lies in its own strain-locus.

The meaning of the term ‘rest’ is the relation of an occasion to its strain-locus, if there be one. An occasion with no unified strain-locus has no dominating locus with which it can have the relationship of ‘rest.’ An occasion ‘rests’ in its strain-locus. This is why it is nonsense to ask of an occasion in empty space whether it be ‘at rest’ in reference to some locus. For, since such occasions have no strain-loci, the relationship of ‘rest’ does not apply to them. The strain-locus is the locus which is thoroughly geometricized by the strain-feelings of the percipient occasion. It must have the property of being continent of straight lines, and of flat loci of all dimensions. Thus its boundaries will be three-dimensional† flat loci, non-intersecting. A strain-locus approximates to a three-dimensional flat locus; but in fact it is four-dimensional, with a time-thickness.





Reviewing the discussion in the preceding sections of this chapter and of Chapter IV of Part II, we note that, in reference to any one actual occasion M, seven (but cf. Section VIII†) distinct considerations define loci composed of other actual occasions. In the first place, there are three loci defined by causal efficacy, namely, the ‘causal past’ of M, the ‘causal future’ of M, and the ‘contemporaries’ of M. An actual occasion P, belonging to M's causal past, is objectified for M by a perspective representation of its own (i.e., P's) qualities of feeling and intensities of feeling. There is a quantitative and qualitative vector flow of feeling from P to M; and in this way, what P is subjectively, belongs to M objectively. An [487] actual occasion Q, belonging to M's causal future, is in the converse relation to M, compared to P's relation. For the causal future is composed of those actual occasions which will have M in their respective causal pasts.† Actual occasions R and S,† which are contemporary with M, are those actual occasions which lie neither in M's causal past, nor in M's causal future. The peculiarity of the locus of contemporaries of M is that any two of its members, such as R and S, need not be contemporaries of each other. They may be mutually contemporaries, but not necessarily. It is evident from the form of the definition of ‘contemporary,’ that if R be contemporary with M, then M is contemporary with R. This peculiarity of the locus of M's contemporaries—that R and S may be both contemporaries of M, but not contemporaries of each other—points to another set of loci. A ‘duration’ is a locus of actual occasions, such that (α) any two members of the locus are contemporaries, and (β) that any actual occasion, not belonging to the duration, is in the causal past or causal future of some members of the duration.

A duration is a complete locus of actual occasions in ‘unison of becoming,’ or in ‘concrescent unison.’ It is the old-fashioned ‘present state of the world.’ In reference to a given duration, D, the actual world is divided into three mutually exclusive loci. One of these loci is the duration D itself. Another of these loci is composed of actual occasions which lie in the past of some members of D: this locus is the ‘past of the duration D.’ The remaining locus is composed of actual occasions which lie in the future of some members of D: this locus is the ‘future of the duration D.’

By its definition, a duration which contains an occasion M† must lie within the locus of the contemporaries of M. According to the classical pre-relativistic notions of time, there would be only one duration including M, and it would contain all M's contemporaries. According to modern relativistic views,† we must admit that there are many durations including M—in fact, an infinite [488] number, so that no one of them contains all M's contemporaries.

Thus the past of a duration D includes the whole past of any actual occasion belonging to D, such as M for example, and it also includes some of M's contemporaries. Also the future of the duration D includes the whole future of M, and also includes some of M's contemporaries.

So far, starting from an actual occasion M, we find six loci, or types of loci, defined purely in terms of notions derived from ‘causal efficacy.’ These loci are, M's causal past, M's causal future, M's contemporaries, the set of durations defined by M; and finally, taking any one such duration which we call D as typical, there is D's past, and D's future. Thus there are the three definite loci, the causal past, the causal future,‡ and the contemporaries, which are defined uniquely by M; and there are the set of durations defined by M, and the set of ‘durational pasts’ and the set of ‘durational futures.’ The paradox which has been introduced by the modern theory of relativity is twofold. First, the actual occasion M does not, as a general characteristic of all actual occasions, define a unique duration; and secondly,† such a unique duration, if defined, does not include all the contemporaries of M.

But among the set of durations, there may be one with a unique association with M. For the mode of presentational immediacy objectifies for M† the actual occasions within one particular duration. This is the ‘presented duration.’ Such a presented duration is an inherent factor in the character of an ‘enduring physical object.’ It is practically identical with the strain-locus. This locus is the reason why there is a certain absoluteness in the notions of rest, velocity, and acceleration. For this presented duration is the spatialized world in which the physical object is at rest, at least momentarily for its occasion M. This spatialized world is objectified for M by M's own conditioned range of feeling-tones which have been inherited from the causal past of the actual occasion [489] in question, namely, of M. Thus the presented duration is with peculiar vividness part of the character of the actual occasion. A historic route of actual occasions,† each with its presented duration, constitutes a physical object.

Our partial consciousness of the objectifications of the presented duration constitutes our knowledge of the present world, so far as it is derived from the senses. Remembering that objectifications constitute the objective conditions from which an actual occasion (M) initiates its successive phases of feeling, we must admit that, in the most general sense, the objectifications express the causality by which the external world fashions the actual occasion in question. Thus the objectifications of the presented duration represent a recovery by its contemporaries of a very real efficacy in the determination of M. It is true that the eternal objects which effect this objectification belong to the feeling-tones which M derives from the past. But it is a past which is largely common to M and to the presented duration. Thus by the intermediacy of the past, the presented duration has its efficacy in the production of M. This efficacy does not derogate from the principle of the independence of contemporary occasions. For the contemporary occasions in the presented duration are only efficacious through the feeling-tones of their sources, and not through their own immediate feeling-tones.

Thus in so far as Bergson ascribes the ‘spatialization’ of the world to a distortion introduced by the intellect, he is in error. This spatialization is a real factor in the physical constitution of every actual occasion belonging to the life-history† of an enduring physical object. For actual occasions in so-called ‘empty space,’ there is no reason to believe that any duration has been singled out for spatialization; that is to say, that physical perception in the mode of presentational immediacy is negligible for such occasions. The reality of the rest and the motion of enduring physical objects depends on this spatializa- [490] tion for occasions in their historic routes. The presented duration is the duration in respect to which the enduring object is momentarily at rest. It is that duration which is the strain-locus of that occasion in the life-history of the enduring object.

1Cf. my three Barbour-Page lectures, Symbolism, at the University of Virginia (New York: Macmillan, 1927, and Cambridge University Press, 1928);† and also above, Part II, Ch. VIII.
