CHAPTER V MEASUREMENT





[491] THE identification of the strain-locus with a duration is only an approximation based upon empirical evidence. Their definitions are entirely different. A duration is a complete set of actual occasions, such that all the members are mutually contemporary one with the other. This property is expressed by the statement that the members enjoy ‘unison of immediacy.’ The completeness consists in the fact that no other actual occasion can be added to the set without loss of this unison of immediacy. Every occasion outside the set is in the past or in the future of some members of the set, and is contemporary with other members of the set. According as an occasion is in the past, or the future, of some members of a duration, the occasion is said to be in the past, or in the future, of that duration.

No occasion can be both in the past and in the future† of a duration. Thus a duration forms a barrier in the world between its past and its future. Any route of occasions, in which adjacent members are contiguous, and such that it includes members of the past, and members of the future, of a duration, must also include one or more members of that duration. This is the notion of a duration, which has already been explained (cf. Part II, Ch. IV, Sects. VIII and IX).

The definition of a strain-locus (cf. previous chapter) depends entirely on the geometrical elements which are the elements of geometric form in the objectification of a nexus including the experient occasion in question. These [492] elements are (i) a set of points, within the volume of the regional standpoint of the experient occasion, and (ii) the set of straight lines defined by all the pairs of these points. The set of points is the ‘seat’ of the strain; the set of straight lines is the set of ‘projectors.’ The complete region penetrated by the ‘projectors’ is the strain-locus. A strain-locus is bounded by two ‘flat’ three-dimensional surfaces. When some members of the seat have a special function in the strain-feeling, the projectors which join pairs of these points may define a subordinate region in the strain-locus; this subordinate region is termed the ‘focal region.’

The strain-loci in the present epoch seem to be confined to the contemporaries of their experient occasions. In fact ‘strain-loci’ occur as essential components for perception in the mode of presentational immediacy. In this mode of perception there is a unique strain-locus for each such experient. Rest and motion are definable by reference to real strain-loci, and to potential strain-loci. Thus the molecules, forming material bodies for which the science of dynamics is important, may be presumed to have unique strain-loci associated with their prehensions.

This recapitulation of the theories of durations and strain-loci brings out the entire disconnection of their definitions. There is no reason, derivable from these definitions, why there should be any close association between the strain-locus of an experient occasion and any duration including that occasion among its members. It is an empirical fact that mankind invariably conceives the presented world as consisting of such a duration. This is the contemporary world as immediately perceived by the senses. But close association does not necessarily involve unqualified identification. It is permissible, in framing a cosmology to accord with scientific theory, to assume that the associated pair, strain-locus and presented duration, do not involve one and the same extensive region. From the point of view of conscious per- [493] ception, the divergence may be negligible, though important for scientific theory.





The† notions which have led to the phraseology characterizing the ‘projected’ sensa as ‘secondary qualities’ arise out of a fundamental difference between ‘strain-loci’ and their associated ‘presented durations.’ A strain-locus is entirely determined by the experient in question. It extends beyond that experient indefinitely, although defined by geometrical elements entirely within the extensive region which is the standpoint of the experient. The ‘seat’ of the strain-locus, which is a set of points within this region, is sufficient to effect this definition of the complete strain-locus by the aid of the straight lines termed the ‘projectors.’ These straight lines are nexūs whose geometrical relations are forms ingredient in a strain-feeling with these nexūs as data. Presentational immediacy arises from the integration of a strain-feeling and a ‘physical purpose,’ so that, by the Category of Transmutation, the sensum involved in the ‘physical purpose’ is projected onto some external focal region defined by projectors.

It is to be noted that this doctrine of presentational immediacy and of the strain-locus entirely depends upon a definition of straight lines in terms of mere extensiveness. If the definition depends upon the actual physical occasions beyond the experient, the experient should find the actual physical structures of his environment a block, or an assistance, to his ‘projection’ to focal regions beyond them. The projection of sensa in presentational immediacy depends entirely upon the state of the brain and upon systematic geometrical relations characterizing the brain. How the brain is excited, whether by visual stimuli through the eye, or by auditory stimuli through the ear, or by the excessive consumption of alcohol, or by hysterical emotion, is completely indifferent; granted the proper excitement of the brain, the experient will per- [494] ceive some definite contemporary region illustrated by the projected sensa. The indifference of presentational immediacy to contemporary actualities in the environment cannot be exaggerated. It is only by reason of the fortunate dependence of the experient and of these contemporary actualities on a common past, that presentational immediacy is more than a barren aesthetic display. It does display something, namely, the real extensiveness of the contemporary world. It involves the contemporary actualities but only objectifies them as conditioned by extensive relations. It displays a system pervading the world, a world including and transcending the experient. It is a vivid display of systematic real potentiality, inclusive of the experient and reaching beyond it. In so far as straight lines can only be defined in terms of measurements, requiring particular actual occasions for their performance, the theory of geometry lacks the requisite disengagement from particular physical fact. The requisite geometrical forms can then only be introduced after examination of the particular actual occasions required for measurement. But the theory of ‘projection,’ explained above, requires that the definition of a complete straight line be logically prior to the particular actualities in the extensive environment. This requisite has been supplied by the preceding theory of straight lines (cf. Ch. III‡). The projectors do depend upon the one experient occasion. But even this dependence merely requires that component feelings of that occasion should participate in certain geometric elements, namely, a set of points, and the straight lines defined by them, among their data. Thus, according to this explanation, presentational immediacy is the mode in which vivid feelings of contemporary geometrical relations, with especial emphasis on certain ‘focal’ regions, enter into experience.

This doctrine is what common sense always assumes. When we see a coloured shape, it may be a real man, or a ghost, or an image behind a mirror, or a hallucination; [495] but whatever it be, there it is—exhibiting to us a certain region of external space. If we are gazing at a nebula, a thousand light-years away, we are not looking backward through a thousand years. Such ways of speaking are interpretative phrases, diverting attention from the primary fact of direct experience, observing the illumination of a contemporary patch of the heavens. In philosophy, it is of the utmost importance to beware of the interpretative vagaries of language. Further, the extent of the patch illuminated will depend entirely upon the magnifying power of the telescope used. The correlation of the patch, thus seen through the telescope, with a smaller patch, defined by direct ‘projection’ from the observer, is again a question of scientific interpretation. This smaller patch is what we are said to have seen ‘magnified’ by the use of the telescope. What we do see is the bigger patch, and we correlate it with the smaller patch by theoretical calculation. The scientific explanation neglects the telescope and the larger patch really seen, and considers them as merely instrumental intermediaries. It concentrates on the contemporary smaller patch, and finally deserts even that patch in favour of another region a thousand years in the past. This explanation is only one illustration of the way in which so-called statements of direct observation are, through and through, merely interpretative statements of simple direct experience. When we say that we have seen a man, we may mean that we have seen a patch which we believe to be a man. In this case, our total relevant experience may be more than that of bare sight. In Descartes' phraseology, our experience of the external world embraces not only an ‘inspectio’ of the ‘realitas objectiva’ in the prehensions in question, but also a ‘judicium’ which calls into play the totality of our experience beyond those prehensions. The objection to this doctrine of ‘presentational immediacy’—that it presupposes a definition of straight lines, freed from dependence on external actualities—has been removed by the production of such a definition in Ch. III.‡ [496] Of course the point of the definition is to demonstrate that the extensive continuum, apart from the particular actualities into which it is atomized, includes in its systematic structure the relationships of regions expressed by straight lines. These relationships are there for perception.





The Cartesian doctrine of the ‘realitas objectiva’ attaching to presentational immediacy is entirely denied by the modern doctrine of private psychological fields. Locke's doctrine of ‘secondary qualities’ is a halfway house to the modern position, and indeed so is Descartes' own position considered as a whole. Descartes' doctrine on this point is obscure, and is interpretable as according with that of the philosophy of organism. But Locke conceives the sensa as purely mental additions to the facts of physical nature. Both philosophers conceive the physical world as in essential independence of the mental world, though the two worlds have ill-defined accidental relationships. According to the philosophy of organism, physical and mental operations are inextricably intertwined; also we find the sensa functioning as forms participating in the vector prehensions of one occasion by another; and finally in tracing the origin of presentational immediacy, we find mental operations transmuting the functions of sensa so as to transfer them from being participants in causal prehensions into participants in presentational† prehensions. But throughout the whole story, the sensa are participating in nature as much as anything else. It is the function of mentality to modify the physical participation of eternal objects: the case of presentational prehensions is only one conspicuous example. The whole doctrine of mentality—from the case of God downwards—is that it is a modifying agency. But Descartes and Locke abandon the ‘realitas objectiva’ so far as sensa are concerned (but for Descartes, cf. Meditation I,† “it is certain all the same that the colours of [497] which this is composed are necessarily real”), and hope to save it so far as extensive relations are concerned. This is an impossible compromise. It was easily swept aside by Berkeley and Hume. (Cf. Enquiry, Sect. XII, Part I.† Hume,† with obvious truth, refers to Berkeley as the originator of this train of argument.) The modern doctrine of ‘private psychological fields’ is the logical result of Hume's doctrine, though it is a result which Hume ‘as an agent’ refused to accept. This modern doctrine raises a great difficulty in the interpretation of modern science. For all exact observation is made in these private psychological fields. It is then no use talking about instruments and laboratories and physical energy. What is really being observed are narrow bands of colour-sensa in the private psychological space of colour-vision. The impressions of sensation which collectively form this entirely private experience ‘arise in the soul from unknown causes.’ The spectroscope is a myth, the radiant energy is a myth, the observer's eye is a myth, the observer's brain is a myth, and the observer's record of his experiment on a sheet of paper is a myth. When,† some months later, he reads his notes to a learned society, he has a new visual experience of black marks on a white background in a new private psychological field. And again, these experiences arise in his soul ‘from unknown causes.’ It is merely ‘custom’ which leads him to connect his earlier with his later experiences.

All exact measurements are, on this theory, observations in such private psychological fields.

Hume himself ‘as an agent’ refused to accept this doctrine. The conclusion is that Hume's account of experience is unduly simplified. This is the conclusion adopted by the philosophy of organism.

But one important fact does emerge from the discussion: that all exact measurements concern perceptions in the mode of presentational immediacy; and that such observations purely concern the systematic geometric forms of the environment, forms defined by projectors [498] from the ‘seat’ of the strain and irrespective of the actualities which constitute the environment. The contemporary actualities of the world are irrelevant to these observations. All scientific measurements merely concern the systematic real potentiality out of which these actualities arise. This is the meaning of the doctrine that physical science is solely concerned with the mathematical relations of the world.

These mathematical relations belong to the systematic order of extensiveness which characterizes the cosmic epoch in which we live. The societies of enduring objects—electrons, protons, molecules, material bodies—at once sustain that order and arise out of it. The mathematical relations involved in presentational immediacy thus belong equally to the world perceived and to the nature† of the percipient. They are, at the same time, public fact and private experience.

The perceptive mode of presentational immediacy is in one sense barren. So far as—apart from symbolic transference—it discloses the contemporary world, that world, thus objectified, is devoid of all elements constitutive of subjective form, elements emotional, appreciative, purposive. The bonds of the objectified nexus only exhibit the definiteness of mathematical relations.

But in another sense this perceptive mode has overwhelming significance. It exhibits that complex of systematic mathematical relations which participate in all the nexūs of our cosmic epoch, in the widest meaning of that term. These relations only characterize the epoch by reason of their foundation in the immediate experience of the society of occasions dominating that epoch. Thus we find a special application of the doctrine of the interaction between societies of occasions and the laws of nature. The perceptive mode in presentational immediacy is one of the defining characteristics of the societies which constitute the nexūs termed material bodies. Also in some fainter intensity it belongs to the electromagnetic occasions in empty space. From the point of view of a [499] single experient, that mode discloses systematic relations which dominate the environment. But the environment is dominated by these relationships by reason of the experiences of the individual occasions constituting the societies.

It is by reason of this disclosure of ultimate system that an intellectual comprehension of the physical universe is possible. There is a systematic framework permeating all relevant fact. By reference to this framework the variant, various, vagrant, evanescent details of the abundant world can have their mutual relations exhibited by their correlation to the common terms of a universal system. Sounds differ qualitatively among themselves, sounds differ qualitatively from colours, colours differ qualitatively from the rhythmic throbs of emotion and of pain; yet all alike are periodic and have their spatial relations and their wave-lengths. The discovery of the true relevance of the mathematical relations disclosed in presentational immediacy was the first step in the intellectual conquest of nature. Accurate science was then born. Apart from these relations as facts in nature, such science is meaningless, a tale told by an idiot and credited by fools. For example, the conjecture by an eminent astronomer, based on measurements of photographic plates, that the period of the revolution of our galaxy of stars is about three hundred million years can only derive its meaning from the systematic geometrical relations which permeate the epoch. But he would have required the same reference to system, if he had made an analogous statement about the period of revolution of a child's top. Also the two periods are comparable in terms of the system.





Measurement depends upon counting and upon permanence. The question is, what is counted, and what is permanent? The things that are counted are the inches on a straight metal rod, a yard-measure. Also the thing [500] that is permanent is this yard-measure in respect both to its internal relations and in respect to some of its extensive relations to the geometry of the world. In the first place, the rod is straight. Thus the measurement depends on the straightness and not the straightness upon the measurement. The modern answer to this statement is that the measurement is a comparison of infinitesimals, or of an approximation to infinitesimals. The answer to this answer is that there are no infinitesimals, and that therefore there can be no approximation to them. In mathematics,† all phraseology about infinitesimals is merely disguised statement about a class of finites. This doctrine has been conclusive mathematical theory since the time of Weierstrass in the middle of the nineteenth century. Also all the contortions of curvature are possible for a segment between any end-points.

Of course, in all measurement there is approximation in our suppositions as to the yard-measure.† But it is approximation to straightness. Also having regard to the systematic geometry of straight lines, and to the type of approximation exhibited by the rod, the smaller the portion used, the more negligible are the percentage errors introduced by the defects from straightness. But unless the notion of straightness has a definite meaning in reference to the extensive relations, this whole procedure in practical measurement is meaningless. There is nothing to distinguish one contorted segment between end-points from another contorted segment between those end-points. One is no straighter than another. Also any percentage differences between their lengths can exist.

Again, the inches are counted because they are congruent and are end-on along the straight rod. No one counts coincident inches. The counting essentially is concerned with non-coincident straight segments. The numerical measure of length is the indication of the fact that the yard-measure is a straight rod divisible into thirty-six congruent inch-long segments.

[501] There is a modern doctrine that ‘congruence’ means the possibility of coincidence. If this be the case, then the importance of congruence would arise when the possibility is realized. Alternatively, the possibility could be of importance as a lure entering into the subjective aim. If the latter alternative were true, congruence would play its part in the form of a tendency of congruent bodies to coalesce, or to resist coalescence. In fact, there would be adversion to, or aversion from,† coalescence. Of course the suggestion is fantastic. Recurring to the former alternative, the importance of the thirty-six inches along the yard-measure depends on the fact that they are not coincident and, until the destruction of the rod, never will be coincident. There is a realized property of the rod that it is thirty-six inches in length. Thus although ‘coincidence’ is used as a test of congruence, it is not the meaning of congruence.

We must now consider the use of ‘coincidence’ as a test. Congruence is tested either by the transference of a steel yard-measure from coincidence with one body to coincidence with another body, or by some optical means dependent on the use of an optical instrument and on the congruence of successive wave-lengths† in a train of waves, or by some other vibratory device dependent on analogous principles.

It is at once evident that all these tests are† dependent on a direct intuition of permanence. This ‘permanence’ means ‘permanence in respect to congruence’† for the various instruments employed, namely, the yard-measure, or the optical instruments, or analogous instruments. For example, the yard-measure is assumed to remain congruent to its previous self, as it is transferred from one setting to another setting. It is not sufficient to intuit that it remains the same body. Substances that are very deformable preserve that sort of self-identity. The required property is that of self-congruence. Minute variations of physical conditions will make the rod vary slightly; also sense-perception is never absolutely exact. [502] But unless there be a meaning to ‘exactitude,’ the notions of a ‘slight variation’ and of a ‘slight defect from exactitude’ are nonsense. Apart from such a meaning the two occasions of the rod's existence are incomparable, except by another experiment depending upon the same principles. There can only be a finite number of such experiments; so ultimately we are reduced to these direct judgments.

However far the testing of instruments and the corrections for changes of physical factors, such as temperature, are carried, there is always a final dependence upon direct intuitions that relevant circumstances are unchanged. Instruments are used from minute to minute, from hour to hour, and from day to day, with the sole guarantee of antecedent tests and of the appearance of invariability of relevant circumstances.

This ‘appearance’ is always a perception in the mode of presentational immediacy. If such perception be in any sense ‘private’ in contradistinction to a correlative meaning for the term ‘public,’ then the perceptions, on which scientific measurement depends,† merely throw light upon the private psychology of the particular observer, and have no ‘public’ import.

Such a conclusion is so obviously inconsistent with our beliefs as to the intercommunication of real actualities in a public world, that it may be dismissed as a reductio ad absurdum, having regard to the groundwork of common experience which is the final test of all science and philosophy. A great deal of modern scientific philosophy consists in recurrence to the theory of ‘privacy’ when such statements seem to afford a short cut to simplicity of statement, and—on the other hand—of employment of the notion of observing a public world when that concept is essential for expressing the status of science in common experience. Science is either an important statement of systematic theory correlating observations of a common world, or is the daydream of a solitary intelligence with a taste for the daydream of publication. But [503] it is not philosophy to vacillate from one point of view to the other.





Finally, the† meaning of ‘congruence’ as a relation between two geometrical elements in a strain-locus must be considered. It will be sufficient to consider this meaning in reference to two segments of straight lines, and to treat all other meanings as derivative from this.

A strain-locus is defined by the ‘projectors’ which penetrate any one finite region within it. Such a locus is a systematic whole, independently of the actualities which may atomize it. In this it is to be distinguished from a ‘duration’ which does depend on its physical content. A strain-locus depends merely upon its geometrical content. This geometrical content is expressed by any adequate set of ‘axioms’ from which the systematic interconnections† of its included straight lines and points can be deduced. This conclusion requires the systematic uniformity of the geometry of a strain-locus, but refers to further empirical observation for the discovery of the particular character of this uniform system. For example, the question as to whether a complete straight line be a ‘closed’ serial locus of points or an ‘open’ serial locus, is entirely a question for such discovery. The only decision is to be found by comparing the rival theories in respect to their power of elucidating observed facts.

The only relevant properties of straight lines are (i) their completeness, (ii) their inclusion of points, (iii) their unique definition by any pair of included points, (iv) their possibility of mutual intersection in a single point. The additional axioms which express the systematic geometrical theory must not have reference to length or to congruence. For these notions are to be derived from the theory. Thus the axioms must have exclusive reference to the intersection of straight lines, and to their inclusion or exclusion of points indicated by the intersections of other lines. Such sets of axioms are [504] well known to mathematicians. There are many such sets which respectively constitute alternative geometrical theories. Also given one set of axioms constituting a definite geometrical theory, different sets of axioms can easily be obtained which are equivalent to each other in the sense that all the other sets can be deduced from any one of them. All such equivalent sets produce the same geometrical theory. Equivalent sets have their importance, but not for the present investigation. We can therefore neglect them, and different sets of axioms will mean sets of axioms which constitute incompatible geometrical theories.

There are many such sets, with a great variety of peculiar properties. There are, however, three such sets which combine a peculiar simplicity with a very general conformation to the observed facts. These sets give the non-metrical properties of the three geometrical theories respectively known to mathematicians as the theory of Elliptic Geometry, of Euclidean Geometry, and of Hyperbolic Geometry.* It will serve no purpose to give the three sets of axioms. But it is very easy to explain the main point of difference between the theories, without being led too far from the philosophical discussion.

In the first place, a definition of a ‘plane’ can be given which is common to all the three theories. The definition already given in Chapter III of this Part will suffice. But an alternative definition can be stated thus: If A, B, C be any three non-collinear points, and AB, BC, CA denote the three complete straight lines containing,† respectively, A and B, B and C, C and A, then the straight lines which respectively intersect both members of any pair of these three lines, not both lines at one of the corners A or B or C, pass through all the points constituting one plane, and all their incident points are incident in the plane.

Thus a plane is defined to be the locus of all the points incident in at least one of such a group of straight lines. The axioms are such that this definition is equivalent to [505] the definition in Chapter III. Also the axioms secure that any straight line, passing through two points in a plane, is itself† wholly incident in that plane. Also it follows from the definition of a plane that a line l and a point P, not incident in l, are coplanar.

The distinction between the three geometrical theories can now be explained by the aid of such a triplet, a point P, a line l not passing through P, and the plane π in which P and l are both incident. Consider all the lines through P and incident in the plane π. Then in the Elliptic Geometrical Theory, all these lines intersect the line l; in the Euclidean Geometrical Theory, all these lines intersect the line l, with the exception of one and only one line—the unique parallel to l through P; in the Hyperbolic Geometrical Theory the lines through P in the plane are divisible into two classes, one class consisting of the lines intersecting l, the other class consisting of the lines not intersecting l, and each class with an infinite number of members. Then it has been shown by Cayley and von Staudt1 that the congruence of segments and the numerical measures of the distances involved are definable. The simplest case is that of Euclidean Geometry. In that case the basic fact is that the opposite sides of parallelograms are equal. A further complication is required to define congruence between segments which are not parallel. But it would serve no purpose to enter into the detailed solutions of this mathematical problem.

But the illustration afforded by the particular case of the congruence of the opposite sides of parallelograms† enables the general principle underlying the notion of congruence to be explained. Two segments are congruent when there is a certain analogy between their functions in a systematic pattern of straight lines, which includes both of them.

The definition of this analogy is the definition of con- [506] gruence in terms of non-metrical geometry. It is possible to discover diverse analogies which give definitions of congruence which are inconsistent with each other. That definition which enters importantly into the internal constitutions of the dominating social entities is the important definition for the cosmic epoch in question.

Measurement is now possible throughout the extensive continuum. This measurement is a systematic procedure dependent on the dominant societies of the cosmic epoch. When one form of measurement has been given, alternative forms with assigned mathematical relations to the initial form can be defined. One such system is as good as any other, so far as mathematical procedure is concerned. The only point to be remembered is that each system of ‘coordinates’ must have its definable relation to the analogy which constitutes congruence.





Physical measurement is now possible. The modern procedure, introduced by Einstein, is a generalization of the method of ‘least action.’ It consists in considering any continuous line between any two points in the spatio-temporal continuum and seeking to express the physical properties of the field as an integral along it. The measurements which are presupposed are the geometrical measurements constituting the coordinates of the various points involved. Various physical quantities enter as the ‘constants’ involved in the algebraic functions concerned. These constants depend on the actual occasions which atomize the extensive continuum. The physical properties of the medium are expressed by various conditions satisfied by this integral.

It is usual to term an ‘infinitesimal’ element of this integral by the name of an element of distance. But this name, though satisfactory as a technical phraseology, is entirely misleading. There can be no theory of the congruence of different elements of the path. The notion of coincidence does not apply. There is no systematic [507] theory possible, since the so-called ‘infinitesimal’ distance depends on the actual entities throughout the environment. The only way of expressing such so-called distance is to make use of the presupposed geometrical measurements. The mistake arises because, unconsciously, the minds of physicists are infected by a presupposition which comes down from Aristotle through Kant. Aristotle placed ‘quantity’ among his categories, and did not distinguish between extensive quantity and intensive quantity. Kant made this distinction, but considered both of them as categoreal notions. It follows from Cayley's and von Staudt's work (cf. loc. cit.) that extensive quantity is a construct. The current physical theory presupposes a comparison of so-called lengths among segments without any theory as to the basis on which this comparison is to be made, and in ignoration of the fact that all exact observation belongs to the mode of presentational immediacy. Further, the fact is neglected that there are no infinitesimals, and that a comparison of finite segments is thus required. For this reason, it would be better—so far as explanation is concerned—to abandon the term ‘distance’ for this integral, and to call it by some such name as ‘impetus,’ suggestive of its physical import.2

It is to be noted, however, that the conclusions of this discussion involve no objection to the modern treatment of ultimate physical laws in the guise of a problem in differential geometry. The integral impetus is an extensive quantity, a ‘length.’ The differential element of impetus is the differential element of systematic length weighted with the individual peculiarities of its relevant environment. The whole theory of the physical field is the interweaving of the individual peculiarities of actual occasions upon the background of systematic geometry. This systematic geometry expresses the most general ‘substantial form’ inherited throughout the vast cosmic society which [508] constitutes the primary real potentiality conditioning concrescence.3 In this doctrine, the organic philosophy is very near to the philosophy of Descartes.

The whole argument can be summarized thus:

Actual occasions are immovable, so that the doctrine of coincidence is nonsense.

Extensive quantity is a logical construct, expressing the number of congruent units which are (a) non-overlapping, and (b) exhaustive of the nexus in question.

Congruence is only definable as a certain definite analogy of function in a systematic complex which embraces both congruent elements.

That all experimental measurement involves ultimate intuitions of congruence between earlier and later states of the instruments employed.

That all exact observation is made by perception in the mode of presentational immediacy.

That if such perception merely concerns a private psychological field, science is the daydream of an individual without any public import.

That perception in the mode of presentational immediacy solely depends upon the ‘withness’ of the ‘body,’ and only exhibits the external contemporary world in respect to its systematic geometrical relationship to the ‘body.’

1Cf. Cayley's ‘Sixth Memoir On Quantics,” Transactions of the Royal Society, 1859; von† Staudt's Geometrie der Lage, 1847; and Beiträge zur Geometrie der Lage, 1856.

2Cf. my book, The Principle of Relativity, University Press, Cambridge, 1922.

3This theory of the derivation of the basic uniformity requisite for congruence, and thence for measurement, should be compared with that of two deeply interesting articles: (i) “The Theory of Relativity and The First Principles of Science,” and (ii) “The Macroscopic Atomic Theory,” Journal of Philosophy, Vol. XXV,† by Professor F. S. C. Northrop of Yale. I cannot adjust his doctrine of a ‘macroscopic atom’ to my cosmological outlook. Nor does this notion seem necessary if my doctrine of ‘microscopic atomic occasions’ be accepted. But Professor Northrop's theory does seem to be the only alternative if this doctrine be abandoned. I regret that the articles did not come under my notice till this work had been finally revised for publication.
