CHAPTER II



THE IDENTIFICATION

OF THE REAL


Newton’s Laws


We shall now take a closer look at the mechanistic world view as it emerged from the work of Galileo, Newton, and their successors. We wish to describe its strong points, the aspects of nature it has succeeded in clarifying, but we also want to expose its limitations.

Ever since Galileo, one of the central problems of physics has been the description of acceleration. The surprising feature was that the change undergone by the state of motion of a body could be formulated in simple mathematical terms. This seems almost trivial to us today. Still, we should remember that Chinese science, so successful in many areas, did not produce a quantitative formulation of the laws of motion. Galileo discovered that we do not need to ask for the cause of a state of motion if the motion is uniform, any more than it is necessary to ask the reason for a state of rest. Both motion and rest remain indefinitely stable unless something happens to upset them. The central problem is the change from rest to motion, and from motion to rest, as well as, more generally, all changes of velocity. How do these changes occur? The formulation of the Newtonian laws of motion made use of two converging developments: one in physics, Kepler’s laws for planetary motion and Galileo’s laws for falling bodies, and the other in mathematics, the formulation of differential or “infinitesimal” calculus.

How can a continuously varying speed be defined? How can we describe the instantaneous changes in the various quantities, such as position, velocity, and acceleration? How can we describe the state of a body at any given instant? To answer these questions, mathematicians have introduced the concept of infinitesimal quantities. An infinitesimal quantity is the result of a limiting process; it is typically the variation in a quantity occurring between two successive instants when the time elapsing between these instants tends toward zero. In this way the change is broken up into an infinite series of infinitely small changes.

At each instant the state of a moving body can be defined by its position r, by its velocity v, which expresses its “instantaneous tendency” to modify this position, and by its acceleration a, again its “instantaneous tendency,” but now to modify its velocity. Instantaneous velocities and accelerations are limiting quantities that measure the ratio between two infinitesimal quantities: the variation of r (or v) during a temporal interval Δt, and this interval Δt when Δt tends to zero. Such quantities are “derivatives with respect to time,” and since Leibniz they have been written as v = dr/dt and a = dv/dt. Therefore, acceleration, the derivative of a derivative, a = d2r/dt2, becomes a “second derivative.” The problem on which Newtonian physics concentrates is the calculation of this second derivative, that is, of the acceleration undergone at each instant by the points that form a system. The motion of each of these points over a finite interval of time can then be calculated by integration, by adding up the infinitesimal velocity changes occurring during this interval. The simplest case is when a is constant (for example, for a freely falling body a is the gravitational constant g). Generally speaking, acceleration itself varies in time, and the physicist’s task is to determine precisely the nature of this variation.

In Newtonian language, to study acceleration means to determine the various “forces” acting on the points in the system under examination. Newton’s second law, F = ma, states that the force applied at any point is proportional to the acceleration it produces. In the case of a system of material points, the problem is more complicated, since the forces acting on a given body are determined at each instant by the relative distances between the bodies of the system, and thus vary at each instant as a result of the motion they themselves produce.

A problem in dynamics is expressed in the form of a set of “differential” equations. The instantaneous state of each of the bodies in a system is described as a point and defined by means of its position as well as by its velocity and acceleration, that is, by the first and second derivatives of the position. At each instant, a set of forces, which is a function of the distance between the points in the system (a function of r), gives a precise acceleration to each point; the accelerations then bring about changes in the distances separating these points and therefore in the set of forces acting at the following instant.

While the differential equations set up the dynamics problem, their “integration” represents the solution of this problem. It leads to the calculation of the trajectories, r(t). These trajectories contain all the information acknowledged as relevant by dynamics; it provides a complete description of the dynamic system.

The description therefore implies two elements: the positions and velocities of each of the points at one instant, often called the “initial instant,” and the equations of motion that relate the dynamic forces to the accelerations. The integration of the dynamic equations starting from the “initial state” unfold the succession of states, that is, the set of trajectories of its constitutive bodies.

The triumph of Newtonian science is the discovery that a single force, gravity, determines both the motion of planets and comets in the sky and the motions of bodies falling toward the earth. Whatever pair of material bodies is considered, the Newtonian system implies that they are linked by the same force of attraction. Newtonian dynamics thus appears to be doubly universal. The definition of the law of gravity that describes how masses tend to approach one another contains no reference to any scale of phenomena. It can be applied equally well to the motion of atoms, of planets, or of the stars in a galaxy. Every body, whatever its size, has a mass and acts as a source of the Newtonian forces of interaction.

Since gravitational forces connect any two bodies (for two bodies of mass m and m′ and separated by a distance r, the gravitational force is kmm′/r2, where k is the Newtonian force of attraction equal to 6.67cm3g−1sec−2), the only true dynamic system is the universe as a whole. Any local dynamic system, such as our planetary system, can only be defined approximately, by neglecting forces that are small in comparison to those whose effect is being considered.

It must be emphasized that whatever the dynamic system chosen, the laws of motion can always be expressed in the form F=ma. Other types of forces apart from those due to gravity may be discovered (and actually have been discovered—for instance, electric forces of attraction and repulsion) and would thereby modify the empirical content of the laws of motion. They would not, however, modify the form of those laws. In the world of dynamics, change is identified with acceleration or deceleration. The integration of the laws of motion leads to the trajectories that the particles follow. Therefore the laws of change, of time’s impact on nature, are expressed in terms of the characteristics of trajectories.

The basic characteristics of trajectories are lawfulness, determinism, and reversibility. We have seen that in order to calculate a trajectory we need, in addition to our knowledge of the laws of motion, an empirical definition of a single instantaneous state of the system. The general law then deduces from this “initial state” the series of states the system passes through as time progresses, just as logic deduces a conclusion from basic premises. The remarkable feature is that once the forces are known, any single state is sufficient to define the system completely, not only its future but also its past. At each instant, therefore, everything is given. Dynamics defines all states as equivalent: each of them allows all the others to be calculated along with the trajectory which connects all states, be they in the past or the future.

“Everything is given.” This conclusion of classical dynamics, which Bergson repeatedly emphasized, characterizes the reality that dynamics describes. Everything is given, but everything is also possible. A being who has the power to control a dynamic system may calculate the right initial state in such a way that the system “spontaneously” reaches any chosen state at some chosen time. The generality of dynamic laws is matched by the arbitrariness of the initial conditions.

The reversibility of a dynamic trajectory was explicitly stated by all the founders of dynamics. For instance, when Galileo or Huyghens described the implications of the equivalence between cause and effect postulated as the basis of their mathematization of motion, they staged thought experiments such as an elastic ball bouncing on the ground. As the result of its instantaneous velocity inversion, such a body would return to its initial position. Dynamics assigns this property of reversibility to all dynamic changes. This early “thought experiment” illustrates a general mathematical property of dynamic equations. The structure of these equations implies that if the velocities of all the points of a system are reversed, the system will go “backward in time.” The system would retrace all the states it went through during the previous change. Dynamics defines as mathematically equivalent changes such as t → –t, time inversion, and v → – v, velocity reversal. What one dynamic change has achieved, another change, defined by velocity inversion, can undo, and in this way exactly restore the original conditions.

This property of reversibility in dynamics leads, however, to a difficulty whose full significance was realized only with the introduction of quantum mechanics. Manipulation and measurement are essentially irreversible. Active science is thus, by definition, extraneous to the idealized, reversible world it is describing. From a more general point of view, reversibility may be taken as the very symbol of the “strangeness” of the world described by dynamics. Everyone is familiar with the absurd effects produced by projecting a film backward—the sight of a match being regenerated by its flame, broken ink pots that reassemble and return to a tabletop after the ink has poured back into them, branches that grow young again and turn into fresh shoots. In the world of classical dynamics, such events are considered to be just as likely as the normal ones.

We are so accustomed to the laws of classical dynamics that are taught to us early in school that we often fail to sense the boldness of the assumptions on which they are based. A world in which all trajectories are reversible is a strange world indeed. Another astonishing assumption is that of the complete independence of initial conditions from the laws of motion. It is possible to take a stone and throw it with some initial velocity limited only by one’s physical strength, but what about a complex system such as a gas formed by many particles? It is obvious that we can no longer impose arbitrary initial conditions. The initial conditions must be the outcome of the dynamic evolution itself. This is an important point to which we shall come back in the third part of this book. But whatever its limitations, today, three centuries later, we can only admire the logical coherence and the power of the methods discovered by the founders of classical dynamics.





Motion and Change


Aristotle made time the measure of change. But he was fully aware of the qualitative multiplicity of change in nature. Still there is only one type of change surviving in dynamics, one “process,” and that is motion. The qualitative diversity of changes in nature is reduced to the study of the relative displacement of material bodies. Time is a parameter in terms of which these displacements may be described. In this way space and time are inextricably tied together in the world of classical dynamics. (Also see Chapter IX.)

It is interesting to compare dynamic change with the atomists’ conception of change, which enjoyed considerable favor at the time Newton formulated his laws. Actually, it seems that not only Descartes, Gassendi, and d’Alembert, but even Newton himself believed that collisions between hard atoms were the ultimate, and perhaps the only, sources of changes of motion.1 Nevertheless, the dynamic and the atomic descriptions differ radically. Indeed, the continuous nature of the acceleration described by the dynamic equations is in sharp contrast with the discontinuous, instantaneous collisions between hard particles. Newton had already noticed that, in contradiction to dynamics, an irreversible loss of motion is involved in each hard collision. The only reversible collision—that is, the only one in agreement with the laws of dynamics—is the “elastic,” momentum-conserving collision. But how can the complex property of “elasticity” be applied to atoms that are supposed to be the fundamental elements of nature?

On the other hand, at a less technical level, the laws of dynamic motion seem to contradict the randomness generally attributed to collisions between atoms. The ancient philosophers had already pointed out that any natural process can be interpreted in many different ways in terms of the motion of and collisions between atoms. This was not a problem for the atomists, since their main aim was to describe a godless, law less world in which man is free and can expect to receive neither punishment nor reward from any divine or natural order. But classical science was a science of engineers and astronomers, a science of action and prediction. Speculations based on hypothetical atoms could not satisfy its needs. In contrast, Newton’s law provided a means of predicting and manipulating. Nature thus becomes law-abiding, docile, and predictable, instead of being chaotic, unruly, and stochastic. But what is the connection between the mortal, unstable world in which atoms unceasingly combine and separate, and the immutable world of dynamics governed by Newton’s law, a single mathematical formula corresponding to an eternal truth unfolding toward a tautological future? In the twentieth century we are again witnessing the clash between lawfulness and random events, which, as Koyré has shown, had already tormented Descartes.2 Ever since the end of the nineteenth century, with the kinetic theory of gases, the atomic chaos has reintegrated physics, and the problem of the relationship between dynamic law and statistical description has penetrated to the very core of physics. It is one of the key elements in the present renewal of dynamics (see Book III).

In the eighteenth century, however, this contradiction seemed to produce a deadlock. This may partly explain the skepticism of some eighteenth-century physicists regarding the significance of Newton’s dynamic description. We have already noted that collisions may lead to a loss of motion. They thereby concluded that in such nonideal cases, “energy” is not conserved but is irreversibly dissipated (see Chapter IV, section 3). Therefore, the atomists could not help considering dynamics as an idealization of limited value. Continental physicists and mathematicians such as d’Alembert, Clairaut, and Lagrange resisted the seductive charms of Newtonianism for a long time.

Where do the roots of the Newtonian concept of change lie? It appears to be a synthesis3 of the science of ideal machines, where motion is transmitted without collision or friction between parts already in contact, and the science of celestial bodies interacting at a distance. We have seen that it appears as the very antithesis of atomism, which is based on the concept of random collisions. Does this, however, vindicate the view of those who believe that Newtonian dynamics represents a rupture in the history of thinking, a revolutionary novelty? This is what positivist historians have claimed when they described how Newton escaped the spell of preconceived notions and had the courage to infer from the mathematical study of planetary motions and the laws of falling bodies the action of a “universal” force. We know that on the contrary the eighteenth-century rationalists emphasized the apparent similarity between his “mathematical” forces and traditional occult qualities. Fortunately, these critics did not know the strange story behind the Newtonian forces! For behind Newton’s cautious declaration—“I frame no hypotheses”—concerning the nature of the forces lurked the passion of an alchemist.4 We now know that, side by side with his mathematical studies, Newton had studied the ancient alchemists for thirty years and had carried out painstaking laboratory experiments on ways of achieving the master work, the synthesis of gold.

Recently some historians have gone so far as to propose that the Newtonian synthesis of heaven and earth was the achievement of a chemist, not an astronomer. The Newtonian force “animating” matter and, in the stronger sense of the term, making up the very activity of nature would then be the inheritor of the forces Newton the chemist observed and manipulated, the chemical “affinities” forming and disrupting ever new combinations of matter.5 The decisive role played by celestial orbits of course remains. Still, at the start of his intense astronomical studies—about 1679—Newton apparently expected to find new forces of attraction only in the heavens, forces similar to chemical forces and perhaps easier to study mathematically. Six years later this mathematical study produced an unexpected conclusion: the forces between the planets and those accelerating freely falling bodies are not merely similar but are the same. Attraction is not specific to each planet; it is the same—for the moon circling the earth, for the planets, and even for comets passing through the solar system. Newton set out to discover in the sky forces similar to the chemical forces: the specific affinities, different for each chemical compound and giving each compound qualitatively differentiated activities. What he actually found was a universal law, which, as he emphasized, could be applied to all phenomena—whether chemical, mechanical, or celestial in nature.

The Newtonian synthesis is thus a surprise. It is an unexpected, staggering discovery that the scientific world has commemorated by making Newton the symbol of modern science. What is particularly astonishing is that the basic code of nature appeared to have been cracked in a single creative act.

For a long time this sudden loquaciousness of nature, this triumph of the English Moses, was a source of intellectual scandal for continental rationalists. Newton’s work was viewed as a purely empirical discovery that could thus equally well be empirically disproved. In 1747 Euler, Clairaut, and d’Alembert, without doubt some of the greatest scientists of the time, came to the same conclusion: Newton was wrong. In order to describe the moon’s motion, a more complex mathematical form must be given to the force of attraction, making it the sum of two terms. For the following two years, each of them believed that nature had proved Newton wrong, and this belief was a source of excitement, not of dismay. Far from considering Newton’s discovery synonymous with physical science itself, physicists were blithely contemplating dropping it altogether. D’Alembert went so far as to express scruples about seeking fresh evidence against Newton and giving him “le coup de pied de l’âne.”6

Only one courageous voice against this verdict was raised in France. In 1748, Buffon wrote:

A physical law is a law only by virtue of the fact that it is easy to measure, and that the scale it represents is not only always the same, but is actually unique.… M. Clairaut has raised an objection against Newton’s system, but it is at best an objection and must not and cannot become a principle; an attempt should be made to overcome it and not to turn it into a theory the entire consequences of which merely rest on a calculation; for, as I have said, one may represent anything by means of calculation and achieve nothing; and if it is allowed to add one or more terms to a physical law such as that of attraction, we are only adding to arbitrariness instead of representing reality.7



Later Buffon was to announce what was to become, although for only a short time, the research program for chemistry:

The laws of affinity by means of which the constituent parts of different substances separate from others to combine together to form homogeneous substances are the same as the general law governing the reciprocal action of all the celestial bodies on one another: they act in the same way and with the same ratios of mass and distance; a globule of water, of sand or metal acts upon another globule just as the terrestrial globe acts on the moon, and if the laws of affinity have hitherto been regarded as different from those of gravity, it is because they have not been fully understood, not grasped completely; it is because the whole extent of the problem has not been taken in. The figure which, in the case of celestial bodies has little or no effect upon the law of interaction between bodies because of the great distance involved, is, on the contrary, all important when the distance is very small or zero.… Our nephews will be able, by calculation, to gain access to this new field of knowledge [that is, to deduce the law of interaction between elementary bodies from their figures].8



History was to vindicate the naturalist, for whom force was not merely a mathematical artifice but the very essence of the new science of nature. The physicists were later compelled to admit their mistake. Fifty years afterward, Laplace could write his Système du Monde. The law of universal gravity had stood all tests successfully: the numerous cases apparently disproving it had been transformed into a brilliant demonstration of its validity. At the same time, under Buffon’s influence, the French chemists rediscovered the odd analogy between physical attraction and chemical affinity.9 Despite the sarcasms of d’Alembert, Condillac, and Condorcet, whose unbending rationalism was quite incompatible with these obscure and barren “analogies,” they trod Newton’s path in the opposite direction—from the stars to matter.

By the early nineteenth century, the Newtonian program—the reduction of all physicochemical phenomena to the action of forces (in addition to gravitational attraction, this included the repelling force of heat, which makes bodies expand and favors dissolution, as well as electric and magnetic forces)—had become the official program of Laplace’s school, which dominated the scientific world at the time when Napoleon dominated Europe.10

The early nineteenth century saw the rise of the great French écoles and the reorganization of the universities. This is the time when scientists became teachers and professional researchers and took up the task of training their successors.11 It is also the time of the first attempts to present a synthesis of knowledge, to gather it together in textbooks and works of popularization. Science was no longer discussed in the salons; it was taught or popularized.12 It had become a matter of professional consensus and magistral authority. The first consensus centered around the Newtonian system: in France Buffon’s confidence finally triumphed over the rational skepticism of the Enlightenment.

One century after Newton’s apotheosis in England, the grandiloquence of these lines written by Ampère’s son echoes that of Pope’s epitaph:13

Announcing the coming of science’s Messiah

Kepler had dispelled the clouds around the Arch.

Then the Word was made man, the Word of the seeing God

Whom Plato revered, and He was called Newton.

He came, he revealed the principle supreme,

Eternal, universal, One and unique as God Himself.

The worlds were hushed, he spoke: ATTRACTION.

This word was the very word of creation.*



For a short time, which nevertheless left an indelible mark, science was triumphant, acknowledged and honored by powerful states and acclaimed as the possessor of a consistent conception of the world. Worshiped by Laplace, Newton became the universal symbol of this golden age. It was a happy moment, indeed, a moment in which scientists were regarded both by themselves and others as the pioneers of progress, achieving an enterprise sustained and fostered by society as a whole.

What is the significance of the Newtonian synthesis today, after the advent of field theory, relativity, and quantum mechanics? This is a complex problem, to which we shall return. We now know that nature is not always “comfortable and consonant with herself.” At the microscopic level, the laws of classical mechanics have been replaced by those of quantum mechanics. Likewise, at the level of the universe, relativistic physics has displaced Newtonian physics. Classical physics nevertheless remains the natural reference point. Moreover, in the sense that we have defined it—that is, as the description of deterministic, reversible, static trajectories—Newtonian dynamics still may be said to form the core of physics.

Of course, since Newton the formulation of classical dynamics has undergone great changes. This was a result of the work of some of the greatest mathematicians and physicists, such as Hamilton and Poincaré. In brief, we may distinguish two periods. First there was a period of clarification and of generalization. During the second period, the very concepts upon which classical dynamics rests, such as initial conditions and the meaning of trajectories, have undergone a critical revision even in the fields in which (in contrast to quantum mechanics and relativity) classical dynamics remains valid. At the moment this book is being written, at the end of the twentieth century, we are still in this second period. Let us turn now to the general language of dynamics that was discovered by nineteenth-century scientists. (In Chapter IX we shall describe briefly the revival of classical dynamics in our time.)





The Language of Dynamics


Today classical dynamics can be formulated in a compact and elegant way. As we shall see, all the properties of a dynamic system can be summarized in terms of a single function, the Hamiltonian. The language of dynamics presents a remarkable consistency and completeness. An unambiguous formulation can be given to each “legitimate” problem. No wonder the structure of dynamics has both fascinated and terrified the imagination since the eighteenth century.

In dynamics the same system can be studied from different points of view. In classical dynamics all these points of view are equivalent in the sense that we can go from one to another by a transformation, a change of variables. We may speak of various equivalent representations in which the laws of dynamics are valid. These various equivalent representations form the general language of dynamics. This language can be used to make explicit the static character classical dynamics attributes to the systems it describes: for many classes of dynamic systems, time appears merely as an accident, since their description can be reduced to that of noninteracting mechanical systems. To introduce these concepts in a simple way, let us start with the principle of conservation of energy.

In the ideal world of dynamics, devoid of frictions and collisions, machines have an efficiency of one—the dynamic system comprising the machine merely transmits the whole of the motion it receives. A machine receiving a certain quantity of potential energy (for example, a compressed spring, a raised weight, compressed air) can produce a motion corresponding to an “equal” quantity of kinetic energy, exactly the quantity that would be needed to restore the potential energy the machine has used in producing the motion. The simplest case is that in which the only force considered is gravity (which applies to simple machines, pulleys, levers, capstans, etc.). In this case it is easy to establish an overall relationship of equivalence between cause and effect. The height (h) through which a body falls entirely determines the velocity acquired during its fall. Whether a body of mass m falls vertically, runs down an inclined plane, or follows a roller-coaster path, the acquired velocity (v) and the kinetic energy (mv2/2) depend only on the drop in level and enable the body to return to its original height. The work done against the force of gravity implied in this upward motion restores the potential energy, mgh, that the system lost during the fall. Another example is the pendulum, in which kinetic energy and potential energy are continuously transformed into one another.

Of course, if instead of a body falling toward the earth, we are dealing with a system of interacting bodies, the situation is less easily visualized. Still, at each instant the global variation in kinetic energy compensates for the variation in potential energy (bound to the variation in the distances between the points in the system). Here also energy is conserved in an isolated system.

Potential energy (or “potential,” conventionally denoted as V), which depends on the relative positions of the particles, is thus a generalization of the quantity that enabled builders of machines to measure the motion a machine could produce as the result of a change in its spatial configuration (for example, the change in the height of a mass m, which is part of the machine, gives it a potential energy mgh). Moreover, potential energy allows us to calculate the set of forces applied at each instant to the different points of the system to be described. At each point the derivative of the potential with respect to the space coordinate q measures the force applied at this point in the direction of that coordinate. Newton’s laws of motion thus can be formulated using the potential function instead of force as the main quantity: the variation in the velocity of a point mass at each instant (or the momentum p, the product of the mass and the velocity) is measured by the derivative of the potential with respect to the coordinate q of the mass.

In the nineteenth century this formulation was generalized through the introduction of a new function, the Hamiltonian (H). This function is simply the total energy, the sum of the system’s potential and kinetic energy. However, this energy is no longer expressed in terms of positions and velocities, conventionally denoted by q and dq/dt, but in terms of so-called canonical variables—coordinates and momenta—for which the standard notation is q and p. In simple cases, such as with a free particle, there is a straightforward relation between velocity and momentum (p = m dq/dt), but in general the relation is more complicated.

A single function, the Hamiltonian, H(p, q), describes the dynamics of a system completely. All our empirical knowledge is put into the form of H. Once this function is known, we may solve, at least in principle, all possible problems. For example, the time variation of the coordinate and of the momenta is simply given by the derivatives of H in respect to p or q. This Hamiltonian formulation of dynamics is one of the greatest achievements in the history of science. It has been progressively extended to cover the theory of electricity and magnetism. It has also been used in quantum mechanics. It is true that in quantum mechanics, as we shall see later, the meaning of the Hamiltonian H had to be generalized: here it is no longer a simple function of the coordinates and momenta, but it becomes a new kind of entity, an operator. (We shall return to this question in Chapter VII.) In any case, the Hamiltonian description is still of the greatest importance today. The equations which, through the derivatives of the Hamiltonian, give the time variation of the coordinates and momenta are the so-called canonical equations. They contain the general properties of all dynamic changes. Here we have the triumph of the mathematization of nature. All dynamic change to which classical dynamics applies can be reduced to these simple mathematical equations.

Using these equations, we can verify the above-mentioned general properties implied by classical dynamics. The canonical equations are reversible: time inversion is mathematically the equivalent of velocity inversion. They are also conservative: the Hamiltonian, which expressed the system’s energy in the canonical variables—coordinates and momenta—is itself conserved by the changes it brings about in the course of time.

We have already noticed that there exist many points of view or “representations” in which the Hamiltonian form of the equations of motion is maintained. They correspond to various choices of coordinates and momenta. One of the basic problems of dynamics is to examine precisely how we can select the pair of canonical variables q and p to obtain as simple a description of dynamics as possible. For example, we could look for canonical variables by which the Hamiltonian is reduced to kinetic energy and depends only on the momenta (and not on the coordinates). What is remarkable is that in this case momenta become constants of motion. Indeed, as we have seen, the time variation of the momenta depends, according to the canonical equation, on the derivative of the Hamiltonian in respect to the coordinates. When this derivative vanishes, the momenta indeed become constants of motion. This is similar to what happens in a “free particle” system. What we have done when we go to a free particle system is “eliminate” the interaction through a change of representation. We will define systems for which this is possible as “integrable systems.” Any integrable system may thus be represented as a set of units, each changing in isolation, quite independently of all the others, in that eternal and immutable motion Aristotle attributed to the heavenly bodies (Figure 1).



Figure 1. Two representations of the same dynamic system: (a) as a set of interacting points; the interaction between the points is represented by wavy lines; (b) as a set where each point behaves independently from the others. The potential energy being eliminated, their respective motions are not explicitly dependent on their relative positions.



We have already noted that in dynamics “everything is given.” Here this means that, from the very first instant, the value of the various invariants of the motion is fixed; nothing may “happen” or “take place.” Here we reach one of those dramatic moments in the history of science when the description of nature was nearly reduced to a static picture. Indeed, through a clever change of variables, all interaction could be made to disappear. It was believed that integrable systems, reducible to free particles, were the prototype of dynamic systems. Generations of physicists and mathematicians tried hard to find for each kind of systems the “right” variables that would eliminate the interactions. One widely studied example was the three-body problem, perhaps the most important problem in the history of dynamics. The moon’s motion, influenced by both the earth and the sun, is one instance of this problem. Countless attempts were made to express it in the form of an integrable system until, at the end of the nineteenth century, Bruns and Poincaré showed that this was impossible. This came as a surprise and, in fact, announced the end of all simple extrapolations of dynamics based on integrable systems. The discovery of Bruns and Poincaré shows that dynamic systems are not isomorphic. Simple, integrable systems can indeed be reduced to noninteracting units, but in general, interactions cannot be eliminated. Although this discovery was not clearly understood at the time, it implied the demise of the conviction that the dynamic world is homogeneous, reducible to the concept of integrable systems. Nature as an evolving, interactive multiplicity thus resisted its reduction to a timeless and universal scheme.

There were other indications pointing in the same direction. We have mentioned that trajectories correspond to deterministic laws; once an initial state is given, the dynamic laws of motion permit the calculation of trajectories at each point in the future or the past. However, a trajectory may become intrinsically indeterminate at certain singular points. For instance, a rigid pendulum may display two qualitatively different types of behavior—it may either oscillate or swing around its points of suspension. If the initial push is just enough to bring it into a vertical position with zero velocity, the direction in which it will fall, and therefore the nature of its motion, are indeterminate. An infinitesimal perturbation would be enough to set it rotating or oscillating. (This problem of the “instability” of motion will be discussed fully in Chapter IX.)

It is significant that Maxwell had already stressed the importance of these singular points. After describing the explosion of gun cotton, he goes on to say:

In all such cases there is one common circumstance—the system has a quantity of potential energy, which is capable of being transformed into motion, but which cannot begin to be so transformed till the system has reached a certain configuration, to attain which requires an expenditure of work, which in certain cases may be infinitesimally small, and in general bears no definite proportion to the energy developed in consequence thereof. For example, the rock loosed by frost and balanced on a singular point of the mountain-side, the little spark which kindles the great forest, the little word which sets the world a fighting, the little scruple which prevents a man from doing his will, the little spore which blights all the potatoes, the little gemmule which makes us philosophers or idiots. Every existence above a certain rank has its singular points: the higher the rank, the more of them. At these points, influences whose physical magnitude is too small to be taken account of by a finite being, may produce results of the greatest importance. All great results produced by human endeavour depend on taking advantage of these singular states when they occur.14



This conception received no further elaboration owing to the absence of suitable mathematical techniques for identifying systems containing such singular points and the absence of the chemical and biological knowledge that today affords, as we shall see later, a deeper insight into the truly essential role played by such singular points.

Be that as it may, from the time of Leibniz’ monads (see the conclusion to section 4) down to the present day (for example, the stationary states of the electrons in the Bohr model—see Chapter VII), integrable systems have been the model par excellence of dynamic systems, and physicists have attempted to extend the properties of what is actually a very special class of Hamiltonian equations to cover all natural processes. This is quite understandable. The class of integrable systems is the only one that, until recently, had been thoroughly explored. Moreover, there is the fascination always associated with a closed system capable of posing all problems, provided it does not define them as meaningless. Dynamics is such a language; being complete, it is by definition coextensive with the world it is describing. It assumes that all problems, whether simple or complex, resemble one another since it can always pose them in the same general form. Thus the temptation to conclude that all problems resemble one another from the point of view of their solutions as well, and that nothing new can appear as a result of the greater or lesser complexity of the integration procedure. It is this intrinsic homogeneity that we now know to be false. Moreover, the mechanical world view was acceptable as long as all observables referred in one way or another to motion. This is no longer the case. For example, unstable particles have an energy that can be related to motion but that also has a lifetime that is a quite different type of observable, more closely related to irreversible processes, as we shall describe them in Chapters IV and V. The necessity of introducing new observables into the theoretical sciences was, and still is today, one of the driving forces that move us beyond the mechanical world view.





Laplace’s Demon


Extrapolations from the dynamic description discussed above have a symbol—the demon imagined by Laplace, capable at any given instant of observing the position and velocity of each mass that forms part of the universe and of inferring its evolution, both toward the past and toward the future. Of course, no one has ever dreamed that a physicist might one day benefit from the knowledge possessed by Laplace’s demon. Laplace himself only used this fiction to demonstrate the extent of our ignorance and the need for a statistical description of certain processes. The problematics of Laplace’s demon are not related to the question of whether a deterministic prediction of the course of events is actually possible, but whether it is possible in principle, de jure. This possibility seems to be implied in mechanistic description, with its characteristic duality based on dynamic law and initial conditions.

Indeed, the fact that a dynamic system is governed by a deterministic law, even though in practice our ignorance of the initial state precludes any possibility of deterministic predictions, allows the “objective truth” of the system as it would be seen by Laplace’s demon to be distinguished from empirical limitations due to our ignorance. In the context of classical dynamics, a deterministic description may be unattainable in practice; nevertheless, it stands as a limit that defines a series of increasingly accurate descriptions.

It is precisely the consistency of this duality formed by dynamic law and initial conditions that is challenged in the revival of classical mechanics, which we will describe in Chapter IX. We shall see that the motion may become so complex, the trajectories so varied, that no observation, whatever its precision, can lead us to the determination of the exact initial conditions. But at that point the duality on which classical mechanics was constructed breaks down. We can predict only the average behavior of bundles of trajectories.

Modern science was born out of the breakdown of the animistic alliance with nature. Man seemed to possess a place in the Aristotelian world as both a living and a knowing creature. The world was made to his measure. The first experimental dialogue received part of its social and philosophic justification from another alliance, this time with the rational God of Christianity. To the extent to which dynamics has become and still is the model of science, certain implications of this historical situation have persisted to our day.

Science is still the prophetic announcement of a description of the world seen from a divine or demonic point of view. It is the science of Newton, the new Moses to whom the truth of the world was unveiled; it is a revealed science that seems alien to any social and historical context identifying it as the result of the activity of human society. This type of inspired discourse is found throughout the history of physics. It has accompanied each conceptual innovation, each occasion at which physics seemed at the point of unification and the prudent mask of positivism was dropped. Each time physicists repeated what Ampère’s son stated so explicitly: this word—universal attraction, energy, field theory, or elementary particles—is the word of creation. Each time—in Laplace’s time, at the end of the nineteenth century, or even today—physicists announced that physics was a closed book or about to become so. There was only one final stronghold where nature continued to resist, the fall of which would leave it defenseless, conquered, and subdued by our knowledge. They were thus unwittingly repeating the ritual of the ancient faith. They were announcing the coming of the new Moses, and with him a new Messianic period in science.

Some might wish to disregard this prophetic claim, this somewhat naïve enthusiasm, and it is certainly true that dialogue with nature has gone on all the same, together with a search for new theoretical languages, new questions, and new answers. But we do not accept a rigid separation between the scientist’s “actual” work and the way he judges, interprets, and orientates this work. To accept it would be to reduce science to an ahistorical accumulation of results and to pay no attention to what scientists are looking for, the ideal knowledge they try to attain, the reasons why they occasionally quarrel or remain unable to communicate with each other.15

Once again, it was Einstein who formulated the enigma produced by the myth of modern science. He has stated that the miracle, the only truly astonishing feature, is that science exists at all, that we find a convergence between nature and the human mind. Similarly, when, at the end of the nineteenth century, du Bois Reymond made Laplace’s demon the very incarnation of the logic of modern science, he added, “Ignoramus, ignorabimus”: we shall always be totally ignorant of the relationship between the world of science and the mind which knows, perceives, and creates this science.16

Nature speaks with a thousand voices, and we have only begun to listen. Nevertheless, for nearly two centuries Laplace’s demon has plagued our imagination, bringing a nightmare in which all things are insignificant. If it were really true that the world is such that a demon—a being that is, after all, like us, possessing the same science, but endowed with sharper senses and greater powers of calculation—could, starting from the observation of an instantaneous state, calculate its future and past, if nothing qualitatively differentiates the simple systems we can describe from the more complex ones for which a demon is needed, then the world is nothing but an immense tautology. This is the challenge of the science we have inherited from our predecessors, the spell we have to exorcise today.

__________________________

*Our translation—authors.





