CHAPTER IV



ENERGY AND THE

INDUSTRIAL AGE


Heat, the Rival of Gravitation


Ignis mutat res. Ageless wisdom has always linked chemistry to the “science of fire.” Fire became part of experimental science during the eighteenth century, starting a conceptual transformation that forced science to reconsider what it had previously rejected in the name of a mechanistic world view, topics such as irreversibility and complexity.

Fire transforms matter; fire leads to chemical reactions, to processes such as melting and evaporation. Fire makes fuel burn and release heat. Out of all this common knowledge, nineteenth-century science concentrated on the single fact that combustion produces heat and that heat may lead to an increase in volume; as a result, combustion produces work. Fire leads, therefore, to a new kind of machine, the heat engine, the technological innovation on which industrial society has been founded.1

It is interesting to note that Adam Smith was working on his Wealth of Nations and collecting data on the prospects and determinants of industrial growth at the same university at which James Watt was putting the finishing touches on his steam engine. Yet the only use for coal that Adam Smith could find was to provide heat for workers. In the eighteenth century, wind, water, and animals, and the simple machines driven by them, were still the only conceivable sources of power.

The rapid spread of the British steam engine brought about a new interest in the mechanical effect of heat, and thermodynamics, born out of this interest, was thus not so much concerned with the nature of heat as with heat’s possibilities for producing “mechanical energy.”

As for the birth of the “science of complexity,” we propose to date it in 1811, the year Baron Jean-Joseph Fourier, the prefect of Isère, won the prize of the French Academy of Sciences for his mathematical description of the propagation of heat in solids.

The result stated by Fourier was surprisingly simple and elegant: heat flow is proportional to the gradient of temperature. It is remarkable that this simple law applies to matter, whether its state is solid, liquid, or gaseous. Moreover, it remains valid whatever the chemical composition of the body is, whether it is iron or gold. It is only the coefficient of proportionality between the heat flow and the gradient of temperature that is specific to each substance.

Obviously, the universal character of Fourier’s law is not directly related to dynamic interactions as expressed by Newton’s law, and its formulation may thus be considered the starting point of a new type of science. Indeed, the simplicity of Fourier’s mathematical description of heat propagation stands in sharp contrast to the complexity of matter considered from the molecular point of view. A solid, a gas, or a liquid are macroscopic systems formed by an immense number of molecules, and yet heat conductivity is described by a single law. Fourier formulated his result at the time when Laplace’s school dominated European science. Laplace, Lagrange, and their disciples vainly joined forces to criticize Fourier’s theory, but they were forced to retreat.2 At the peak of its glory, the Laplacian dream met with its first setback. A physical theory had been created that was every bit as mathematically rigorous as the mechanical laws of motion but that remained completely alien to the Newtonian world. From this time on, mathematics, physics, and Newtonian science ceased to be synonymous.

The formulation of the law of heat conduction had a lasting influence. Curiously, in France and Britain it was the starting point of different historical paths leading to our time.

In France, the failure of Laplace’s dream led to the positivist classification of science into the well-defined compartments introduced by Auguste Comte. The Comtean division of science has been well analyzed by Michel Serrès3—heat and gravity, two universals, coexist in physics. Worse, as Comte was to state later, they are antagonistic. Gravitation acts on an inert mass that submits to it without being affected by it in any other way than by the motion it acquires or transmits. Heat transforms matter, determines changes of state, and leads to a modification of intrinsic properties. This was, in a sense, a confirmation of the protest made by the anti-Newtonian chemists of the eighteenth century and by all those who emphasized the difference between the purely spatiotemporal behavior attributed to mass and the specific activity of matter. This distinction was used as a foundation for the classification of the sciences, all placed by Comte under the common sign of order—that is, of equilibrium. To the mechanical equilibrium between forces the positivist classification simply adds the concept of thermal equilibrium.

In Britain, on the other hand, the theory of heat propagation did not mean giving up the attempt to unite the fields of knowledge but opened a new line of inquiry, the progressive formulation of a theory of irreversible processes.

Fourier’s law, when applied to an isolated body with an un-homogeneous temperature distribution, describes the gradual onset of thermal equilibrium. The effect of heat propagation is to equalize progressively the distribution of temperature until homogeneity is reached. Everyone knew that this was an irreversible process; a century before, Boerhave had stressed that heat always spread and leveled out. The science of complex phenomena—involving interaction among a large number of particles—and the occurrence of temporal asymmetry thus were linked from the outset. But heat conduction did not become the starting point of an investigation into the nature of irreversibility before it was first linked with the notion of dissipation as seen from an engineering point of view.4

Let us go into some detail about the structure of the new “science of heat” as it took shape in the early nineteenth century. Like mechanics, the science of heat implied both an original conception of the physical object and a definition of machines or engines—that is, an identification of cause and effect in a specific mode of production of mechanical work.

The study of the physical processes involving heat entails defining a system, not, as in the case of dynamics, by the position and velocity of its constituents (there are some 1023 molecules in a volume of gas or a solid fragment of the order of a cm3), but by a set of macroscopic parameters such as temperature, pressure, volume, and so on. In addition, we have to take into account the boundary conditions that describe the relation of the system to its environment.

Let us consider specific heat, one of the characteristic properties of a macroscopic system, as an example. The specific heat is a measure of the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of a system by one degree while its volume or pressure is kept constant. To study the specific heat—for instance, at constant volume—the system must be brought into interaction with its environment; it must receive a certain amount of heat while at the same time its volume is kept constant and its pressure is allowed to vary.

More generally, a system may be subjected to mechanical action (for example, either the pressure or the volume may be fixed by using a piston device), thermal action (a certain amount of heat may be given to or removed from the system, or the system itself may be brought to a given temperature through heat exchange), or chemical action (a flux of reactants and reaction products between the system and the environment). As we have already mentioned, pressure, volume, chemical composition, and temperature are the classical physicochemical parameters in terms of which the properties of macroscopic systems are defined. Thermodynamics is the science of the correlation among the variations in these properties. In comparison with dynamic objects, thermodynamic objects therefore lead to a new point of view. The aim of the theory is not to predict the changes in the system in terms of the interactions among particles; it aims instead to predict how the system will react to modifications we may impose on it from the outside.

A mechanical engine gives back in the form of work the potential energy it has received from the outside world. Both cause and effect are of the same nature and, at least ideally, equivalent. In contrast, the heat engine implies material changes of states, including the transformation of the system’s mechanical properties, dilatation, and expansion. The mechanical work produced must be seen as the result of a true process of transformation and not only as a transmission of movement. Thus the heat engine is not merely a passive device; strictly speaking, it produces motion. This is the origin of a new problem: in order to restore the system’s capacity to produce motion, the system must be brought back to its initial state. Thus a second process is needed, a second change of state that compensates for the change producing the motion. In a heat engine, this second process, which is opposite to the first, involves cooling the system until it regains its initial temperature, pressure, and volume.

The problem of the efficiency of heat engines, of the ratio between the work done and the heat that must be supplied to the system to produce the two mutually compensating processes, is the very point at which the concept of irreversible process was introduced into physics. We shall return to the importance of Fourier’s law in this context. Let us first describe the essential role played by the principle of energy conservation.





The Principle of the Conservation of Energy


We have already emphasized the central place of energy in classical dynamics. The Hamiltonian (the sum of the kinetic and potential energies) is expressed in terms of canonical variables—coordinates and momenta—and leads to changes in these variables while itself remaining constant throughout the motion. Dynamic change merely modifies the respective importance of potential and kinetic energy, conserving their totality.

The early nineteenth century was characterized by unprecedented experimental ferment.5 Physicists realized that motion does more than bring about changes in the relative position of bodies in space. New processes identified in the laboratories gradually formed a network that ultimately linked all the new fields of physics with other, more traditional branches, such as mechanics. One of these connections was accidentally discovered by Galvani. Before him, only static electric charges were known. Galvani, using a frog’s body, set up the first experimental electric current. Volta soon recognized that the “galvanic” contractions in the frog were actually the effect of an electric current passing through it. In 1800, Volta constructed a chemical battery; electricity could thus be produced by chemical reactions. Then came electrolysis: electric current can modify chemical affinities and produce chemical reactions. But this current can also produce light and heat; and, in 1820, Oersted discovered the magnetic effects produced by electrical currents. In 1822, Seebeck showed that, inversely, heat could produce electricity and, in 1834, how matter could be cooled by electricity. Then, in 1831, Faraday induced an electric current by means of magnetic effects. A whole network of new effects was gradually uncovered. The scientific horizon was expanding at an unprecedented rate.

In 1847 a decisive step was taken by Joule: the links among chemistry, the science of heat, electricity, magnetism, and biology were recognized as a “conversion.” The idea of conversion, which postulates that “something” is quantitatively conserved while it is qualitatively transformed, generalizes what occurs during mechanical motion. As we have seen, total energy is conserved while potential energy is converted into kinetic energy, or vice versa. Joule defined a general equivalent for physicochemical transformations, thus making it possible to measure the quantity conserved. This quantity was later6 to become known as “energy.” He established the first equivalence by measuring the mechanical work required to raise the temperature of a given quantity of water by one degree. A unifying element had been discovered in the middle of a bewildering variety of new discoveries. The conservation of energy, throughout the various transformations undergone by physical, chemical, and biological systems, was to provide a guiding principle in the exploration of the new processes.

No wonder that the principle of the conservation of energy was so important to nineteenth-century physicists. For many of them it meant the unification of the whole of nature. Joule expressed this conviction in an English context:

Indeed the phenomena of nature, whether mechanical, chemical, or vital, consist almost entirely in a continual conversion of attraction through space, living force (N.B., kinetic energy) and heat into one another. Thus it is that order is maintained in the universe—nothing is deranged, nothing ever lost, but the entire machinery, complicated as it is, works smoothly and harmoniously. And though, as in the awful vision of Ezekiel, “wheel may be in the middle of wheel,” and everything may appear complicated and involved in the apparent confusion and intricacy of an almost endless variety of causes, effects, conversions, and arrangements, yet is the most perfect regularity preserved—the whole being governed by the sovereign will of God.7



The case of the Germans Helmholtz, Mayer, and Liebig—all three belonging to a culture that would have rejected Joule’s conviction on the grounds of strictly positivist practice—is even more striking. At the time of their discoveries, none of the three was, strictly speaking, a physicist. On the other hand, all of them were interested in the physiology of respiration. This had become, since Lavoisier, a model problem in which the functioning of a living being could be described in precise physical and chemical terms, such as the combustion of oxygen, the release of heat, and muscular work. It was thus a question that would attract physiologists and chemists hostile to Romantic speculation and eager to contribute to experimental science. However, judging from the account of how these three scientists came to the conclusion that respiration, and then the whole of nature, was governed by some fundamental “equivalence,” we may state that the German philosophic tradition had imbued them with a conception that was quite alien to a positivist position: without hesitation they all concluded that the whole of nature, in each of its details, is ruled by this single principle of conservation.

The case of Mayer is the most remarkable.8 As a young doctor working in the Dutch colonies in Java, he noticed the bright red color of the venous blood of one of his patients. This led him to conclude that, in a warm, tropical climate, the inhabitants need to burn less oxygen to maintain body temperature; this results in the bright color of their blood. Mayer went on to establish the balance between oxygen consumption, which is the source of energy, and the energy consumption involved in maintaining body temperature despite heat losses and manual work. This was quite a leap, since the color of the blood could as well be due to the patient’s “laziness.” But Mayer went further and concluded that the balance between oxygen consumption and heat loss was merely the particular manifestation of the existence of an indestructible “force” underlying all phenomena.

This tendency to see natural phenomena as the products of an underlying reality that remains constant throughout its transformations is strikingly reminiscent of Kant. Kant’s influence can also be recognized in another idea held by some physiologists, the distinction between vitalism as philosophical speculation and the problem of scientific methodology. For those physiologists, even if there was a “vital” force underlying the function of living beings, the object of physiology would nonetheless be purely physicochemical in nature. From the two points of view mentioned, Kantianism, which ratified the systematic form taken by mathematical physics during the eighteenth century, can also be identified as one of the roots of the renewal of physics in the nineteenth century.9

Helmholtz quite openly acknowledged Kant’s influence. For Helmholtz, the principle of the conservation of energy was merely the embodiment in physics of the general a priori requirement on which all science is based—the postulate that there is a basic invariance underlying natural transformations:

The problem of the sciences is, in the first place, to seek the laws by which the particular processes of nature may be referred to, and deduced from, general rules.

We are justified, and indeed impelled in this proceeding, by the conviction that every change in nature must have a sufficient cause. The proximate causes to which we refer phenomena may, in themselves, be either variable or invariable; in the former case the above conviction impels us to seek for causes to account for the change, and thus we proceed until we at length arrive at final causes which are unchangeable, and which therefore must, in all cases where the exterior conditions are the same, produce the same invariable effects. The final aim of the theoretic natural sciences is therefore to discover the ultimate and unchangeable causes of natural phenomena.10



With the principle of the conservation of energy, the idea of a new golden age of physics began to take shape, an age that would lead to the ultimate generalization of mechanics.

The cultural implications were far-reaching, and they included a conception of society and men as energy-transforming engines. But energy conversion cannot be the whole story. It represents the aspects of nature that are peaceful and controllable, but below there must be another, more “active” level. Nietzsche was one of those who detected the echo of creations and destructions that go far beyond mere conservation or conversion. Indeed, only difference, such as a difference of temperature or of potential energy, can produce results that are also differences.11 Energy conversion is merely the destruction of a difference, together with the creation of another difference. The power of nature is thus concealed by the use of equivalences. However, there is another aspect of nature that involves the boilers of steam engines, chemical transformations, life and death, and that goes beyond equivalences and conservation of energy.12 Here we reach the most original contribution of thermodynamics, the concept of irreversibility.





Heat Engines and the Arrow of Time


When we compare mechanical devices to thermal engines, for example, to the red-hot boilers of locomotives, we can see at a glance the gap between the classical age and nineteenth-century technology. Still, physicists first thought that this gap could be ignored, that thermal engines could be described like mechanical ones, neglecting the crucial fact that fuel used by the steam engine disappears forever. But such complacency soon became impossible. For classical mechanics the symbol of nature was the clock; for the Industrial Age, it became a reservoir of energy that is always threatened with exhaustion. The world is burning like a furnace; energy, although being conserved, also is being dissipated.

The original formulation of the second law of thermodynamics, which would lead to the first quantitative expression of irreversibility, was made by Sadi Carnot in 1824, before the general formulation of the principle of conservation of energy by Mayer (1842) and Helmholtz (1847). Carnot analyzed the heat engine, closely following the work of his father, Lazare Carnot, who had produced an influential description of mechanical engines.

The description of mechanical engines assumes motion as a given. In modern language this corresponds to conservation of energy and momentum. Motion is merely converted and transferred to other bodies. But the analogy between mechanical and thermal engines was a natural one for Sadi Carnot, since he assumed, with most of the scientists of his time, that heat as well as mechanical energy are conserved.

Water falling from one level to another can drive a mill. Similarly, Sadi Carnot assumed two sources, one of which gives heat to the engine system, and the other, at a different temperature, which absorbs the heat given by the former. It is the motion of the heat through the engine, between the two sources at different temperatures—that is, the driving force of fire—that will make the engine work.

Carnot repeated his father’s questions.13 Which machine will have the highest efficiency? What are the sources of loss? What are the processes whereby heat propagates without producing work? Lazare Carnot had concluded that in order to obtain maximum efficiency from a mechanical machine it must be built and made to function to reduce to a minimum shocks, friction, or discontinuous changes of speed—in short, all that is caused by the sudden contact of bodies moving at different speeds. In doing so he had merely applied the physics of his time: only continuous phenomena are conservative; all abrupt changes in motion cause an irreversible loss of the “living force.” Similarly, the ideal heat engine, instead of having to avoid all contacts between bodies moving at different speeds, will have to avoid all contact between bodies having different temperatures.

The cycle therefore has to be designed so that no temperature change results from direct heat flow-between two bodies at different temperatures. Since such flows have no mechanical effect, they would merely lead to a loss of efficiency.

The ideal Carnot cycle is thus a rather tricky device that achieves the paradoxical result of a heat transfer between two sources at different temperatures without any contact between bodies of different temperatures. It is divided into four phases. During each of the two isothermal phases, the system is in contact with one of the two heat sources and is kept at the temperature of this source. When in contact with the hot source, it absorbs heat and expands; when in contact with the cold source, it loses heat and contracts. The two isothermal phases are linked up by two phases in which the system is isolated from the sources—that is, heat no longer enters or leaves the system, but the temperature of the latter changes as a result, respectively, of expansion and compression. The volume continues to change until the system has passed from the temperature of one source to that of the other.



Figure 2. Pressure-volume diagram of the Carnot cycle: a thermodynamic engine, functioning between two sources, one “hot” at temperature TH, the other “cold” at temperature TL. Between state a and state b, there is an isothermal change: The system, kept at temperature TH, absorbs heat and expands. Between b and c, the system is kept expanding while in thermal isolation; its temperature goes down from TH to TL. Those two steps produce mechanical energy. Between c and d, there is a second isothermal change: the system is compressed and releases heat while being kept at temperature TL. Between d and a, the system, again isolated, is compressed while its temperature increases to temperature TH.



It is quite remarkable that this description of an ideal thermal engine does not mention the irreversible processes that are at the basis of its realization. No mention is made of the furnace in which the coal is burning. The model is only concerned with the effect of the combustion, which permits the maintenance of the temperature difference between the two sources.

In 1850, Clausius described the Carnot cycle from the new perspective provided by the conservation of energy. He discovered that the need for two sources and the formula for theoretical efficiency stated by Carnot express a specific problem with heat engines: the need for a process compensating for conversion (in the present instance, cooling by contact with a cold source) to restore the engine to its initial mechanical and thermal conditions. Balance relations expressing energy conversion are now joined by new equivalence relations between the effects of two processes on the state of the system, heat flux between the sources and conversion of heat into work. A new science, thermodynamics, which linked mechanical and thermal effects, came into being.

The work of Clausius explicitly demonstrated that we cannot use without restriction the seemingly inexhaustible energy reservoir that nature provides. Not all energy-conserving processes are possible. An energy difference, for instance, cannot be created without the destruction of an at least equivalent energy difference. Thus in the ideal Carnot cycle, the price for the work produced is paid by the heat, which is transferred from one source to the other. The outcome, as expressed by the mechanical work produced on one side, and the transfer of heat on the other, is linked by an equivalence. This equivalence is valid in both directions. By working in reverse, the same machine can restore the initial temperature difference while consuming the work produced. No heat engine can be constructed using a single source of heat.

Clausius was no more concerned than Carnot with the losses whereby all real engines have an efficiency lower than the ideal value predicted by the theory. His description, like that of Carnot, corresponds to an idealization. It leads to the definition of the limit nature imposes on the yield of thermal engines.

However, since the eighteenth century, the status of idealizations had changed. Based as it was on the principle of the conservation of energy, the new science claimed to describe not only idealizations, but also nature itself, including “losses.” This raised a new problem, whereby irreversibility entered physics. How does one describe what happens in a real engine? How does one include losses in the energy balance? How do they reduce efficiency? These questions paved the way to the second law of thermodynamics.





From Technology to Cosmology


As we have seen, the question raised by Carnot and Clausius led to a description of ideal engines that was based on conservation and compensation. In addition, it provided an opportunity for presenting new problems, such as the dissipation of energy. William Thomson, who had great respect for Fourier’s work, was quick to grasp the importance of the problem, and in 1852 he was the first to formulate the second law of thermodynamics.

It was Fourier’s heat propagation that Carnot had identified as a possible cause for the power losses in a heat engine. Carnot’s cycle, no longer the ideal cycle but the “real” cycle, thus became the point of convergence of the two universalities discovered in the nineteenth century—energy conversion and heat propagation. The combination of these two discoveries led Thomson to formulate his new principle: the existence in nature of a universal tendency toward the degradation of mechanical energy. Note the word “universal,” which has obvious cosmological connotations.

The world of Laplace was eternal, an ideal perpetual-motion machine. Since Thomson’s cosmology is not merely a reflection of the new ideal heat engine but also incorporates the consequences of the irreversible propagation of heat in a world in which energy is conserved. This world is described as an engine in which heat is converted into motion only at the price of some irreversible waste and useless dissipation. Effect-producing differences in nature progressively diminish. The world uses up its differences as it goes from one conversion to another and tends toward a final state of thermal equilibrium, “heat death.” In accordance with Fourier’s law, in the end there will no longer be any differences of temperature to produce a mechanical effect.

Thomson thus made a dizzy leap from engine technology to cosmology. His formulation of the second law was couched in the scientific terminology of his time: the conservation of energy, engines, and Fourier’s law. It is clear, moreover, that the part played by the cultural context was important. It is generally accepted that the problem of time took on a new importance during the nineteenth century. Indeed, the essential role of time began to be noticed in all fields—in geology, in biology, in language, as well as in the study of human social evolution and ethics. But it is interesting that the specific form in which time was introduced in physics, as a tendency toward homogeneity and death, reminds us more of ancient mythological and religious archetypes than of the progressive complexification and diversification described by biology and the social sciences. The return of these ancient themes can be seen as a cultural repercussion of the social and economic upheavals of the time. The rapid transformation of the technological mode of interaction with nature, the constantly accelerating pace of change experienced by the nineteenth century, produced a deep anxiety. This anxiety is still with us and takes various forms, from the repeated proposals for a “zero growth” society or for a moratorium on scientific research to the announcement of “scientific truths” concerning our disintegrating universe. Present knowledge in astrophysics is still scanty and very problematic, since in this field gravitational effects play an essential role and problems imply the simultaneous use of thermodynamics and relativity. Yet most texts in this field are unanimous in predicting final doom. The conclusion of a recent book reads:

The unpalatable truth appears to be that the inexorable disintegration of the universe as we know it seems assured, the organization which sustains all ordered activity, from men to galaxies, is slowly but inevitably running down, and may even be overtaken by total gravitational collapse into oblivion.14



Others are more optimistic. In an excellent article on the energy of the universe, Freeman Dyson has written:

It is conceivable however that life may have a larger role to play than we have yet imagined. Life may succeed against all of the odds in molding the universe to its own purpose. And the design of the inanimate universe may not be as detached from the potentialities of life and intelligence as scientists of the twentieth century have tended to suppose.15



In spite of the important progress made by Hawking and others, our knowledge of large-scale transformations in our universe remains inadequate.





The Birth of Entropy


In 1865, it was Clausius’ turn to make the leap from technology to cosmology. At the outset he merely reformulated his earlier conclusions, but in doing so he introduced a new concept, entropy. His first goal was to distinguish clearly between the concepts of conservation and of reversibility. Unlike mechanical transformations, where reversibility and conservation coincide, a physicochemical transformation may conserve energy even though it cannot be reversed. This is true, for instance, in the case of friction, in which motion is converted into heat, or in the case of heat conduction as it was described by Fourier.

We are already familiar with energy, which is a function of the state of a system—that is, a function dependent only on the value of the parameters (pressure, volume, temperature) by which that state may be defined.16 But we must go beyond the principle of energy conservation and find a way to express the distinction between “useful” exchanges of energy in the Carnot cycle and “dissipated” energy that is irreversibly wasted.

This is precisely the role of Clausius’ new function, entropy, generally denoted by S.

Apparently Clausius merely wished to express in a new form the obvious requirement that an engine return to its initial state at the end of its cycle. The first definition of entropy is centered on conservation: at the end of each cycle, whether ideal or not, the function of the system’s state, entropy, returns to its initial value. But the parallel between entropy and energy ends as soon as we abandon idealizations.17

Let us consider the variation of the entropy dS over a short time interval dt. The situation is quite different for ideal and real engines. In the first case, dS may be expressed completely in terms of the exchanges between the engine and its environment. We can set up experiments in which heat is given up by the system instead of flowing into the system. The corresponding change in entropy would simply have its sign changed. This kind of contribution to entropy, which we shall call deS, is therefore reversible in the sense that it can have either a positive or a negative sign. The situation is drastically different in a real engine. Here, in addition to reversible exchanges, we have irreversible processes inside the system, such as heat losses, friction, and so on. These produce an entropy increase or “entropy production” inside the system. This increase of entropy, which we shall call diS, cannot change its sign through a reversal of the heat exchange with the outside world. Like all irreversible processes (such as heat conduction), entropy production always proceeds in the same direction. In other words, diS can only be positive or vanish in the absence of irreversible processes. Note that the positive sign of diS is chosen merely by convention; it could just as well have been negative. The point is that the variation is monotonous, that entropy production cannot change its sign as time goes on.

The notations deS and diS have been chosen to remind the reader that the first term refers to exchanges (e) with the outside world, while the second refers to the irreversible processes inside (i) the system. The entropy variation dS is therefore the sum of the two terms deS and diS, which have quite different physical meanings.18

To grasp the peculiar feature of this decomposition of entropy variation into two parts, it is useful to apply our formulation to energy. Let us denote energy by E and variation over a short time dt by dE. Of course, we would still write that dE is equal to the sum of a term deE due to the exchanges of energy and a term diE linked to the “internal production” of energy. However, the principle of the conservation of energy states that energy is never “produced” but only transferred from one place to another. The variation in energy dE is then reduced to deE. On the other hand, if we take a nonconserved quantity, such as the quantity of hydrogen molecules contained in a vessel, this quantity may vary both as the result of adding hydrogen to the vessel or through chemical reactions occurring inside the vessel. But in this case, the sign of the “production” is not determined. Depending on the circumstances, we can produce or destroy hydrogen molecules by transferring hydrogen atoms to other chemical components. The peculiar feature of the second law is the fact that the production term diS is always positive. The production of entropy expresses the occurrence of irreversible changes inside the system.

Clausius was able to express quantitatively the entropy flow deS in terms of the heat received (or given up) by the system. In a world dominated by the concepts of reversibility and conservation, this was his main concern. Regarding the irreversible processes involved in entropy production, he merely stated the existence of the inequality diS/dt>0. Even so, important progress had been made, for, if we leave the Carnot cycle and consider other thermodynamic systems, the distinction between entropy flow and entropy production can still be made. For an isolated system that has no exchanges with its environment, the entropy flow is, by definition, zero. Only the production term remains, and the system’s entropy can only increase or remain constant. Here, then, it is no longer a question of irreversible transformations considered as approximations of reversible transformations; increasing entropy corresponds to the spontaneous evolution of the system. Entropy thus becomes an “indicator of evolution,” or an “arrow of time,” as Eddington aptly called it. For all isolated systems, the future is the direction of increasing entropy.

What system would be better “isolated” than the universe as a whole? This concept is the basis of the cosmological formulation of the two laws of thermodynamics given by Clausius in 1865:

Die Energie der Welt ist konstant.

Die Entropie der Welt strebt einem Maximum zu.19

The statement that the entropy of an isolated system increases to a maximum goes far beyond the technological problem that gave rise to thermodynamics. Increasing entropy is no longer synonymous with loss but now refers to the natural processes within the system. These are the processes that ultimately lead the system to thermodynamic “equilibrium” corresponding to the state of maximum entropy.

In Chapter I we emphasized the element of surprise involved in the discovery of Newton’s universal laws of dynamics. Here also the element of surprise is apparent. When Sadi Carnot formulated the laws of ideal thermal engines, he was far from imagining that his work would lead to a conceptual revolution in physics.

Reversible transformations belong to classical science in the sense that they define the possibility of acting on a system, of controlling it. The dynamic object could be controlled through its initial conditions. Similarly, when defined in terms of its reversible transformations, the thermodynamic object may be controlled through its boundary conditions: any system in thermodynamic equilibrium whose temperature, volume, or pressure are gradually changed passes through a series of equilibrium states, and any reversal of the manipulation leads to a return to its initial state. The reversible nature of such change and controlling the object through its boundary conditions are interdependent processes. In this context irreversibility is “negative”; it appears in the form of “uncontrolled” changes that occur as soon as the system eludes control. But inversely, irreversible processes may be considered as the last remnants of the spontaneous and intrinsic activity displayed by nature when experimental devices are employed to harness it.

Thus the “negative” property of dissipation shows that, unlike dynamic objects, thermodynamic objects can only be partially controlled. Occasionally they “break loose” into spontaneous change.

All changes are not equivalent for a thermodynamic system. This is the meaning of the expression dS = deS + diS. Spontaneous change toward equilibrium diS is different from the change deS, which is determined and controlled by a modification of the boundary conditions (for example, ambient temperature). For an isolated system, equilibrium appears as an “attractor” of nonequilibrium states. Our initial assertion may thus be generalized by saying that evolution toward an attractor state differs from all other changes, especially from changes determined by boundary conditions.

Max Planck often emphasized the difference between the two types of change found in nature. Nature, wrote Planck, seems to “favor” certain states. The irreversible increase in entropy diS/dt describes a system’s approach to a state which “attracts” it, which the system prefers and from which it will not move of its own “free will.” “From this point of view, Nature does not permit processes whose final states she finds less attractive than their initial states. Reversible processes are limiting cases. In them, Nature has an equal propensity for initial and final states; this is why the passage between them can be made in both directions.”20

How foreign such language sounds when compared with the language of dynamics! In dynamics, a system changes according to a trajectory that is given once and for all, whose starting point is never forgotten (since initial conditions determine the trajectory for all time). However, in an isolated system all nonequilibrium situations produce evolution toward the same kind of equilibrium state. By the time equilibrium has been reached, the system has forgotten its initial conditions—that is, the way it had been prepared.

Thus specific heat or the compressibility of a system in equilibrium are properties independent of the way the system has been set up. This fortunate circumstance greatly simplifies the study of the physical states of matter. Indeed, complex systems consist of an immense number of particles.* From the dynamic standpoint it is practically impossible to reproduce any state of such systems in view of the infinite variety of dynamic states that may occur.

We are now confronted with two basically different descriptions: dynamics, which applies to the world of motion, and thermodynamics, the science of complex systems with its intrinsic direction of evolution toward increasing entropy. This dichotomy immediately raises the question of how these descriptions are related, a problem that has been debated since the laws of thermodynamics were formulated.





Boltzmann’s Order Principle


The second law of thermodynamics contains two fundamental elements: (1) a “negative” one that expresses the impossibility of certain processes (heat flows from the hot source to the cold and not vice versa) and (2) a “positive,” constructive one. The second is a consequence of the first; it is the impossibility of certain processes that permits us to introduce a function, entropy, which increases uniformly for isolated systems. Entropy behaves as an attractor for isolated systems.

How could the formulations of thermodynamics be reconciled with dynamics? At the end of the nineteenth century, most scientists seemed to think this was impossible. The principles of thermodynamics were new laws forming the basis of a new science that could not be reduced to traditional physics. Both the qualitative diversity of energy and its tendency toward dissipation had to be accepted as new axioms. This was the argument of the “energeticists” as opposed to the “atomists,” who refused to abandon what they considered to be the essential mission of physics—to reduce the complexity of natural phenomena to the simplicity of elementary behavior expressed by the laws of motion.

Actually, the problems of the transition from the microscopic to the macroscopic level were to prove exceptionally fruitful for the development of physics as a whole. Boltzmann was the first to take up the challenge. He felt that new concepts had to be developed to extend the physics of trajectories to cover the situation described by thermodynamics. Following in Maxwell’s footsteps, Boltzmann sought this conceptual innovation in the theory of probability.

That probability could play a role in the description of complex phenomena was not surprising: Maxwell himself appears to have been influenced by the work of Quetelet, the inventor of the “average” man in sociology. The innovation was to introduce probability in physics not as a means of approximation but rather as an explanatory principle, to use it to show that a system could display a new type of behavior by virtue of its being composed of a large population to which the laws of probability could be applied.

Let us consider a simple example of the application of the concept of probability in physics. An ensemble composed of N particles is contained in a box divided into two equal compartments. The problem is to find the probability of the various possible distributions of particles between the compartments—that is, the probability of finding N1 particles in the first compartment (and N2 = N − N1 in the second).

Using combinatorial analysis, it is easy to calculate the number of ways in which each different distribution of N particles can be achieved. Thus if N = 8, there is only one way of placing the eight particles in a single half. There are, however, eight different ways of putting one particle in one half and seven in the other half, if we suppose the particles to be distinguishable, as is assumed in classical physics. Furthermore, equal distribution of the eight particles between the two halves can be carried out in 8!/4!4! = 70 different ways (where n! = 1·2·3 … (n−1)·n). Likewise, whatever the value of N, a number P of situations called complexions in physics may be defined, giving the number of ways of achieving any given distribution N1,N2. Its expression is P = N!/N1!N2!.

For any given population, the larger the number of complexions the smaller the difference between N1 and N2. It is maximum when the population is equally distributed over the two halves. Moreover, the larger the value of N, the greater the difference between the number of complexions corresponding to the different ways of distribution. For values of N of the order of 1023 values found in macroscopic systems, the overwhelming majority of possible distributions corresponds to the distribution N1 = N2 = N/2. For systems composed of a large number of particles, all states that differ from the state corresponding to an equal distribution are thus highly improbable.

Boltzmann was the first to realize that irreversible increase in entropy could be considered as the expression of a growing molecular disorder, of the gradual forgetting of any initial dissymmetry, since dissymmetry decreases the number of complexions when compared to the state corresponding to the maximum of P. Boltzmann thus aimed to identify entropy S with the number of complexions: entropy characterizes each macroscopic state in terms of the number of ways of achieving this state. Boltzmann’s famous equation S = k lg P† expresses this idea in quantitative form. The proportionality factor k in this formula is a universal constant, known as Boltzmann’s constant.

Boltzmann’s results signify that irreversible thermodynamic change is a change toward states of increasing probability and that the attractor state is a macroscopic state corresponding to maximum probability. This takes us far beyond Newton. For the first time a physical concept has been explained in terms of probability. Its utility is immediately apparent. Probability can adequately explain a system’s forgetting of all initial dissymmetry, of all special distributions (for example, the set of particles concentrated in a subregion of the system, or the distribution of velocities that is created when two gases of different temperatures are mixed). This forgetting is possible because, whatever the evolution peculiar to the system, it will ultimately lead to one of the microscopic states corresponding to the macroscopic state of disorder and maximum symmetry, since these macroscopic states correspond to the overwhelming majority of possible microscopic states. Once this state has been reached, the system will move only short distances from the state, and for short periods of time. In other words, the system will merely fluctuate around the attractor state.

Boltzmann’s order principle implies that the most probable state available to a system is the one in which the multitude of events taking place simultaneously in the system compensates for one another statistically. In the case of our first example, whatever the initial distribution, the system’s evolution will ultimately lead it to the equal distribution N1 = N2. This state will put an end to the system’s irreversible macroscopic evolution. Of course, the particles will go on moving from one half to the other, but on the average, at any given instant, as many will be going in one direction as in the other. As a result, their motion will cause only small, short-lived fluctuations around the equilibrium state N1 = N2. Boltzmann’s probabilistic interpretation thus makes it possible to understand the specificity of the attractor studied by equilibrium thermodynamics.

This is not the whole story, and we shall devote the third part of this book to a more detailed discussion. A few remarks suffice here. In classical mechanics (and, as we shall see, in quantum mechanics as well), everything is determined in terms of initial states and the laws of motion. How then does probability enter the description of nature? Here it is common to invoke our ignorance of the exact dynamic state of the system. This is the subjectivistic interpretation of entropy. Such an interpretation was acceptable when irreversible processes were considered to be mere nuisances corresponding to friction or, more generally, to losses in the functioning of thermal engines. But today the situation has changed. As we shall see, irreversible processes have an immense constructive importance: life would not be possible without them. The subjectivistic interpretation is therefore highly questionable. Are we ourselves merely the result of our ignorance, of the fact that we only observe macroscopic states.

Moreover, both in thermodynamics as well as in its probabilistic interpretation, there appears a dissymmetry in time: entropy increases in the direction of the future, not of the past. This seems impossible when we consider dynamic equations that are invariant in respect to time inversion. As we shall see, the second law is a selection principle compatible with dynamics but not deducible from it. It limits the possible initial conditions available to a dynamic system. The second law therefore marks a radical departure from the mechanistic world of classical or quantum dynamics. Let us now return to Boltzmann’s work.

So far we have discussed isolated systems in which the number of particles as well as the total energy are fixed by the boundary conditions. However, it is possible to extend Boltzmann’s explanation to open systems that interact with their environment. In a closed system, defined by boundary conditions such that its temperature T is kept constant by heat exchange with the environment, equilibrium is not defined in terms of maximum entropy but in terms of the minimum of a similar function, free energy: F=E–TS, where E is the energy of the system and T is the temperature (measured on the so-called Kelvin scale, where the freezing point of water is 273 K and its boiling point is 373 K).

This formula signifies that equilibrium is the result of competition between energy and entropy. Temperature is what determines the relative weight of the two factors. At low temperatures, energy prevails, and we have the formation of ordered (weak-entropy) and low-energy structures such as crystals. Inside these structures each molecule interacts with its neighbors, and the kinetic energy involved is small compared with the potential energy that results from the interactions of each molecule with its neighbors. We can imagine each particle as imprisoned by its interactions with its neighbors. At high temperatures, however, entropy is dominant and so is molecular disorder. The importance of relative motion increases, and the regularity of the crystal is disrupted; as the temperature increases, we first have the liquid state, then the gaseous state.

The entropy S of an isolated system and the free energy F of a system at fixed temperature are examples of “thermodynamic potentials.” The extremes of thermodynamic potentials such as S or F define the attractor states toward which systems whose boundary conditions correspond to the definition of these potentials tend spontaneously.

Boltzmann’s principle can also be used to study the coexistence of structures (such as the liquid phase and the solid phase) or the equilibrium between a crystallized product and the same product in solution. It is important to remember, however, that equilibrium structures are defined on the molecular level. It is the interaction between molecules acting over a range of the order of some 10−8 cm, the same order of magnitude as the diameter of atoms in molecules, that makes a crystal structure stable and endows it with its macroscopic properties. Crystal size, on the other hand, is not an intrinsic property of structure. It depends on the quantity of matter in the crystalline phase at equilibrium.





Carnot and Darwin


Equilibrium thermodynamics provides a satisfactory explanation for a vast number of physicochemical phenomena. Yet it may be asked whether the concept of equilibrium structures encompasses the different structures we encounter in nature. Obviously the answer is no.

Equilibrium structures can be seen as the results of statistical compensation for the activity of microscopic elements (molecules, atoms). By definition they are inert at the global level. For this reason they are also “immortal.” Once they have been formed, they may be isolated and maintained indefinitely without further interaction with their environment. When we examine a biological cell or a city, however, the situation is quite different: not only are these systems open, but also they exist only because they are open. They feed on the flux of matter and energy coming to them from the outside world. We can isolate a crystal, but cities and cells die when cut off from their environment. They form an integral part of the world from which they draw sustenance, and they cannot be separated from the fluxes that they incessantly transform.

However, it is not only living nature that is profoundly alien to the models of thermodynamic equilibrium. Hydrodynamics and chemical reactions usually involve exchanges of matter and energy with the outside world.

It is difficult to see how Boltzmann’s order principle can be applied to such situations. The fact that a system becomes more uniform in the course of time can be understood in terms of complexions; in a state of uniformity, when the “differences” created by the initial conditions have been forgotten, the number of complexions will be maximum. But it is impossible to understand spontaneous convection from this point of view. The convection current calls for coherence, for the cooperation of a vast number of molecules. It is the opposite of disorder, a privileged state to which only a comparatively small number of complexions may correspond. In Boltzmann’s terms, it is an “improbable” state. If convection must be considered a “miracle,” what then is there to say about life, with its highly specific features present in the simplest organisms?

The question of the relevance of equilibrium models can be reversed. In order to produce equilibrium, a system must be “protected” from the fluxes that compose nature. It must be “canned,” so to speak, or put in a bottle, like the homunculus in Goethe’s Faust, who addresses to the alchemist who created him: “Come, press me tenderly to your breast, but not too hard, for fear the glass might break. This is the way things are: something natural, the whole world hardly suffices what is, but what is artificial demands a closed space.” In the world that we are familiar with, equilibrium is a rare and precarious state. Even evolution toward equilibrium implies a world like ours, far enough away from the sun for the partial isolation of a system to be conceivable (no “canning” is possible at the temperature of the sun), but a world in which nonequilibrium remains the rule, a “lukewarm” world where equilibrium and nonequilibrium coexist.

For a long time, however, physicists thought they could define the inert structure of crystals as the only physical order that is predictable and reproducible and approach equilibrium as the only evolution that could be deduced from the fundamental laws of physics. Thus any attempt at extrapolation from thermodynamic descriptions was to define as rare and unpredictable the kind of evolution described by biology and the social sciences. How, for example, could Darwinian evolution—the statistical selection of rare events—be reconciled with the statistical disappearance of all peculiarities, of all rare configurations, described by Boltzmann? As Roger Caillois21 asks: “Can Carnot and Darwin both be right?”

It is interesting to note how similar in essence the Darwinian approach is to the path explored by Boltzmann. This may be more than a coincidence. We know that Boltzmann had immense admiration for Darwin. Darwin’s theory begins with an assumption of the spontaneous fluctuations of species; then selection leads to irreversible biological evolution. Therefore, as with Boltzmann, a randomness leads to irreversibility. Yet the result is very different. Boltzmann’s interpretation implies the forgetting of initial conditions, the “destruction” of initial structures, while Darwinian evolution is associated with self-organization, ever-increasing complexity.

To sum up our argument so far, equilibrium thermodynamics was the first response of physics to the problem of nature’s complexity. This response was expressed in terms of the dissipation of energy, the forgetting of initial conditions, and evolution toward disorder. Classical dynamics, the science of eternal, reversible trajectories, was alien to the problems facing the nineteenth century, which was dominated by the concept of evolution. Equilibrium thermodynamics was in a position to oppose its view of time to that of other sciences: for thermodynamics, time implies degradation and death. As we have seen, Diderot had already asked the question: Where do we, organized beings endowed with sensations, fit in an inert world subject to dynamics? There is another question, which has plagued us for more than a century: What significance does the evolution of a living being have in the world described by thermodynamics, a world of ever-increasing disorder? What is the relationship between thermodynamic time, a time headed toward equilibrium, and the time in which evolution toward increasing complexity is occurring?

Was Bergson right? Is time the very medium of innovation, or is it nothing at all?

__________________________

*Physical chemistry often employs Avogadro’s number—that is, the number of molecules in a “mole” of matter (a mole always contains the same number of particles, the number of atoms contained in one gram of hydrogen). This number is of the order of 6.1023, and it is the characteristic order of magnitude of the number of particles forming systems governed by the laws of classical thermodynamics.

†The logarithmic expression indicates that entropy is an additive quantity (S1+2 = S1 + S2), while the number of complexions is multiplicative (P1+2 = P1.P2).





