CHAPTER VII



REDISCOVERING TIME


A Change of Emphasis


Whitehead wrote that a “clash of doctrines is not a disaster, it is an opportunity.”1 If this statement is true, few opportunities in the history of science have been so promising: two worlds have come face to face, the world of dynamics and the world of thermodynamics.

Newtonian science was the outcome, the crowning synthesis of centuries of experimentation as well as of converging lines of theoretical research. The same is true for thermodynamics. The growth of science is quite different from the uniform unfolding of scientific disciplines, each in turn divided into an increasing number of watertight compartments. Quite the contrary, the convergence of different problems and points of view may break open the compartments and stir up scientific culture. These turning points have consequences that go beyond their scientific context and influence the intellectual scene as a whole. Inversely, global problems often have been sources of inspiration to science.

The clash of doctrines, the conflict between being and becoming, indicates that a new turning point has been reached, that a new synthesis is needed. Such a synthesis is taking shape today, every bit as unexpected as the preceding ones. We again find a remarkable convergence of research, all of which contributes to identifying the difficulties inherent in the Newtonian concept of a scientific theory.

The ambition of Newtonian science was to present a vision of nature that would be universal, deterministic, and objective inasmuch as it contains no reference to the observer, complete inasmuch as it attains a level of description that escapes the clutches of time.

We have reached the core of the problem. “What is time?” Must we accept the opposition, traditional since Kant, between the static time of classical physics and the existential time we experience in our lives? According to Carnap:

Once Einstein said that the problem of the Now worried him seriously. He explained that the experience of the Now means something special for man, something essentially different from the past and the future, but that this important difference does not and cannot occur within physics. That this experience cannot be grasped by science seemed to him a matter of painful but inevitable resignation. I remarked that all that occurs objectively can be described in science; on the one hand the temporal sequence of events is described in physics; and, on the other hand, the peculiarities of man’s experiences with respect to time, including his different attitude towards past, present and future, can be described and (in principle) explained in psychology. But Einstein thought that these scientific descriptions cannot possibly satisfy our human needs; that there is something essential about the Now which is just outside of the realm of science.2



It is interesting to note that Bergson, in a sense following an opposite road, also reached a dualistic conclusion (see Chapter III). Like Einstein, Bergson started with a subjective time and then moved to time in nature, time as objectified by physics. However, for him this objectivization led to a debasement of time. Internal existential time has qualitative features that are lost in the process. It is for this reason that Bergson introduced the distinction between physical time and duration, a concept referring to existential time.

But we cannot stop here. As J. T. Fraser says, “The resulting dichotomy between time felt and time understood is a hallmark of scientific-industrial civilization, a sort of collective schizophrenia.”3 As we have already emphasized, where classical science used to emphasize permanence, we now find change and evolution; we no longer see in the skies the trajectories that filled Kant’s heart with the same admiration as the moral law residing in him. We now see strange objects: quasars, pulsars, galaxies exploding and being torn apart, stars that, we are told, collapse into “black holes” irreversibly devouring everything they manage to ensnare.

Time has penetrated not only biology, geology, and the social sciences but also the two levels from which it has been traditionally excluded, the microscopic and the cosmic. Not only life, but also the universe as a whole has a history; this has profound implications.

The first theoretical paper dealing with a cosmological model from the point of view of general relativity was published by Einstein in 1917. It presented a static, timeless view of the universe, Spinoza’s vision translated into physics. But then comes the unexpected. It became immediately evident that there were other, time-dependent solutions to Einstein’s cosmological equations. We owe this discovery to the Russian astrophysicist A. Friedmann and the Belgian G. Lemaître. At the same time Hubble and his coworkers were studying the motions of galaxies, and they demonstrated that the velocity of distant galaxies is proportional to their distance from earth. The relation with the expanding universe discovered by Friedmann and Lemaître was obvious. Yet for many years physicists remained reluctant to accept such an “historical” description of cosmic evolution. Einstein himself was wary of it. Lemaître often said that when he tried to discuss with Einstein the possibility of making the initial state of the universe more precise and perhaps finding there the explanation of cosmic rays, Einstein showed no interest.

Today there is new evidence, the famous residual black-body radiation, the light that illuminated the explosion of the hyperdense fireball with which our universe began. The whole story appears as another irony of history. In a sense, Einstein has, against his will, become the Darwin of physics. Darwin taught us that man is embedded in biological evolution; Einstein has taught us that we are embedded in an evolving universe. Einstein’s ideas led him to a new continent, as unexpected to him as was America to Columbus. Einstein, like many physicists of his generation, was guided by a deep conviction that there was a fundamental, simple level in nature. Yet today this level is becoming less and less accessible to experiment. The only objects whose behavior is truly “simple” exist in our own world, at the macroscopic level. Classical science carefully chose its objects from this intermediate range. The first objects singled out by Newton—falling bodies, the pendulum, planetary motion—were simple. We know now, however, that this simplicity is not the hallmark of the fundamental: it cannot be attributed to the rest of the world.

Does this suffice? We now know that stability and simplicity are exceptions. Should we merely disregard the totalizing totalitarian claims of a conceptualization that, in fact, applies only to simple and stable objects? Why worry about the incompatibility between dynamics and thermodynamics?

We must not forget the words of Whitehead, words constantly confirmed by the history of science: a clash of doctrines is an opportunity, not a disaster. It has often been suggested that we simply ignore certain issues for practical reasons on the grounds that they are based on idealizations that are difficult to implement. At the beginning of this century, several physicists suggested abandoning determinism on the grounds that it was inaccessible in real experience.4 Indeed, as we have already emphasized, we never know the exact positions and velocities of the molecules in a large system; thus an exact prediction of the system’s future evolution is impossible. More recently, Brillouin hoped to destroy determinism by appealing to the commonsense truth that accurate prediction requires an accurate knowledge of the initial conditions and that this knowledge must be paid for; the exact prediction necessary to make determinism work requires that an “infinite” price be paid.

These objections, while reasonable, do not affect the conceptual world of dynamics. They shed no new light on reality. Moreover, the improvements in technology could bring us closer and closer to the idealization implied by classical dynamics.

In contrast, demonstrations of “impossibility” have a fundamental importance. They imply the discovery of an unexpected intrinsic structure of reality that dooms an intellectual enterprise to failure. Such discoveries will exclude the possibility of an operation that previously could have been imagined as feasible, at least in principle. “No engine can have an efficiency greater than one,” “no heat engine can produce useful work unless it is in contact with two sources” are examples of statements of impossibility which have led to profound conceptual innovations.

Thermodynamics, relativity, and quantum mechanics are all rooted in the discovery of impossibilities, of limits to the ambitions of classical physics. Thus they marked the end of an exploration that had reached its limits. But we can now see these scientific innovations in a different light, not as an end but a beginning, as the opening up of new opportunities. We shall see in Chapter IX that the second law of thermodynamics expresses an “impossibility,” even on the microscopic level, but even there the newly discovered impossibility becomes a starting point for the emergence of new concepts.





The End of Universality


Scientific description must be consistent with the resources available to an observer who belongs to the world he describes and cannot refer to some being who contemplates the physical world “from the outside.” This is one of the fundamental requirements of relativity theory. In connection with the propagation of signals a limit appears that cannot be transgressed by any observer. Indeed, c, the velocity of light in vacuum (c = 300,000 km/sec), is the limiting velocity for the propagation of all signals. Thus this limiting velocity plays a fundamental role. It limits the region in space that may influence the point where an observer is located.

There is no universal constant in Newtonian physics. This is the reason for its claim to universality, why it can be applied in the same way whatever the scale of the objects: the motion of atoms, planets, and stars are governed by a single law.

The discovery of universal constants signified a radical change. Using the velocity of light as the comparison standard, physics has established a distinction between low and high velocities, those approaching the speed of light.

Likewise, Planck’s constant, h, sets up a natural scale according to the object’s mass. The atom can no longer be regarded as a tiny planetary system. Electrons belong to a different scale than planets and all other heavy, slow-moving, macroscopic objects, including ourselves.

Universal constants not only destroy the homogeneity of the universe by introducing physical scales in terms of which various behaviors become qualitatively different, they also lead to a new conception of objectivity. No observer can transmit signals at a velocity higher than that of light in a vacuum. Hence Einstein’s remarkable conclusion: we can no longer define the absolute simultaneity of two distant events; simultaneity can be defined only in terms of a given reference frame. The scope of this book does not permit an extensive account of relativity theory. Let us merely point out that Newton’s laws did not assume that the observer was a “physical being.” Objective description was defined precisely as the absence of any reference to its author. For “nonphysical” intelligent beings capable of communicating at an infinite velocity, the laws of relativity would be irrelevant. The fact that relativity is based on a constraint that applies only to physically localized observers, to beings who can be in only one place at a time and not everywhere at once, gives this physics a “human” quality. This does not mean, however, that it is a “subjective” physics, the result of our preferences and convictions; it remains subject to intrinsic constraints that identify us as part of the physical world we are describing. It is a physics that presupposes an observer situated within the observed world. Our dialogue with nature will be successful only if it is carried on from within nature.





The Rise of Quantum Mechanics


Relativity altered the classical concept of objectivity. However, it left unchanged another fundamental characteristic of classical physics, namely, the ambition to achieve a “complete” description of nature. After relativity, physicists could no longer appeal to a demon who observed the entire universe from outside, but they could still conceive of a supreme mathematician who, as Einstein claimed, neither cheats nor plays dice. This mathematician would possess the formula of the universe, which would include a complete description of nature. In this sense, relativity remains a continuation of classical physics.

Quantum mechanics, on the other hand, is the first physical theory truly to have broken with the past. Quantum mechanics not only situates us in nature, it also labels us as “heavy” beings composed of a macroscopic number of atoms. In order to visualize more clearly the consequences of the velocity of light as a universal constant, Einstein imagined himself riding a photon. But quantum mechanics discovered that we are too heavy to ride photons or electrons. We cannot possibly replace such airy beings, identify ourselves with them, and describe what they would think, if they were able to think, and what they would experience, if they were able to feel anything.

The history of quantum mechanics, like that of all conceptual innovations, is complex, full of unexpected events; it is the history of a logic whose implications were discovered long after it was conceived in the urgency of experiment and in a difficult political and cultural environment.5 This history cannot be related here; we only wish to emphasize its role in the construction of the bridge from being to becoming, which is our main subject.

The birth of quantum mechanics was in itself part of the quest for this bridge. Planck was interested in the interaction between matter and radiation. Underlying his work was the ambition to accomplish for the matter-light interaction what Boltzmann had achieved for the matter-matter interaction, namely, to discover a kinetic model for irreversible processes leading to equilibrium.6 To his surprise, he was forced, in order to reach experimental results valid at thermal equilibrium, to assume that an exchange of energy between matter and radiation occurred only in discrete steps involving a new universal constant. This universal constant “h” measures the “size” of each step.

In this case, as in many others, the challenge of irreversibility led to decisive progress in physics.

This discovery remained isolated until Einstein presented the first general interpretation of Planck’s constant. He understood that it had far-reaching implications for the nature of light. He introduced a revolutionary concept: the wave-particle duality of light.

Since the beginning of the nineteenth century, light had been associated with wave properties manifest in phenomena such as diffraction or interference. However, at the end of the nineteenth century, new phenomena were discovered, notably the photoelectric effect—that is, the expulsion of electrons as the result of the absorption of light. These new experimental results were difficult to explain in terms of the traditional wave properties of light. Einstein solved the riddle by assuming that light may be both wave and particle and that these two aspects are related through Planck’s constant. More precisely, a light wave is characterized by its frequency v and its wavelength λ; h permits us to go from frequency and wavelength to mechanical quantities such as energy ε and momentum p. The relations between v and λ on the one side and ε and p on the other are very simple: ε = hv, p = h/λ, and both involve h. Twenty years later, Louis de Broglie extended this wave-particle duality from light to matter; thus the starting point for the modern formulation of quantum mechanics.

In 1913 Niels Bohr had linked the new quantum physics to the structure of atoms (and later of molecules). As a result of the wave-particle duality, he showed that there exist discrete sequences of electron orbits. When an atom is excited, the electron jumps from one orbit to another. At this very instant the atom emits or absorbs a photon the frequency of which corresponds to the difference between the energies characterizing the electron’s motion in each of the two orbits. This difference is calculated in terms of Einstein’s formula relating energy to frequency.

Thus we reach the decisive years 1925–27, a “golden age” of physics.7 During this short period, Heisenberg, Born, Jordan, Schrödinger, and Dirac made quantum physics into a consistent new theory. This theory incorporates Einstein’s and de Broglie’s wave-particle duality in the framework of a new generalized form of dynamics: quantum mechanics. For our purposes here, the conceptual novelty of quantum mechanics is essential.

First and foremost, a new formulation, unknown in classical physics, had to be introduced to allow “quantitization” to be incorporated into the theoretical language. The essential fact is that an atom can be found only in discrete energy levels corresponding to the various electron orbits. In particular, this means that energy (or the Hamiltonian) can no longer be merely a function of the position and the moment, as it is in classical mechanics. Otherwise, by giving the positions and moments slightly different values, energy could be made to vary continuously. But as observation reveals, only discrete levels exist.

We therefore have to replace the conventional idea that the Hamiltonian is a function of position and momenta with something new; the basic idea of quantum mechanics is that the Hamiltonian as well as the other quantities of classical mechanics, such as coordinates q or momenta p, now become operators. This is one of the boldest ideas ever introduced in science, and we would like to discuss it in detail.

It is a simple idea, even if at first it seems somewhat abstract. We have to distinguish the operator—a mathematical operation—and the object on which it operates—a function. As an example, take as the mathematical “operator” the derivative represented by d/dx and suppose it acts on a function—say, x2; the result of this operation is a new function, this time “2x.” However, certain functions behave in a peculiar way with respect to derivation. For example, the derivative of “e3x” is “3e3x”: here we return to the original function simply multiplied by some number—here, 3. Functions that are merely recovered by a given operator to them are known as the “eigenfunctions” of this operator, and the numbers by which the eigenfunction is multiplied after the application of the operator are the “eigenvalues” of the operator.

To each operator there thus corresponds an ensemble, a “reservoir” of numerical values; this ensemble forms its “spectrum.” This spectrum is “discrete” when the eigenvalues form a discrete series. There exists, for instance, an operator with all the integers 0, 1, 2 … as eigenvalues. A spectrum may also be continuous—for example, when it consists of all the numbers between 0 and 1.

The basic concept of quantum mechanics may thus be expressed as follows: to all physical quantities in classical mechanics there corresponds in quantum mechanics an operator, and the numerical values that may be taken by this physical quantity are the eigenvalues of this operator. The essential point is that the concept of physical quantity (represented by an operator) is now distinct from that of its numerical values (represented by the eigenvalues of the operator). In particular, energy will now be represented by the Hamiltonian operator, and the energy levels—the observed values of the energy—will be identified with the eigenvalues corresponding to this operator.

The introduction of operators opened up to physics a microscopic world of unsuspected richness, and we regret that we cannot devote more space to this fascinating subject, in which creative imagination and experimental observation are so successfully combined. Here we wish merely to stress that the microscopic world is governed by laws having a new structure, thereby putting an end once and for all to the hope of discovering a single conceptual scheme common to all levels of description.

A new mathematical language invented to deal with a certain situation may actually open up fields of inquiry that are full of surprises, going far beyond the expectations of its originators. This was true for differential calculus, which lies at the root of the formulation of classical dynamics. It is true as well for operator calculus. Quantum theory, initiated as demanded by the result of unexpected experimental discoveries, was quick to reveal itself as pregnant with new content.

Today, more than fifty years after the introduction of operators into quantum mechanics, their significance remains a subject of lively discussion. From the historical point of view, the introduction of operators is linked to the existence of energy levels, but today operators have applications even in classical physics. This implies that their significance has been extended beyond the expectations of the founders of quantum mechanics. Operators now come into play as soon as, for one reason or another, the notion of a dynamic trajectory has to be discarded, and with it, the deterministic description a trajectory implies.





Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Relation


We have seen that in quantum mechanics to each physical quantity corresponds an operator that acts on functions. Of special importance are the eigenfunctions and the eigenvalues corresponding to the operator under consideration. The eigenvalues correspond precisely to the numerical values the physical quantity can now take. Let us take a closer look at the operators quantum mechanics associates with coordinates q and momenta p; their coordinates are, as we have seen in Chapter II, the canonical variables.

In classical mechanics coordinates and momenta are independent in the sense that we can ascribe to a coordinate a numerical value quite independent of the value we have ascribed to the momentum. However, the existence of Planck’s constant h implies the reduction in the number of independent variables. We could have guessed this right away from the Einstein-de Broglie relation λ = h/p, which, as we have seen, connects wavelength to momentum. Planck’s constant h expresses a relation between lengths (closely related to the concept of coordinates) and momenta. Therefore, positions and momenta can no longer be independent variables, as in classical mechanics. The operators corresponding to positions and momenta can be expressed in terms of the coordinate alone or in terms of the momentum, something explained in all textbooks dealing with quantum mechanics.

The important point is that in all cases, only one type of quantity appears (either coordinate or momentum), but not both. In this sense we may say that the quantum mechanics divides the number of classical mechanical variables by a factor of two.

One fundamental property results from the relation between operators in quantum mechanics: the two operators qop and pop do not commute—that is, the results of qoppop and of popqop applied to the same function are different. This has profound implications, since only commuting operators admit common eigenfunctions. Thus we cannot identify a function that would be an eigenfunction of both coordinate and momentum. As a consequence of the definition of the coordinate and momentum operators in quantum mechanics, there can be no state in which the physical quantities, coordinate q and momentum p, both have a well-defined value. This situation, unknown in classical mechanics, is expressed by Heisenberg’s famous uncertainty relations. We can measure a coordinate and a momentum, but the dispersions of the respective possible predictions as expressed by Δq,Δp are related by the Heisenberg inequality ΔqΔp≥h. We can make Δq as small as we want, but then Δp goes to infinity, and vice versa.

Much has been written about Heisenberg’s uncertainty relations, and our discussion is admittedly oversimplified. But we wish to give our readers some understanding of the new problem that results from the use of operators: Heisenberg’s uncertainty relation necessarily leads to a revision of the concept of causality. It is possible to determine the coordinate precisely. But the moment we do so, the momentum will acquire an arbitrary value, positive or negative. In other words, in an instant the position of the object will become arbitrarily distant. The meaning of localization becomes blurred: the concepts that form the basis of classical mechanics are profoundly altered.

These consequences of quantum mechanics were unacceptable to many physicists, including Einstein; and many experiments were devised to demonstrate their absurdity. An attempt was also made to minimize the conceptual change involved. In particular, it was suggested that the foundation of quantum mechanics is in some way related to perturbations resulting from the process of observation. A system was thought to possess intrinsically well-defined mechanical parameters such as coordinates and momenta; but some of them would be made fuzzy by measurement, and Heisenberg’s uncertainty relation would only express the perturbation created by the measurement process. Classical realism thus would remain intact on the fundamental level, and we would simply have to add a positivistic qualification. This interpretation seems too narrow. It is not the quantum measurement process that disturbs the results. Far from it: Planck’s constant forces us to revise our concepts of coordinates and momenta. This conclusion has been confirmed by recent experiments designed to test the assumption of local hidden variables that were introduced to restore classical determinism.8 The results of those experiments confirm the striking consequences of quantum mechanics.

That quantum mechanics obliges us to speak less absolutely about the localization of an object implies, as Niels Bohr often emphasized, that we must give up the realism of classical physics. For Bohr, Planck’s constant defines the interaction between a quantum system and the measurement device as nondecomposable. It is only to the quantum phenomenon as a whole, including the measurement interaction, that we can ascribe numerical values. All description thus implies a choice of the measurement device, a choice of the question asked. In this sense, the answer, the result of the measurement, does not give us access to a given reality. We have to decide which measurement we are going to perform and which question our experiments will ask the system. Thus there is an irreducible multiplicity of representations for a system, each connected with a determined set of operators.

This implies a departure from the classical notion of objectivity, since in the classical view the only “objective” description is the complete description of the system as it is, independent of the choice of how it is observed.

Bohr always emphasized the novelty of the positive choice introduced through measurement. The physicist has to choose his language, to choose the macroscopic experimental device. Bohr expressed this idea through the principle of complementarity,9 which may be considered as an extension of Heisenberg’s uncertainty relations. We can measure coordinates or momenta, but not both. No single theoretical language articulating the variables to which a well-defined value can be attributed can exhaust the physical content of a system. Various possible languages and points of view about the system may be complementary. They all deal with the same reality, but it is impossible to reduce them to one single description. The irreducible plurality of perspectives on the same reality expresses the impossibility of a divine point of view from which the whole of reality is visible. However, the lesson of the principle of complementarity is not a lesson in resignation. Bohr used to say that the significance of quantum mechanics always made him dizzy, and we do indeed feel dizzy when we are torn from the comfortable routine of common sense.

The real lesson to be learned from the principle of complementarity, a lesson that can perhaps be transferred to other fields of knowledge, consists in emphasizing the wealth of reality, which overflows any single language, any single logical structure. Each language can express only part of reality. Music, for example, has not been exhausted by any of its realizations, by any style of composition, from Bach to Schönberg.

We have emphasized the importance of operators because they demonstrate that the reality studied by physics is also a mental construct; it is not merely given. We must distinguish between the abstract notion of a coordinate or of momentum, represented mathematically by operators, and their numerical realization, which can be reached through experiments. One of the reasons for the opposition between the “two cultures” may have been the belief that literature corresponds to a conceptualization of reality, to “fiction,” while science seems to express objective “reality.” Quantum mechanics teaches us that the situation is not so simple. On all levels reality implies an essential element of conceptualization.





The Temporal Evolution of Quantum Systems


We shall now move on to discuss the temporal evolution of quantum systems. As in classical mechanics, the Hamiltonian plays a fundamental role. As we have seen, in quantum mechanics it is replaced by the Hamiltonian operator Hop. This energy operator plays a central role: on the one hand, its eigenvalues correspond to the energy levels; on the other hand, as in classical mechanics, the Hamiltonian operator determines the temporal evolution of the system. In quantum mechanics the role played by the canonical equation of classical mechanics is taken by the Schrödinger equation, which expresses the time evolution of the function characterizing the quantum state as the result of the application of the operator Hop on the wave function ψ (there are, of course, other formulations, which we cannot describe here). The term “wave function” has been chosen to emphasize once again the wave-particle duality so fundamental in all of quantum physics. ψ is a wave amplitude that evolves according to a particle type of equation determined by the Hamiltonian. Schrödinger’s equation, like the canonical equation of classical physics, expresses a reversible and deterministic evolution. The reversible change of wave function corresponds to a reversible motion along a trajectory. If the wave function at a given instant is known, Schrödinger’s equation allows it to be calculated for any previous or subsequent instant. From this viewpoint, the situation is strictly similar to that in classical mechanics. This is because the uncertainty relations of quantum mechanics do not include time. Time remains a number, not an operator, and only operators can appear in Heisenberg’s uncertainty relations.

Quantum mechanics deals with only half of the variables of classical mechanics. As a result, classical determinism becomes inapplicable, and in quantum physics statistical considerations play a central role. It is through the wave intensity/ψ/2 (the square of the amplitude) that we make contact with statistical considerations.

The standard statistical interpretation of quantum mechanics runs as follows: consider the eigenfunctions of some operator—say, the energy operator Hop—and the corresponding eigenvalues. In general the wave function ψ will not be the eigenfunction of the energy operator, but it can be expressed as the superposition of these eigenfunctions. The respective importance of each eigenfunction in this superposition allows us to calculate the probability for the appearance of the various possible corresponding eigenvalues.

Here again we notice a fundamental departure from classical theory. Only probabilities can be predicted, not single events. This was the second time in the history of science that probabilities were used to explain some basic features of nature. The first time was in Boltzmann’s interpretation of entropy. There, however, a subjective point of view remained possible; in this view, “only” our ignorance in the face of the complexity of the systems considered prevented us from achieving a complete description. (We shall see that today it is possible to overcome this attitude.) Here, as before, the use of probabilities was unacceptable to many physicists—including Einstein—who wished to achieve a “complete” deterministic description. Just as with irreversibility, an appeal to our ignorance seemed to offer a way out: our inaptitude would make us responsible for statistical behavior in the quantum world, just as it makes us responsible for irreversibility.

Once again we come to the problem of hidden variables. However, as we have said, there has been no experimental evidence to justify the introduction of such variables, and the role of probabilities seems irreducible.

There is only one case in which the Schrödinger equation leads to a deterministic prediction: that is when ψ, instead of being a superposition of eigenfunctions, is reduced to a single one. In particular, in an ideal measurement process, a system may be prepared in such a way that the result of a given measurement may be predicted. We then know that the system is described by the corresponding eigenfunction. From then on, the system may be described with certainty as being in the eigenstate indicated by the measurement result.

The measurement process in quantum mechanics has a special significance that is attracting considerable interest today. Suppose we start with a wave function, which is indeed a superposition of eigenfunctions. As a result of the measurement process, this single collection of systems all represented by the same wave function is replaced by a collection of wave functions corresponding to the various eigenvalues that may be measured. Stated technically, a measurement leads from a single wave function (a “pure” state) to a mixture.

As Bohr and Rosenfeld10 repeatedly pointed out, every measurement contains an element of irreversibility, an appeal made to irreversible phenomena, such as chemical processes corresponding to the recording of the “data.” Recording is accompanied by an amplification whereby a microscopic event produces an effect on a macroscopic level—that is, a level at which we can read the measuring instruments. The measurement thus presupposes irreversibility.

This was in a sense already true in classical physics. However, the problem of the irreversible character of measurement is more urgent in quantum mechanics because it raises questions at the level of its formulation.

The usual approach to this problem states that quantum mechanics has no choice but to postulate the coexistence of two mutually irreducible processes, the reversible and continuous evolution described by Schrödinger’s equation and the irreversible and discontinuous reduction of the wave function to one of its eigenfunctions at the time of measurement. Thus the paradox: the reversible Schrödinger equation can be tested only by irreversible measurements that the equation is by definition unable to describe. It is thus impossible for quantum mechanics to set up a closed structure.

In the face of these difficulties, some physicists have once more taken refuge in subjectivism, stating that we—our measurement and even, for some, our mind—determine the evolution of the system that breaks the law of natural, “objective” reversibility.11 Others have concluded that Schrödinger’s equation was not “complete” and that new terms must be added to account for the irreversibility of the measurement. Other more improbable “solutions” have also been proposed, such as Everett’s many-world hypothesis (see d’Espagnat, ref. 8). For us, however, the coexistence in quantum mechanics of reversibility and irreversibility shows that the classical idealization that describes the dynamic world as self-contained is impossible at the microscopic level. This is what Bohr meant when he noted that the language we use to describe a quantum system cannot be separated from the macroscopic concepts that describe the functioning of our measurement instruments. Schrödinger’s equation does not describe a separate level of reality; rather it presupposes the macroscopic world to which we belong.

The problem of measurement in quantum mechanics is thus an aspect of one of the problems to which this book is devoted—the connection between the simple world described by Hamiltonian trajectories and Schrödinger’s equation, and the complex macroscopic world of irreversible processes.

In Chapter IX, we shall see that irreversibility enters classical physics when the idealization involved in the concept of a trajectory becomes inadequate. The measurement problem in quantum mechanics is susceptible to the same type of solution.12 Indeed, the wave function represents the maximum knowledge of a quantum system. As in classical physics, the object of this maximum knowledge satisfies a reversible evolution equation. In both cases, irreversibility enters when the ideal object corresponding to maximum knowledge has to be replaced by less idealized concepts. But when does this happen? This is the question of the physical mechanisms of irreversibility to which we shall turn in Chapter IX. But let us first summarize some other features of the renewal of contemporary science.





A Nonequilibrium Universe


The two scientific revolutions described in this chapter started as attempts to incorporate universal constants, c and h, into the framework of classical mechanics. This led to far-reaching consequences, some of which we have described here. From other perspectives, relativity and quantum mechanics seemed to adhere to the basic world view expressed in Newtonian mechanics. This is especially true regarding the role and meaning of time. In quantum mechanics, once the wave function at time zero is known, its value ψ(t) both for future and past is determined. Likewise, in relativity theory the static geometric character of time is often emphasized by the use of four-dimensional notation (three dimensions for space and one for time). As expressed concisely by Minkowski in 1908, “space by itself and time by itself are doomed to fade away into mere shadows, and only a kind of union of the two will preserve an independent reality … only a world in itself will subsist.”13

But over the past five decades this situation has radically changed. Quantum mechanics has become the main tool for dealing with elementary particles and their transformations. It is outside the scope of this book to describe the bewildering variety of elementary particles that have appeared during the past few years.

We want only to recall that, using both quantum mechanics and relativity, Dirac demonstrated that we have to associate to each particle of mass m and charge e an antiparticle of the same mass but of opposite charge. Positrons, the antiparticles of electrons, as well as antiprotons, are currently being produced in high-energy accelerators. Antimatter has become a common subject of study in particle physics. Particles and their corresponding antiparticles annihilate each other when they collide, producing photons, massless particles corresponding to light. The equations of quantum theory are symmetric in respect to the exchange particle-antiparticle, or more precisely, they are symmetric in respect to a weaker requirement known as the CPT symmetry. In spite of this symmetry, there exists a remarkable dissymmetry between particles and antiparticles in the world around us. We are made of particles (electrons, protons), while antiparticles remain rare laboratory products. If particles and antiparticles coexisted in equal amount, all matter would be annihilated. There is strong evidence that antimatter does not exist in our galaxy, but the possibility that it exists in distant galaxies cannot be excluded. We can imagine a mechanism in the universe that separates particles and antiparticles, hides antiparticles somewhere. However, it seems more likely that we live in a “nonsymmetrical” universe where matter completely dominates antimatter.

How is this possible? A model explaining the situation was presented by Sakharov in 1966, and today much work is being done along these lines.14 One essential element of the model is that, at the time of the formation of matter, the universe had to be in nonequilibrium conditions, for at equilibrium the law of mass action discussed in Chapter V would have required equal amounts of matter and antimatter.

What we want to emphasize here is that nonequilibrium has now acquired a new, cosmological dimension. Without nonequilibrium and without the irreversible processes linked to it, the universe would have a completely different structure. There would be no appreciable amount of matter, only some fluctuating local excesses of matter over antimatter, or vice versa.

From a mechanistic theory that was modified to account for the existence of the universal constant h, quantum theory has evolved into a theory of mutual transformations of elementary particles. In recent attempts to formulate a “unified theory of elementary particles” it has even been suggested that all particles of matter, including the proton, are unstable (however, the lifetime of the proton would be enormous, of the order of 1030 years). Mechanics, the science of motion, instead of corresponding to the fundamental level of description, becomes a mere approximation, useful only because of the long lifetime of elementary particles such as protons.

Relativity theory has gone through the same transformations. As we mentioned, it started as a geometric theory that strongly emphasized timeless features. Today it is the main tool for investigating the thermal history of the universe, for providing clues to the mechanisms that led to the present structure of the universe. The problem of time, of irreversibility, has therefore acquired a new urgency. From the field of engineering, of applied chemistry, where it was first formulated, it has spread to the whole of physics, from elementary particles to cosmology.

From the perspective of this book, the importance of quantum mechanics lies in its introduction of probability into microscopic physics. This should not be confused with the stochastic processes that describe chemical reactions as discussed in Chapter V. In quantum mechanics, the wave function evolves in a deterministic fashion, except in the measurement process.

We have seen that in the fifty years since the formulation of quantum mechanics the study of nonequilibrium processes has revealed that fluctuations, stochastic elements, are important even on the microscopic scale. We have repeatedly stated in this book that the reconceptualization of physics going on today leads from deterministic, reversible processes to stochastic and irreversible ones. We believe that quantum mechanics occupies a kind of intermediate position in this process. There probability appears, but not irreversibility. We expect, and we shall give some reasons for this in Chapter IX, that the next step will be the introduction of fundamental irreversibility on the microscopic level. In contrast with the attempts to restore classical orthodoxy through hidden variables or other means, we shall argue that it is necessary to move even farther away from deterministic descriptions of nature and adopt a statistical, stochastic description.





