CONCLUSION



FROM EARTH TO HEAVEN—

THE REENCHANTMENT

OF NATURE


In any attempt to bridge the domains of experience belonging to the spiritual and physical sides of our nature, time occupies the key position.

A. S. EDDINGTON1





An Open Science


Science certainly involves manipulating nature, but it is also an attempt to understand it, to dig deeper into questions that have been asked generation after generation. One of these questions runs like a leitmotiv, almost as an obsession, through this book, as it does through the history of science and philosophy. This is the question of the relation between being and becoming, between permanence and change.

We have mentioned pre-Socratic speculations: Is change, whereby things are born and die, imposed from the outside on some kind of inert matter? Or is it the result of the intrinsic and independent activity of matter? Is an external driving force necessary, or is becoming inherent in matter? Seventeenth-century science arose in opposition to the biological model of a spontaneous and autonomous organization of natural beings. But it was confronted with another fundamental alternative. Is nature intrinsically random? Is ordered behavior merely the transient result of the chance collisions of atoms and of their unstable associations?

One of the main sources of fascination in modern science was precisely the feeling that it had discovered eternal laws at the core of nature’s transformations and thus had exorcised time and becoming. This discovery of an order in nature produced the feeling of intellectual security described by French sociologist Lévy-Bruhl:

Our feeling of intellectual security is so deeply anchored in us that we even do not see how it could be shaken. Even if we suppose that we could observe some phenomenon seemingly quite mysterious, we still would remain persuaded that our ignorance is only provisional, that this phenomenon must satisfy the general laws of causality, and that the reasons for which it has appeared will be determined sooner or later. Nature around us is order and reason, exactly as is the human mind. Our everyday activity implies a perfect confidence in the universality of the laws of nature.2



This feeling of confidence in the “reason” of nature has been shattered, partly as the result of the tumultuous growth of science in our time. As we stated in the Preface, our vision of nature is undergoing a radical change toward the multiple, the temporal, and the complex. Some of these changes have been described in this book.

We were seeking general, all-embracing schemes that could be expressed in terms of eternal laws, but we have found time, events, evolving particles. We were also searching for symmetry, and here also we were surprised, since we discovered symmetry-breaking processes on all levels, from elementary particles up to biology and ecology. We have described in this book the clash between dynamics, with the temporal symmetry it implies, and the second law of thermodynamics, with its directed time.

A new unity is emerging: irreversibility is a source of order at all levels. Irreversibility is the mechanism that brings order out of chaos. How could such a radical transformation of our views on nature occur in the relatively short time span of the past few decades? We believe that it shows the important role intellectual construction plays in our concept of reality. This was very well expressed by Bohr, when he said to Werner Heisenberg on the occasion of a visit at Kronberg Castle:

Isn’t it strange how this castle changes as soon as one imagines that Hamlet lived here? As scientists we believe that a castle consists only of stones, and admire the way the architect put them together. The stones, the green roof with its patina, the wood carvings in the church, constitute the whole castle. None of this should be changed by the fact that Hamlet lived here, and yet it is changed completely. Suddenly the walls and the ramparts speak a different language.… Yet all we really know about Hamlet is that his name appears in a thirteenth-century chronicle.… But everyone knows the questions Shakespeare had him ask, the human depths he was made to reveal, and so he too had to have a place on earth, here in Kronberg.3



The question of the meaning of reality was the central subject of a fascinating dialogue between Einstein and Tagore.4 Einstein emphasized that science had to be independent of the existence of any observer. This led him to deny the reality of time as irreversibility, as evolution. On the contrary, Tagore maintained that even if absolute truth could exist, it would be inaccessible to the human mind. Curiously enough, the present evolution of science is running in the direction stated by the great Indian poet. Whatever we call reality, it is revealed to us only through the active construction in which we participate. As it is concisely expressed by D. S. Kothari, “The simple fact is that no measurement, no experiment or observation is possible without a relevant theoretical framework.”5





Time and Times


The statement that time is basically a geometric parameter that makes it possible to follow the unfolding of the succession of dynamical states has been asserted in physics for more than three centuries. Emile Meyerson6 tried to describe the history of modern science as the gradual implementation of what he regarded as a basic category of human reason: the different and the changing had to be reduced to the identical and the permanent. Time had to be eliminated.

Nearer to our own time, Einstein appears as the incarnation of this drive toward a formulation of physics in which no reference to irreversibility would be made on the fundamental level.

An historic scene took place at the Société de Philosophie in Paris on April 6, 1922,7 when Henri Bergson attempted to defend the cause of the multiplicity of coexisting “lived” times against Einstein. Einstein’s reply was absolute: he categorically rejected “philosophers’ time.” Lived experience cannot save what has been denied by science.

Einstein’s reaction was somewhat justified. Bergson had obviously misunderstood Einstein’s theory of relativity. However, there also was some prejudice on Einstein’s part: durée, Bergson’s “lived time,” refers to the basic dimensions of becoming, the irreversibility that Einstein was willing to admit only at the phenomenological level. We have already referred to Einstein’s conversations with Carnap (see Chapter VII). For him distinctions among past, present, and future were outside the scope of physics.

It is fascinating to follow the correspondence between Einstein and the closest friend of his young days in Zurich, Michele Besso.8 Although he was an engineer and scientist, toward the end of his life Besso became increasingly concerned with philosophy, literature, and the problems that surround the core of human existence. Untiringly he kept asking the same questions: What is irreversibility? What is its relationship with the laws of physics? And untiringly Einstein would answer with a patience he showed only to this closest friend: irreversibility is merely an illusion produced by “improbable” initial conditions. This dialogue continued over many years until Besso, older than Einstein by eight years, passed away, only a few months before Einstein’s death. In a last letter to Besso’s sister and son, Einstein wrote: “Michele has left this strange world just before me. This is of no importance. For us convinced physicists the distinction between past, present and future is an illusion, although a persistent one.” In Einstein’s drive to perceive the basic laws of physics, the intelligible was identified with the immutable.

Why was Einstein so strongly opposed to the introduction of irreversibility into physics? We can only guess. Einstein was a rather lonely man; he had few friends, few coworkers, few students. He lived in a sad time: the two World Wars, the rise of anti-Semitism. It is not surprising that for Einstein science was the road that led to victory over the turmoil of time. What a contrast, however, with his scientific work. His world was full of observers, of scientists situated in various coordinate systems in motion with one another, situated on various stars differing by their gravitational fields. All these observers were exchanging information through signals all over the universe. What Einstein wanted to preserve above all was the objective meaning of this communication. However, we can perhaps state that Einstein stopped short of accepting that communication and irreversibility are closely related. Communication is at the base of what probably is the most irreversible process accessible to the human mind, the progressive increase of knowledge.





The Entropy Barrier


In Chapter IX we described the second law as a selection principle: to each initial condition there corresponds an “information.” All initial conditions for which this information is finite are permitted. However, to reverse the direction of time we would need infinite information; we cannot produce situations that would evolve into our past! This is the entropy barrier we have introduced.

There is an interesting analogy with the concept of the velocity of light as the maximum velocity of transmission of signals. As we have seen in Chapter VII, this is one of the basic postulates of Einstein’s relativity theory. The existence of the velocity of light barrier is necessary to give meaning to causality. Suppose we could, in a science-fiction ship, leave the earth at a velocity greater than the velocity of light. We could overtake light signals and in this way precede our own past. Likewise, the entropy barrier is necessary to give meaning to communication. We have already mentioned that irreversibility and communication are closely related. Norbert Wiener has argued that the existence of two directions of time would have disastrous consequences. It is worthwhile to cite a passage from his well-known book Cybernetics:

Indeed, it is a very interesting intellectual experiment to make the fantasy of an intelligent being whose time should run the other way to our own. To such a being, all communication with us would be impossible. Any signal he might send would reach us with a logical stream of consequents from his point of view, antecedents from ours. These antecedents would already be in our experience, and would have served to us as the natural explanation of his signal, without presupposing an intelligent being to have sent it. If he drew us a square, we should see the remains of his figure as its precursors, and it would seem to be the curious crystallization—always perfectly explainable—of these remains. Its meaning would seem to be as fortuitous as the faces we read into mountains and cliffs. The drawing of the square would appear to us as a catastrophe—sudden indeed, but explainable by natural laws—by which that square would cease to exist. Our counterpart would have exactly similar ideas concerning us. Within any world with which we can communicate, the direction of time is uniform.9



It is precisely the infinite entropy barrier that guarantees the uniqueness of the direction of time, the impossibility of switching from one direction of time to the opposite one.

In the course of this book, we have stressed the importance of demonstrations of impossibility. In fact, Einstein was the first to grasp that importance when he based his concept of relative simultaneity on the impossibility of transmitting information at a velocity greater than that of light. The whole theory of relativity is built around the exclusion of “unobservable” simultaneities. Einstein considered this step as somewhat similar to the step taken in thermodynamics when perpetual motion was excluded. But some of his contemporaries—Heisenberg, for example—emphasized an important difference between these two impossibilities. In the case of thermodynamics, a certain situation is defined as being absent from nature; in the case of relativity, it is an observation that is defined as impossible—that is, a type of dialogue, of communication between nature and the person who describes it. Thus Heisenberg saw himself as following Einstein’s example, in spite of Einstein’s skepticism, when he grounded quantum mechanics on the exclusion of what the quantum uncertainty principle defines as unobservable.

As long as the second law was considered to express only a practical improbability, it had little theoretical interest. You could always hope to overcome it by sufficient technical skill. But we have seen that this is not so. At its roots there is a selection of possible initial states. It is only after these states have been selected that the probability interpretation becomes possible. Indeed, as Boltzmann stated for the first time, the increase of entropy expresses the increase of probability, of disorder. However, his interpretation results from the conclusion that entropy is a selection principle breaking the time symmetry. It is only after this symmetry-breaking that any probabilistic interpretation becomes possible.

In spite of the fact that we have recouped much of Boltzmann’s interpretation of entropy, the basis of our interpretation of his second law is radically different, since we have in succession

the second law as a symmetry-breaking selection principle



probabilistic interpretation



irreversibility as increase of disorder



It is only the unification of dynamics and thermodynamics through the introduction of a new selection principle that gives the second law its fundamental importance as the evolutionary paradigm of the sciences. This point is of such importance that we shall dwell on it in more detail.





The Evolutionary Paradigm


The world of dynamics, be it classical or quantum, is a reversible world. As we have emphasized in Chapter VIII, no evolution can be ascribed to this world; the “information” expressed in terms of dynamical units remains constant. It is therefore of great importance that the existence of an evolutionary paradigm can now be established in physics—not only on the level of macroscopic description but also on all levels. Of course, there are conditions: as we have seen, a minimum complexity is necessary. But the immense importance of irreversible processes shows that this requirement is satisfied for most systems of interest. Remarkably, the perception of oriented time increases as the level of biological organization increases and probably reaches its culminating point in human consciousness.

How general is this evolutionary paradigm? It includes isolated systems that evolve to disorder and open systems that evolve to higher and higher forms of complexity. It is not surprising that the entropy metaphor has tempted a number of writers dealing with social or economic problems. Obviously here we have to be careful; human beings are not dynamic objects, and the transition to thermodynamics cannot be formulated as a selection principle maintained by dynamics. On the human level irreversibility is a more fundamental concept, which is for us inseparable from the meaning of our existence. Still it is essential that in this perspective we no longer see the internal feeling of irreversibility as a subjective impression that alienates us from the outside world, but as marking our participation in a world dominated by an evolutionary paradigm.

Cosmological problems are notoriously difficult. We still do not know what the role of gravitation was in the early universe. Can gravitation be included in some form of the second law, or is there a kind of dialectical balance between thermodynamics and gravitation? Certainly irreversibility could not have appeared abruptly in a time-reversible world. The origin of irreversibility is a cosmological problem and would require an analysis of the universe in its first stages. Here our aim is more modest. What does irreversibility mean today? How does it relate to our position in the world we describe?





Actors and Spectators


The denial of becoming by physics created deep rifts within science and estranged science from philosophy. What had originally been a daring wager with the dominant Aristotelian tradition gradually became a dogmatic assertion directed against all those (chemists, biologists, physicians) for whom a qualitative diversity existed in nature. At the end of the nineteenth century this conflict had shifted from inside science to the relation between “science” and the rest of culture, especially philosophy. We have described in Chapter III this aspect of the history of Western thought, with its continual struggle to achieve a new unity of knowledge. The “lived time” of the phenomenologists, the Lebenswelt opposed to the objective world of science, may be related to the need to erect bulwarks against the invasion of science.

Today we believe that the epoch of certainties and absolute oppositions is over. Physicists have no privilege whatsoever to any kind of extraterritoriality. As scientists they belong to their culture, to which, in their turn, they make an essential contribution. We have reached a situation close to the one recognized long ago in sociology: Merleau-Ponty had already stressed the need to keep in mind what he termed a “truth within situations.”

So long as I keep before me the ideal of an absolute observer, of knowledge in the absence of any viewpoint, I can only see my situation as being a source of error. But once I have acknowledged that through it I am geared to all actions and all knowledge that are meaningful to me, and that it is gradually filled with everything that may be for me, then my contact with the social in the finitude of my situation is revealed to me as the starting point of all truth, including that of science and, since we have some idea of the truth, since we are inside truth and cannot get outside it, all that I can do is define a truth within the situation.10



It is this conception of knowledge as both objective and participatory that we have explored through this book.

In his Themes11 Merleau-Ponty also asserted that the “philosophic” discoveries of science, its basic conceptual transformations, are often the result of negative discoveries, which provide the occasion and the starting point for a reversal of point of view. Demonstrations of impossibility, whether in relativity, quantum mechanics, or thermodynamics, have shown us that nature cannot be described “from the outside,” as if by a spectator. Description is dialogue, communication, and this communication is subject to constraints that demonstrate that we are macroscopic beings embedded in the physical world.

We may summarize the situation as we see it today in the following diagram:



We start from the observer, who measures coordinates and momenta and studies their change in time. This leads him to the discovery of unstable dynamic systems and other concepts of intrinsic randomness and intrinsic irreversibility, as we discussed them in Chapter IX. Once we have intrinsic irreversibility and entropy, we come in far-from-equilibrium systems to dissipative structures, and we can understand the time-oriented activity of the observer.

There is no scientific activity that is not time-oriented. The preparation of an experiment calls for a distinction between “before” and “after.” It is only because we are aware of irreversibility that we can recognize reversible motion. Our diagram shows that we have now come full circle, that we can see ourselves as part of the universe we describe.

The scheme we have presented is not an a priori scheme—deducible from some logical structure. There is, indeed, no logical necessity for dissipative structures actually to exist in nature; the “cosmological fact” of a universe far from equilibrium is needed for the macroscopic world to be a world inhabited by “observers”—that is, to be a living world. Our scheme thus does not correspond to a logical or epistemological truth but refers to our condition as macroscopic beings in a world far from equilibrium. Moreover, an essential characteristic of our scheme is that it does not suppose any fundamental mode of description; each level of description is implied by another and implies the other. We need a multiplicity of levels that are all connected, none of which may have a claim to preeminence.

We have already emphasized that irreversibility is not a universal phenomenon. We can perform experiments corresponding to thermodynamic equilibrium in limited portions of space. Moreover, the importance of time scales varies. A stone evolves according to the time scale of geological evolution; human societies, especially in our time, obviously have a much shorter time scale. We have already mentioned that irreversibility starts with a minimum complexity of the dynamic systems involved. It is interesting that with an increase of complexity, going from the stone to human societies, the role of the arrow of time, of evolutionary rhythms, increases. Molecular biology shows that everything in a cell is not alive in the same way. Some processes reach equilibrium, others are dominated by regulatory enzymes far from equilibrium. Similarly, the arrow of time plays quite different roles in the universe around us. From this point of view, in the sense of this time-oriented activity, the human condition seems unique. It seems to us, as we said in Chapter IX, quite important that irreversibility, the arrow of time, implies randomness. “Time is construction.” This conclusion, one that Valêry12 reached quite independently, carries a message that goes beyond science proper.





A Whirlwind in a Turbulent Nature


In our society, with its wide spectrum of cognitive techniques, science occupies a peculiar position, that of a poetical interrogation of nature, in the etymological sense that the poet is a “maker”—active, manipulating, and exploring. Moreover, science is now capable of respecting the nature it investigates. Out of the dialogue with nature initiated by classical science, with its view of nature as an automaton, has grown a quite different view in which the activity of questioning nature is part of its intrinsic activity.

As we have written at the start of this chapter, our feeling of intellectual security has been shattered. We can now appreciate in a nonpolemical fashion the relation between science and philosophy. We have already mentioned the Einstein-Bergson conflict. Bergson was certainly “wrong” on some technical points, but his task as a philosopher was to attempt to make explicit inside physics the aspects of time he thought science was neglecting.

Exploring the implications and the coherence of those fundamental concepts, which appear both scientific and philosophical, may be risky, but it can be very fruitful in the dialogue between science and philosophy. Let us illustrate this with some brief references to Leibniz, Peirce, Whitehead, and Lucretius.

Leibniz introduced the strange concept of monads, non-communicating physical entities that have “no windows through which something can get in or out.” His views have often been dismissed as mad, and still, as we have seen in Chapter II, it is an essential property of all integrable systems that there exist a transformation that may be described in terms of noninteracting entities. These entities translate their own initial state throughout their motion, but at the same time, like monads, they coexist with all the others in a “preestablished” harmony: in this representation, the state of each entity, although perfectly self-determined, reflects the state of the whole system down to the smallest detail.

All integrable systems thus can be viewed as “monadic” systems. Conversely, Leibnizian monadology can be translated into dynamic language: the universe is an integrable system.13 Monadology thus becomes the most consequential formulation of a universe from which all becoming is eliminated. By considering Leibniz’s efforts to understand the activity of matter, we can measure the gap that separates the seventeenth century from our time. The tools were not yet ready; it was impossible, on the basis of a purely mechanical universe, for Leibniz to give an account of the activity of matter. Still some of his ideas, that substance is activity, that the universe is an interrelated unit, remain with us and are today taking on a new form.

We regret that we cannot devote sufficient space to the work of Charles S. Peirce. At least let us cite one remarkable passage:

You have all heard of the dissipation of energy. It is found that in all transformations of energy a part is converted into heat and heat is always tending to equalize its temperature. The consequence is that the energy of the universe is tending by virtue of its necessary laws toward a death of the universe in which there shall be no force but heat and the temperature everywhere the same.…

But although no force can counteract this tendency, chance may and will have the opposite influence. Force is in the long run dissipative; chance is in the long run concentrative. The dissipation of energy by the regular laws of nature is by these very laws accompanied by circumstances more and more favorable to its reconcentration by chance. There must therefore be a point at which the two tendencies are balanced and that is no doubt the actual condition of the whole universe at the present time.14



Once again, Peirce’s metaphysics was considered as one more example of a philosophy alienated from reality. But, in fact, today Peirce’s work appears to be a pioneering step toward the understanding of the pluralism involved in physical laws.

Whitehead’s philosophy takes us to the other end of the spectrum. For him, being is inseparable from becoming. Whitehead wrote: “The elucidation of the meaning of the sentence ‘everything flows’ is one of metaphysics’ main tasks.”15 Physics and metaphysics are indeed coming together today in a conception of the world in which process, becoming, is taken as a primary constituent of physical existence and where, unlike Leibniz’ monads, existing entities can interact and therefore also be born and die.

The ordered world of classical physics, or a monadic theory of parallel changes, resembles the equally parallel, ordered, and eternal fall of Lucretius’ atoms through infinite space. We have already mentioned the clinamen and the instability of laminar flows. But we can go farther. As Serres16 points out, the infinite fall provides a model on which to base our conception of the natural genesis of the disturbance that causes things to be born. If the vertical fall were not disturbed “without reason” by the clinamen, which leads to encounters and associations between uniformly falling atoms, no nature could be created; all that would be reproduced would be the repetitive connection between equivalent causes and effects governed by the laws of fate (foedera fati).

Denique si semper motus conectitur omnis

et uetere exoritur [semper] novus ordine certo

nec declinando faciunt primordia motus

principium quoddam quod fati foedera rumpat,

ex infinito ne causam causa sequatur,

libera per terras unde haec animantibus exstat…?17



Lucretius may be said to have invented the clinamen in the same way that archaeological remains are “invented”: one “guesses” they are there before one begins to dig. If only uniformly reversible trajectories existed, where would the irreversible processes we produce and experience come from? The point where the trajectories cease to be determined, where the foedera fati governing the ordered and monotonous world of deterministic change break down, marks the beginning of nature. It also marks the beginning of a new science that describes the birth, proliferation, and death of natural beings. “The physics of falling, of repetition, of rigorous concatenation is replaced by the creative science of change and circumstances.”18 The foedera fati are replaced by the foedera naturae, which, as Serres emphasizes, denote both “laws” of nature—local, singular, historical relations—and an “alliance,” a form of contract with nature.

In Lucretian physics we thus again find the link we have discovered in modern knowledge between the choices underlying a physical description and a philosophic, ethical, or religious conception relating to man’s situation in nature. The physics of universal connections is set against another science that in the name of law and domination no longer struggles with disturbance or randomness. Classical science from Archimedes to Clausius was opposed to the science of turbulence and of bifurcating changes.

It is here that Greek wisdom reaches one of its pinnacles. Where man is in the world, of the world, in matter, of matter, he is not a stranger, but a friend, a member of the family, and an equal. He has made a pact with things. Conversely, many other systems and many other sciences are based on breaking this pact. Man is a stranger to the world, to the dawn, to the sky, to things. He hates them, and fights them. His environment is a dangerous enemy to be fought, to be kept enslaved…. Epicurus and Lucretius live in a reconciled universe. Where the science of things and the science of man coincide. I am a disturbance, a whirlwind in turbulent nature.19





Beyond Tautology


The world of classical science was a world in which the only events that could occur were those deducible from the instantaneous state of the system. Curiously, this conception, which we have traced back to Galileo and Newton, was not new at that time. Indeed, it can be identified with Aristotle’s conception of a divine and immutable heaven. In Aristotle’s opinion, it was only the heavenly world to which we could hope to apply an exact mathematical description. In the Introduction, we echoed the complaint that science has “disenchanted” the world. But this disenchantment is paradoxically due to the glorification of the earthly world, henceforth worthy of the kind of intellectual pursuit Aristotle reserved for heaven. Classical science denied becoming, natural diversity, both considered by Aristotle as attributes of the sublunar, inferior world. In this sense, classical science brought heaven to earth. However, this apparently was not the intention of the fathers of modern science. In challenging Aristotle’s claim that mathematics ends where nature begins, they did not seek to discover the immutable concealed behind the changing, but rather to extend changing, corruptible nature to the boundaries of the universe. In his Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, Galileo is amazed at the notion that the world would be a nobler place if the great flood had left only a sea of ice behind, or if the earth had the incorruptible hardness of jasper; let those who think the earth would be more beautiful after being changed into a crystal ball be transformed by Medusa’s stare into a diamond statue!

But the objects chosen by the first physicists to explore the validity of a quantitative description—that is, the ideal pendulum with its conservative motion, simple machines, planetary orbits, etc.—were found to correspond to a unique mathematical description that actually reproduced the divine ideality of Aristotle’s heavenly bodies.

Like Aristotle’s gods, the objects of classical dynamics are concerned only with themselves. They can learn nothing from the outside. At any instant, each point in the system knows all it will ever need to know—that is, the distribution of masses in space and their velocities. Each state contains the whole truth concerning all possible other states, and each can be used to predict the others, whatever their respective positions on the time axis. In this sense, this description leads to a tautology, since both future and past are contained in the present.

The radical change in the outlook of modern science, the transition toward the temporal, the multiple, may be viewed as the reversal of the movement that brought Aristotle’s heaven to earth. Now we are bringing earth to heaven. We are discovering the primacy of time and change, from the level of elementary particles to cosmological models.

Both at the macroscopic and microscopic levels, the natural sciences have thus rid themselves of a conception of objective reality that implied that novelty and diversity had to be denied in the name of immutable universal laws. They have rid themselves of a fascination with a rationality taken as closed and a knowledge seen as nearly achieved. They are now open to the unexpected, which they no longer define as the result of imperfect knowledge or insufficient control.

This opening up of science has been well defined by Serge Moscovici as the “Keplerian revolution,” to distinguish it from the “Copernican revolution” in which the idea of an absolute point of view was maintained. In many of the passages cited in the Introduction to this book, science was likened to a “disenchantment” of the world. Let us quote Moscovici’s description of the changes going on in the sciences today:

Science has become involved in this adventure, our adventure, in order to renew everything it touches and warm all that it penetrates—the earth on which we live and the truths which enable us to live. At each turn it is not the echo of a demise, a bell tolling for a passing away that is heard, but the voice of rebirth and beginning, ever afresh, of mankind and materiality, fixed for an instant in their ephemeral permanence. That is why the great discoveries are not revealed on a deathbed like that of Copernicus, but offered like Kepler’s on the road of dreams and passion.20





The Creative Course of Time


It is often said that without Bach we would not have had the “St. Matthew Passion” but that relativity would have been discovered without Einstein. Science is supposed to take a deterministic course, in contrast with the unpredictability involved in the history of the arts. When we look back on the strange history of science, three centuries of which we have tried to outline, we may doubt the validity of such assertions. There are striking examples of facts that have been ignored because the cultural climate was not ready to incorporate them into a consistent scheme. The discovery of chemical clocks probably goes back to the nineteenth century, but their result seemed to contradict the idea of uniform decay to equilibrium. Meteorites were thrown out of the Vienna museum because there was no place for them in the description of the solar system. Our cultural environment plays an active role in the questions we ask, but beyond matters of style and social acceptance, we can identify a number of questions to which each generation returns.

The question of time is certainly one of those questions. Here we disagree somewhat with Thomas Kuhn’s analysis of the formation of “normal” science.21 Scientific activity best corresponds to Kuhn’s view when it is considered in the context of the contemporary university, in which research and the training of future researchers is combined. Kuhn’s analysis, if it is taken as a description of science in general, leading to conclusions about what knowledge must be, can be reduced to a new psychosocial version of the positivist conception of scientific development, namely, the tendency to increasing specialization and compartmentalization; the identification of “normal” scientific behavior with that of the “serious,” “silent” researcher who wastes no time on “general” questions about the overall significance of his research but sticks to specialized problems; and the essential independence of scientific development from cultural, economic, and social problems.

The academic structure in which the “normal science” described by Kuhn came into being took shape in the nineteenth century. Kuhn emphasizes that it is by repeating in the form of exercises solutions to the paradigmatic problems of previous generations that students learn the concepts upon which research is based. It is in this way that they are given the criteria that define a problem as interesting and a solution as acceptable. The transition from student to researcher takes place gradually; the scientist continues to solve problems using similar techniques.

Even in our time, for which Kuhn’s description has the greatest relevance, it refers to only one specific aspect of scientific activity. The importance of this aspect varies according to the individual researchers and the institutional context.

In Kuhn’s view the transformation of a paradigm appears as a crisis: instead of remaining a silent, almost invisible rule, instead of remaining unspoken, the paradigm is actually questioned. Instead of working in unison, the members of the community begin to ask “basic” questions and challenge the legitimacy of their methods. The group, which by training was homogeneous, now diversifies. Different points of view, cultural experiences, and philosophic convictions are now expressed and often play a decisive role in the discovery of a new paradigm. The emergence of the new paradigm further increases the vehemence of the debate. The rival paradigms are put to the test until the academic world determines the victor. With the appearance of a new generation of scientists, silence and unanimity take over again. New textbooks are written, and once again things “go without saying.”

In this view the driving force behind scientific innovation is the intensely conservative behavior of scientific communities, which stubbornly apply to nature the same techniques, the same concepts, and always end up by encountering an equally stubborn resistance from nature. When nature is eventually seen as refusing to express itself in the accepted language, the crisis explodes with the kind of violence that results from a breach of confidence. At this stage, all intellectual resources are concentrated on the search for a new language. Thus scientists have to deal with crises imposed upon them against their will.

The questions we have investigated have led us to emphasize aspects that differ considerably from those to which Kuhn’s description applies. We have dwelled on continuities, not the “obvious” continuities but the hidden ones, those involving difficult questions rejected by many as illegitimate or false but that keep coming back generation after generation—questions such as the dynamics of complex systems, the relation of the irreversible world of chemistry and biology with the reversible description provided by classical physics. In fact, the interest of such questions is hardly surprising. To us, the problem is rather to understand how they could ever have been neglected after the work of Diderot, Stahl, Venel, and others.

The past one hundred years have been marked by several crises that correspond closely to the description given by Kuhn—none of which were sought by scientists. Examples are the discovery of the instability of elementary particles, or of the evolving universe. However, the recent history of science is also characterized by a series of problems that are the consequences of deliberate and lucid questions asked by scientists who knew that the questions had both scientific and philosophical aspects. Thus scientists are not doomed to behave like “hypnons”!

It is important to point out that the new scientific development we have described, the incorporation of irreversibility into physics, is not to be seen as some kind of “revelation,” the possession of which would set its possessor apart from the cultural world he lives in. On the contrary, this development clearly reflects both the internal logic of science and the cultural and social context of our time.

In particular, how can we consider as accidental that the rediscovery of time in physics is occurring at a time of extreme acceleration in human history? Cultural context cannot be the complete answer, but it cannot be denied either. We have to incorporate the complex relations between “internal” and “external” determinations of the production of scientific concepts.

In the preface of this book, we have emphasized that its French title (La nouvelle alliance) expresses the coming together of the “two cultures”. Perhaps the confluence is nowhere as clear as in the problem of the microscopic foundations of irreversibility we have studied in Book Three.

As mentioned repeatedly, both classical and quantum mechanics are based on arbitrary initial conditions and deterministic laws (for trajectories or wave functions). In a sense, laws made simply explicit what was already present in the initial conditions. This is no longer the case when irreversibilty is taken into account. In this perspective, initial conditions arise from previous evolution and are transformed into states of the same class through subsequent evolution.

We come therefore close to the central problem of Western ontology: the relation between Being and Becoming. We have given a brief account of the problem in Chapter III. It is remarkable that two of the most influential works of the century were precisely devoted to this problem. We have in mind Whitehead’s Process and Reality and Heidegger’s Sein und Zeit. In both cases, the aim is to go beyond the identification of Being with timelessness, following the Voie Royale of western philosophy since Plato and Aristotle.22

But obviously, we cannot reduce Being to Time, and we cannot deal with a Being devoid of any temporal connotation. The direction which the microscopic theory of irreversibility takes gives a new content to the speculations of Whitehead and Heidegger.

It would go beyond the aim of this book to develop this problem in greater detail; we hope to do it elsewhere. Let us notice that initial conditions, as summarized in a state of the system, are associated with Being; in contrast, the laws involving temporal changes are associated with Becoming.

In our view, Being and Becoming are not to be opposed one to the other: they express two related aspects of reality.

A state with broken time symmetry arises from a law with broken time symmetry, which propagates it into a state belonging to the same category.

In a recent monograph (From Being to Becoming), one of the authors concluded in the following terms: “For most of the founders of classical science—even for Einstein—science was an attempt to go beyond the world of appearances, to reach a timeless world of supreme rationality—the world of Spinoza. But perhaps there is a more subtle form of reality that involves both laws and games, time and eternity.”

This is precisely the direction which the microscopic theory of irreversible processes is taking.





The Human Condition


We agree completely with Herman Weyl:

Scientists would be wrong to ignore the fact that theoretical construction is not the only approach to the phenomena of life; another way, that of understanding from within (interpretation), is open to us.… Of myself, of my own acts of perception, thought, volition, feeling and doing, I have a direct knowledge entirely different from the theoretical knowledge that represents the “parallel” cerebral processes in symbols. This inner awareness of myself is the basis for the understanding of my fellow-men whom I meet and acknowledge as beings of my own kind, with whom I communicate sometimes so intimately as to share joy and sorrow with them.23



Until recently, however, there was a striking contrast. The external universe appeared to be an automaton following deterministic causal laws, in contrast with the spontaneous activity and irreversibility we experience. The two worlds are now drawing closer together. Is this a loss for the natural sciences?

Classical science aimed at a “transparent” view of the physical universe. In each case you would be able to identify a cause and an effect. Whenever a stochastic description becomes necessary, this is no longer so. We can no longer speak of causality in each individual experiment; we can only speak about statistical causality. This has, in fact, been the case ever since the advent of quantum mechanics, but it has been greatly amplified by recent developments in which randomness and probability play an essential role, even in classical dynamics or chemistry. Therefore, the modern trend as compared to the classical one leads to a kind of “opacity” as compared to the transparency of classical thought.

Is this a defeat for the human mind? This is a difficult question. As scientists, we have no choice; we cannot describe for you the world as we would like to see it, but only as we are able to see it through the combined impact of experimental results and new theoretical concepts. Also, we believe that this new situation reflects the situation we seem to find in our own mental activity. Classical psychology centered around conscious, transparent activity; modern psychology attaches much weight to the opaque functioning of the unconscious. Perhaps this is an image of the basic features of human existence. Remember Oedipus, the lucidity of his mind in front of the sphinx and its opacity and darkness when confronted with his own origins. Perhaps the coming together of our insights about the world around us and the world inside us is a satisfying feature of the recent evolution in science that we have tried to describe.

It is hard to avoid the impression that the distinction between what exists in time, what is irreversible, and, on the other hand, what is outside of time, what is eternal, is at the origin of human symbolic activity. Perhaps this is especially so in artistic activity. Indeed, one aspect of the transformation of a natural object, a stone, to an object of art is closely related to our impact on matter. Artistic activity breaks the temporal symmetry of the object. It leaves a mark that translates our temporal dissymmetry into the temporal dissymmetry of the object. Out of the reversible, nearly cyclic noise level in which we live arises music that is both stochastic and time-oriented.





The Renewal of Nature


It is quite remarkable that we are at a moment both of profound change in the scientific concept of nature and of the structure of human society as a result of the demographic explosion. As a result, there is a need for new relations between man and nature and between man and man. We can no longer accept the old a priori distinction between scientific and ethical values. This was possible at a time when the external world and our internal world appeared to conflict, to be nearly orthogonal. Today we know that time is a construction and therefore carries an ethical responsibility.

The ideas to which we have devoted much space in this book—the ideas of instability, of fluctuation—diffuse into the social sciences. We know now that societies are immensely complex systems involving a potentially enormous number of bifurcations exemplified by the variety of cultures that have evolved in the relatively short span of human history. We know that such systems are highly sensitive to fluctuations. This leads both to hope and a threat: hope, since even small fluctuations may grow and change the overall structure. As a result, individual activity is not doomed to insignificance. On the other hand, this is also a threat, since in our universe the security of stable, permanent rules seems gone forever. We are living in a dangerous and uncertain world that inspires no blind confidence, but perhaps only the same feeling of qualified hope that some Talmudic texts appear to have attributed to the God of Genesis:

Twenty-six attempts preceded the present genesis, all of which were destined to fail. The world of man has arisen out of the chaotic heart of the preceding debris; he too is exposed to the risk of failure, and the return to nothing. “Let’s hope it works” [Halway Sheyaamod] exclaimed God as he created the World, and this hope, which has accompanied all the subsequent history of the world and mankind, has emphasized right from the outset that this history is branded with the mark of radical uncertainty.24





