How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket:
Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds

Andy Clark
        Hohwy (Hohwy 2016, Hohwy 2017) argues there is a tension between the free                                    Keywords
        energy principle and leading depictions of mind as embodied, enactive, and ex-
        tended (so-called ‘EEE1 cognition’). The tension is traced to the importance, in                             Active inference | Autopoiesis |
        free energy formulations, of a conception of mind and agency that depends upon                               EEE cognition | Embodied cogni-
        the presence of a ‘Markov blanket’ demarcating the agent from the surrounding                                tion | Evil demon | Extended mind
        world. In what follows I show that the Markov blanket considerations do not, in                              | Free energy minimization | Mar-
        fact, lead to the kinds of tension that Hohwy depicts. On the contrary, they ac-                             kov blanket | Prediction error mini-
        tively favour the EEE story. This is because the Markov property, as exemplified                             mization | Process ontology
        in biological agents, picks out neither a unique nor a stationary boundary. It is
        this multiplicity and mutability– rather than the absence of agent-environment                               Acknowledgements
        boundaries as such - that EEE cognition celebrates.                                                          Thanks to Karl Friston and two
                                                                                                                     anonymous referees for extreme-
                                                                                                                     ly helpful comments on an earlier
                                                                                                                     draft, to John Dupré for invaluable
                                                                                                                     discussions concerning the extend-
                                                                                                                     ed mind and process ontologies,
                                                                                                                     and to Giovanna Colombetti and
                                                                                                                     Joel Krueger for participating in
                                                                                                                     and making possible the ‘Breaking
                                                                                                                     Boundaries’ symposium at the Uni-
                                                                                                                     versity of Exeter, where some of
                                                                                                                     these ideas started to take shape.
                                                                                                                     This paper was drafted during a
                                                                                                                     period of sabbatical leave (Autumn
                  “My cousin has great changes coming – one day he’ll wake with wings”                               2016) kindly granted by the Univer-
                               Cousin Caterpillar (The Incredible String Band)                                       sity of Edinburgh, and completed as
                                                                                                                     part of ERC Advanced Grant XSPECT
                                                                                                                     - DLV-692739.


        1       The Markov Blanket Conception of Mind
        Markov blankets are named after Andrey Markov (1856-1922), a mathematician whose seminal work
        explored abstract systems that remember their past trajectories only insofar as they store a single
        (current) value. In such systems (Markov chains – see Norris 1998) the next state depends only on
        the value of the current state. This is the so-called Markov property. For this reason, such systems are
        sometimes said to be ‘memoryless’.
           Now consider a complex system composed of many interacting nodes (variables). Pearl (Pearl
        1988) introduced the term ‘Markov blanket’ to describe the set of nodes such that, for some given
        node X, the behavior of X could be fully predicted just by knowing the states of those other nodes. The
        states of those neighbouring nodes thus fix (statistically, not causally) the state of the target node con-
        ditionally independently of all the other states of the system, forming a ‘Markov blanket’ that shields
        1 Many of the core ideas of EEE cognition are lately referred to using the even larger grouping ‘4E Cognition’ (see e.g. Newen et al. in press) rather than
          EEE cognition. This adds ‘embedded’, in the sense defended by (Rupert 2009), to the E-pantheon. I have used the ‘EEE’ branding partly because that
          is the label used by Hohwy (Hohwy 2016, Hohwy 2017) in the ‘evil demon’ papers to which the current work responds. ‘EEE Cognition’ also provides
          the most apt label for the contested issues, as it is claims associated with embodied, enactive, and extended (rather than merely ‘embedded’) cognition
          that are the locus of our residual disagreements concerning the conceptual implications of predictive processing.

Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031                         1 | 19
                                                                                                                                             www.predictive-mind.net


        the target node from the rest of the activity in the system. The practical upshot is that, to predict the
        state of the target node, all you ever need to know are the states of the nodes that form its Markov
        blanket2. The Markov blanket comprises the so-called ‘parents’ and ‘children’ of the blanketed node or
        nodes, corresponding to the most proximal actors upon the node (the parents) and the most proximal
        ‘acted-upons’ (the children), along with whatever else acts upon the children (the parents of the chil-
        dren). Markov blankets can be redundant, in that a target node may be enclosed within many Markov
        blankets. Markov blanketed organizations may nest within larger Markov blanketed organization (see
        figure 1), a property that will be important for the treatment that follows. Finally, a Markov boundary
        (Pearl 1988) exists when a Markov blanket for a node has no proper subset that is also a Markov blan-
        ket for that node – it is thus the most minimal (or ‘non-redundant’) Markov blanket for the node.




        Figure 1: Blankets of blankets of blankets. Image by Karl Friston (by permission).

           Hohwy’s (Hohwy 2016, Hohwy 2017) arguments for a form of ‘neurocentric seclusion’ depict the
        states of our biological sensory systems as determining a Markov blanket that (he claims) defines the
        boundaries of the mind. Thus we read that:
             the mind begins where sensory input is delivered through exteroceptive, proprioceptive and intero-
             ceptive receptors and ends where proprioceptive predictions are delivered, mainly in the spinal cord.
             (Hohwy 2016, p. 276)
             Adding in a footnote (footnote 14) that:

             In more technical terms (see Friston 2013), the sensory input and active output at this boundary
             forms a so-called Markov blanket (Pearl 1988) such that observation of the states of these parts of
             the system, together with observation of the prior expectations of the system in principle will allow
             prediction of the behavior of the system as such. Causes beyond this blanket, such as bodily states


        2 This does not imply that, just by knowing the states of the blanket, a theorist could perfectly predict the evolution of the target (contained) nodes. This
          is because the blanketed system may have its own intrinsic dynamics. Thanks to Wanja Wiese for suggesting this clarification.

Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031                           2 | 19
                                                                                                                                          www.predictive-mind.net


             or external states, are rendered uninformative once the states of the blanket are known. (Hohwy
             2016, p. 283; citation style adapted)

           The mind, if this is correct, is firmly bounded by the sensory flows associated with exteroceptive,
        interoceptive, and proprioceptive signaling. Step beyond those sensory flows and (Hohwy argues) the
        Markov property bites, rendering all that led up to those sensory stimulations statistically otiose as a
        predictor of systemic response. That also means that the mind, thus conceived, has no access to states
        of the world beyond that provided by the evidence available at the Markov blanket. Such minds “will
        not be able to distinguish between possibilities where similar flows of sensory input are caused by
        two very different causal processes, beyond the blanket” (Hohwy 2017, sect. 3). Hence they might be
        fooled by a clever Cartesian demon, or by the keepers of the Matrix.

        2       The Markov Blanket Conception of Agents
        Hohwy (Hohwy 2016, Hohwy 2017) also offers the Markov blanket construct as a formalization of
        some important claims concerning the nature and definition of agents. The considerations here weave
        together the Markov blanket considerations and the free energy principle (FEP) described in (Friston
        2010), (Friston and Stephan 2007) and elsewhere.
            FEP (more on which shortly) leverages the simple truth that agents that exist do so because they are
        able to persist, appearing to resist – for periods of time - the second law of thermodynamics that states
        that entropy (disorder) increases over time3. Biological agents are able to resist because the second law
        applies only to isolated (or closed) systems. By exchanging matter and energy with the environment,
        such systems are able to preserve their own integrity and order. They do so, of course, only by increas-
        ing disorder elsewhere (thus ‘obeying’ the second law). We thus enter the realm of living or adaptive
        systems – systems that actively seek out, and work to bring about, the conditions that are necessary
        for their own survival4.
            Such agents are, in an important sense, defined by the particular way they resist disorder. A spe-
        cific type of living agent simply is a set of states that maintain themselves within certain bounds – the
        bounds that describe the conditions necessary for their own survival. Such bounds include, for human
        agents, acceptable ranges of body temperature, the production of glucose to power the metabolism
        that enables foraging, and so on. Only while a whole host of such states remain within set or tolerable
        ranges does the agent (qua that very living being) exist. This adaptive tautology implies that, in a very
        broad sense, every living creature must visit and revisit the set of states that define it as the creature it
        is. In this sense, a living organization is said to be (at least locally) ‘ergodic’ – see (Friston 2013, sect. 4).
            This is where FEP gets invited onto the stage. FEP states that living organisms that persist must
        minimize free energy in their exchanges with the environment. The ‘free energy’ in question here is
        an information-theoretic isomorph of thermodynamic free energy, which is a measure of the energy
        available to do useful work. Useful work, in the information-theoretic story, involves fitting a model
        to a domain, so reducing information-theoretic free energy is improving the model. The free energy
        is then a bound on the long-term average ‘surprisal’ (Tribus 1961) associated with environmental
        engagements, where this names the implausibility of some sensory state given a model of the world.
        Entropy, in this information-theoretic rendition, is the long-term average of surprisal. Reducing in-
        formation-theoretic free energy thus amounts to improving the model so as to reduce (long-term
        average) surprisal. Organisms that minimize long-term average surprisal will, by definition, appear
        to resist the second law of thermodynamics. They will take steps to avoid environmental states and
        encounters that would cause them to undergo catastrophic (‘surprisal-ing’) phase-transitions. They
        3 More accurately, the second law tells us that entropy in an isolated system will either stay the same or increase over time. It can remain constant only
          in certain idealized (e.g. ‘steady-state’) cases. But whenever energy is transferred or transformed, entropy increases.
        4 This formulation suggests – correctly in my view – strong links with the notion of ‘autopoesis’ (Varela et al. 1974). See also section 3 following.

Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031                          3 | 19
                                                                                                                                            www.predictive-mind.net


        achieve this by being structured in ways that in effect ‘exchange entropy’ with the environment, allow-
        ing them to self-organize so as to avoid, for a while at least, the kinds of catastrophic encounters that
        would cause them to cease to exist.
           Hohwy links the FEP to the Markov blanket considerations by identifying the free energy minimiz-
        ing agent or model with the internal states screened off by the Markov blanket. It is in this sense that,
        as Hohwy (Hohwy 2017, sect. 2) puts it “the internal, blanketed states constitute the model”. It is im-
        portant to note that the free energy minimizing ‘model’ here is that which is bounded by sensory and
        active (action-causing) states. This model is then said to be self-evidencing in the sense of (Hempel
        1965). Self-evidencing is typically exemplified by cases such as the following:

             the velocity of recession of a galaxy explains the redshift of its characteristic spectrum, even if the
             observation of that shift is an essential part of the scientist’s evidence that the galaxy is indeed re-
             ceding at that the specified velocity. (Lipton 2001, pp. 44–5)

           But in the case at hand, the very existence of a whole living system (a plant or an animal) provides
        evidence for itself considered as a surprisal-minimizing model. In other words, the goodness of the
        system as a means of exchanging entropy with the environment so as to persist in the face of the sec-
        ond law5 is (self) evidenced by its own existence.
           Notice that nothing in this Markov blanket conception of biological agents requires those agents’
        brains or control systems to engage in online prediction error minimization at all6. Hohwy’s treatment
        (Hohwy 2017) thus covers two issues that – though deeply related - are also importantly distinct.
        The first concerns the status of living systems as self-evidencing free energy minimizing systems. The
        second concerns the specific vision of the human brain as implementing a process of prediction error
        minimization.
           Thus consider a very simple free-energy minimizing life-form, such as a single-celled organism
        capable of survival-enhancing chemotaxis. Such a life-form may respond to environmental pertur-
        bations using a variety of tricks and ploys, none of which require it to engage in a process in which
        incoming sensory stimulations are met with attempts to generate the incoming signal ‘from the top
        down’ using stored knowledge about the world. Such a being, though living and perfectly able to resist
        the second law by exchanging entropy with its environment, could be operating in a purely ‘feed-for-
        ward’ manner, responding to detected chemical gradients in ways not nuanced by any form of top-
        down predictive flow. Talk of such a being ‘predicting’ such-and-such, or ‘minimizing prediction error
        with respect to such and such’ is either simply false or merely short-hand for what is really a rather
        different claim – the claim that the creature is structured so as to favour the kinds of environment
        necessary for its own persistence.
           To describe this whole simple (reactive, feed-forward) creature as a ‘model’ of its world, though
        common in this literature, can also seem somewhat strained. An intelligent agent might harbour an
        explicit model of the layout of her own house, and use it to drive various kinds of ‘offline’ reasoning
        (such as counting the windows while thousands of miles away). An embodied agent might also use
        parts of her own body as a model, for example by counting the windows using her fingers. These are
        core and familiar uses of the notion of a model7.
        5 Or more precisely, in the face of the ‘fluctuation theorem’. This applies to far-from-equilibrium systems (such as living beings), and has the second law
          as a special case. See (Friston and Stephan 2007).
        6 Notice that the mere fact that some creature (a simple feed-forward robot, for example) is not engaging in active online prediction error minimiza-
          tion in no way renders the appeal to a Markov blanket unexplanatory with respect to that creature. The discovery of a Markov blanket indicates the
          presence of some kind of boundary responsible for those statistical independencies. The crucial thing to notice, however, is that those boundaries are
          often both malleable (over time) and multiple (at a given time), as we shall see.
        7 For example, in everyday use the word ‘model’ might be used to mean a scaled down replica such as a toy model of a boat - but not the boat itself. If
          I said ‘the boat is a model of the sea’ most people would take me to be speaking metaphorically. Yet in the technical sense used by Friston and others,
          the boat is quite literally a model of the dynamics of the sea. It is wise to keep these differences in mind when assessing the claim that the free energy
          perspective makes agents into surprise minimizing ‘models’ of their worlds.

Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031                          4 | 19
                                                                                                                                        www.predictive-mind.net


            The matter is complicated, however, by the self-evidencing that is inherent in free energy or surpri-
        sal minimization itself. To see why, notice that negative surprisal is also the ‘Bayesian model evidence’
        (see Friston 2013) associated with some specific Markov blanket and its internal states. Surprisal is
        the negative log probability of sensory states and action given that Markov blanket. In turn, this is
        the Bayesian model evidence for the Markov blanket itself. In this (mathematically quite deep) sense
        minimizing free energy or surprisal is the same as maximizing model evidence for the existence of the
        Markov blanket. The free energy principle, considered as an imperative for biological self-organiza-
        tion, thus necessarily entails some form of self-evidencing8.
            The upshot is that any adaptive system (any system that persists in the face of a changing envi-
        ronment) must display self-evidencing, and might properly be described as self-evidencing a certain
        ‘model of the world’. This is because any system that successfully ‘deals with’ its environment, so as
        temporarily to resist the second law, counts as modelling its environment in this somewhat technical
        sense. Nevertheless, models (organisms or systems) that are self-evidencing in this specific sense need
        not rely upon top-down predictions to structure and inform their exchanges with the wider world.
        Predictive processing thus constitutes a biologically plausible process theory that may or may not
        be implemented in any given biological system. For example, there may be simple systems (such as
        bacteria and viruses) that minimize their surprisal through a genetically pre-configured response to
        sensory perturbations. By the same token, there may be other more complicated systems that resist
        increases in free energy or entropy in part by relying upon some form of predictive processing9.
            Hohwy (Hohwy 2017, sect. 3) also asks “what makes internal models internal?” and once again
        answers by appealing to Markov blankets and self-evidencing. The suggestion seems to be that the real
        internalist commitment is not to cognitive processing being in some important sense ‘brain-bound’
        (in the sense of Clark 2008). Rather, since the organism itself is now (at least in the specific mathemat-
        ical sense just described) the model, the notion of the ‘inner model’ collapses into the claim that there
        exists a Markov blanket organization separating the whole acting organism from the wider world. But
        whatever its other merits, this is not a plausible reconstruction of the notion of internalism at issue in
        the literature on EEE cognition. For EEE theorists do not seek to deny the existence or importance of
        systemic boundaries blanketing the organism from the wider world. Instead, such theorists (see Clark
        2003, Clark 2008) stress the multiplicity, flexibility, and transformability of those boundaries, and the
        way the choice of what boundaries to stress reflects the explanatory interests and projects of the theo-
        rist. This is the main issue to be pursued in the rest of this treatment.
            Putting all this together, every biological system is treated (by Hohwy) as a self-evidencing ‘model’
        of the survival-relevant web of interacting hidden causes partitioned on the other side of a Markov
        blanket constituted by a set of sensory and active states – a blanket that also defines it as the very system
        (creature) it is. The system tracks the wider world only via the changing states of the Markov blanket,
        so that “[t]he nodes of the internal model have access to the states of the blanket […] but the model
        only represents the external causes vicariously” (Hohwy 2017, sect. 3). This also provides Hohwy with
        the opening for his interestingly twisted form of ‘evil demon’ scepticism, as we shall shortly see.

        3       EEE Cognition Revisited
        Summarizing his own recommended approach, Hohwy comments that:

             Many of those [EEE – embodied, extended, enactive] approaches seek to obliterate the Markov
             blanket, and attempt to make perception less inferential, more like action and more connected to
        8 Thanks to Karl Friston (personal communication) for extremely useful discussion of this issue.
        9 Among those systems, those equipped with generative models that enable them actively and systematically to anticipate how the world will alter in
          response to their own possible future actions plausibly constitute the sub-class most demanding of the full predictive processing interpretation – see
          (Pezzulo et al. 2015).

Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031                      5 | 19
                                                                                                                                   www.predictive-mind.net


             the world. The free energy approach instead makes action inferential and conceives it as just a mat-
             ter of internal processing within the Markov blanket. (Hohwy 2017, sect. 7)

            What is right about the EEE stories, Hohwy immediately suggests, is just the strong emphasis on
        causal interactions between mind and world – interactions mediated via “the causal interface of the
        Markov blanket” and resulting in some kind of “reciprocal mirroring of mind and world”.
            I have argued elsewhere (Clark in press) that EEE approaches are best seen as opposed to substan-
        tial notions of mind-world mirroring – the kinds of mirroring that depicts minds as harbouring rich
        enough internal recapitulations of reality to enable us to do most of our cognitive work using tradi-
        tional brain-bound inner models rather than by making the most of the opportunities provided by
        body, world, and action. But suppose the free-energy minimizing ‘model’ that does the mirroring is
        in fact the whole embodied, active organism. We can, if we wish, describe this as an organism’s having
        “transcribed physical laws governing their environment into their structure” or speak of systems that
        “embed [the laws that govern environmental unfoldings] into their anatomy” (both quotes from Fris-
        ton and Stephan 2007, p. 422). But the notion of mirroring itself is now hugely emaciated, effectively
        reduced to that of (non-accidentally) doing whatever it takes to ensure persistence in the face of the
        second law of thermodynamics. Every simple trick and ploy that has been celebrated, in the EEE liter-
        ature, as a means of securing adaptive success thus counts (relative to this undemanding conception)
        as the organisms ‘mirroring’ their environment10. Now, the organism ‘mirrors’ the environment much
        as the shape of the boat (recall note 6 above) ‘mirrors’ the dynamics of the ocean. At this point, some
        theorists may prefer to drop the appeal to mirroring tout court.
            Moreover, the emphasis on causal interactions, once all that is taken into account, seems entirely of
        a piece with even the most radical versions of EEE. For example, citing Wiener’s Cybernetics (Wiener
        1961), Maturana and Varela’s autopoesis (Varela et al. 1974), Chiel and Beer’s neuroethology (Chiel
        and Beer 1997), and Clark’s situatedness (Clark 1997), a leading group of situated roboticists write
        that:

             In this view, adaptive behavior can best be understood within the context of the (biomechanics of
             the) body, the (structure of the organism’s) environment, and the continuous exchange of signals/
             energy between the nervous system, the body, and the environment. Hence the appropriate ques-
             tion to ask is not what the neural basis of adaptive behavior is, but what the contributions of all
             components of the coupled system to adaptive behavior and their mutual interactions are (Mohan
             et al. 2013, p. 17)

           The free energy minimizing story, as we briefly saw, delivers a perfect and principled fit with just
        these kinds of consideration. It depicts the whole embodied organism, appropriately coupled with
        the larger environment, as the system relative to which free energy (and surprise/prediction error) is
        minimized. To that extent, it strikes me as a story that counts in favour of core tenets of the EEE con-
        ception: not merely one that merely preserves the best of EEE while avoiding mistakes and excesses.
           But rather than dwell on these issues, it may be helpful to look a little harder at Hohwy’s conception
        of the EEE project itself. Many EEE approaches, Hohwy commented (op cit, sect. 7) “seek to obliter-
        ate the Markov blanket”. This, it seems to me, is Hohwy’s core reservation. It marks the crucial spot
        at which EEE approaches, in Hohwy’s view, go wrong. But even granted the wide diversity of work
        that falls under the EEE umbrella, I am not persuaded that, on the whole, they seek to obliterate the
        Markov blanket at all. Instead, they aim only to reveal something that is highly compatible with the
        larger story on offer viz that the Markov property, as exemplified in biological agents, picks out neither
        a unique nor a stationary boundary. It is this multiplicity and mutability – rather than the absence of
        10 For useful surveys of many of those tricks and ploys, see (Clark 1997, Pfeifer and Bongard 2006).

Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031            6 | 19
                                                                                                                                             www.predictive-mind.net


        agent-environment boundaries as such - that EEE cognition celebrates, as we’ll see in more detail in
        section 4 following.
           Indeed, a functional analogue of the Markov blanket construct already plays a key role in seminal
        work on the ‘enactive’ approach that stresses the importance of ‘autopoiesis’ (Varela et al. 1974) – a
        form of organization in which the constituent processes actively produce the components needed to
        maintain themselves, and hence maintain the organization itself. Illustrating this, Thompson (Thomp-
        son 2007) notes that:

             A cell stands out of a molecular soup by creating the boundaries that set it apart from that which it
             is not. Metabolic processes within the cell determine these boundaries. In this way the cell emerges
             as a figure out of a chemical background. Should this process of self-production be interrupted, the
             cellular components…gradually diffuse back into a molecular soup. (Varela et al. 1974, p. 99)

           It would be harder to write a more elegant and compelling description of the importance, for living
        forms that resist the second law, of a Markov blanket organization than this. Any autopoietic system
        will, by definition “embody a circular process of self-generation [that] continually re-creates the differ-
        ence between itself and everything else” (Thompson 2007, p. 99). Compare Friston:

             For example, the surface of a cell may constitute a Markov blanket separating intracellular and ex-
             tracellular states. On the other hand, a candle flame cannot possess a Markov blanket, because any
             pattern of molecular interactions is destroyed almost instantaneously by the flux of gas molecules
             from its surface. (Friston 2013, sect. 2)

            The Markov blanket considerations offer a formal and statistical (but, importantly, not intrinsically
        causal11) window onto the space of autopoietic organizational forms. The enactive ‘E’ is thus potential-
        ly in perfect harmony with the FEP.
            Perhaps there is something in the embodied ‘E’ that will cause a problem? Here, it helps to consider
        a concrete example. In a series of experiments, Havas and colleagues (Havas et al. 2010) used Botox
        to induce facial rigidity during an ‘emotion language processing’ task. Subjects were shown sentences
        such as “your closest friend has just been hospitalized” and asked to push a button when they had
        finished reading the sentence. The study found that Botox-induced rigidity hindered the speed of pro-
        cessing of emotion language, concluding that “involuntary facial expressions may play a causal role in
        the processing of emotional language”. In a follow-up study, Neal and Chartrand (Neal and Chartrand
        2011) showed the reverse effect, demonstrating that improving facial feedback12 enhanced the speed of
        processing. Botox-induced facial rigidity thus slowed reading, while gel-induced enhancement speed-
        ed it up. At a minimum, such results suggest that the processing of emotion language involves caus-
        al-functional loops that run through our own involuntary facial expressions. Loops running through
        the actual production of these facial expressions (not merely the issuing of neural commands that
        would normally result in those expressions) thus look to be both functional and integral to the normal
        processing of such stimuli.
            This is a very typical piece of research in ‘embodied cognition’ (for many more such examples, see
        Clark 2008). It is also highly compatible with the predictive processing (PP) story itself. It seems very
        plausible that the role (in emotion processing) of the facial movements is to influence the flow of top-
        down prediction that attempts to ‘explain away’ the facial sensory signal. Our own facial expressions
        (like our own visceral states – see Seth 2013, Pezzulo 2014) simply constitute further sensory evidence
        11 The Markov property is defined by statistical, rather than causal, relations between activity in the various inner and outer nodes. It is this fact, ulti-
           mately, that opens up a space of interesting and important questions concerning the active creation of new Markov blanket organizations as part of a
           life-cycle or as the result of lifetime learning and contingent external influences. We turn to these matters in sections 5-7 below.
        12 Feedback signals are enhanced when muscle contractions meet resistance, so they used a gel to amplify that effect.

Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031                           7 | 19
                                                                                                                                   www.predictive-mind.net


        that helps drive the Bayesian machine more rapidly towards conclusions – here, conclusions concern-
        ing the meanings of the words on the screen.
            Someone might still ask, of course, if this functionally important loop though facial expression is
        part of the cognitive process itself, or is merely input to that process? Otherwise put, is the facial ex-
        pression partly constitutive of the cognitive process or is its role merely causal – just input to the true
        cognitive process? Here, the appeal to Markov blankets seems of little help. For we could just as easily
        ask ‘does the actual facial expression lie within or beyond the Markov blanket that marks the bound-
        aries of the mind and the mental?’ The point to notice is that translating the question into these terms
        goes no way at all towards providing an answer! This is because (as we shall see in more detail below) a
        single adaptive system will typically comprise multiple blanketed organizations – blankets of blankets
        of blankets. Which ones (if any) should count as tracking, at a given moment, the machinery of mind
        is precisely the question at issue.
            Such debates have (for better or for worse) been central to the philosophical and scientific debate
        concerning the ‘extended mind’13 – see, for example, a similar debate (Clark 2007) concerning the role
        of actual physical gestures in the processes of thinking and reasoning. Notice that the ‘causal versus
        constitutive’ question makes sense even if all parties are agreed that the inner neural regime is treating
        the facial states as additional evidence in a Bayesian inference. The question stands – and all the old
        arguments, pro and con apply - even if the neural contributions are all understood through the lens of
        Markov blankets, predictions and prediction error minimization.

        4       Extended Predictive Minds
        Hohwy (Hohwy 2016) does not agree. There, he offers three reasons to reject the ‘extended mind’
        claim concerning processes and operations supported by familiar bio-external hardware such as note-
        books and smart-phones. The first is that:

             it is far from clear that notebooks and smartphones actually play any part of the functional role set
             out by PEM. (Hohwy 2016, p. 270)

            But what exactly is required for an item to play part of that functional role? It seems clear enough
        that a reliable non-biological systemic element could play a role in enabling a system to minimize
        free-energy and resist the second law – examples might include cochlear implants and spectacles.
        The prediction-error minimization (PEM) story is, however, more specific and refers to the specific
        message-passing scheme depicted in work on hierarchical predictive coding. Deploying that rather
        specific kind of process-schema is not required, however (as we saw earlier) in order to count as part
        of an integrated system that resists the second law. A simple free-energy or surprisal minimizing sys-
        tem need not necessarily engage in anything that resembles the top-down use of stored information
        to predict the current or evolving sensory flux. By extension, not every proper part of an integrated
        free-energy minimizing system (e.g. a cognitive agent) that does implement such an online prediction
        error minimizing process need itself be directly involved in that process. It is plausible, for example,
        that gross morphology (e.g. the shape of my hand) serves to minimize free energy in my embodied
        exchanges with the world, while not implementing any part of such an online process. By the same
        token, a system that minimizes free energy using online prediction error minimizing techniques (a
        ‘PEM system’) could be part of a larger free energy minimizing whole that includes multiple sub-sys-
        tems that do not work that way.
            Moreover, even if we decided - for whatever reason - that any genuinely cognitive process must be
        in some way entangled with prediction error minimization (a very strong claim for which no justi-
        fication has been provided) that would still fall short of ruling out the notebook. It would fall short
        13 See e.g. (Adams and Aizawa 2001, Clark 2008), and many of the exchanges in (Menary 2010).

Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031            8 | 19
                                                                                                                                   www.predictive-mind.net


        because the timescale of entanglement would remain to be determined. Thus recall that Clark and
        Chalmers (Clark and Chalmers 1998), in their flagship treatment of these issues, argued only for the
        extension of long-term standing (so-called ‘dispositional’) beliefs – for example, your standing belief
        that Missouri is one of the United States of America. Most likely, you do not go around rehearsing this
        sentence even though you count, at all times, as believing it. Our claim was that for this kind of belief,
        long-term bio-external storage could be on a par with long-term bio-internal storage. The entries in
        Otto’s infamous notebook play (we argued) this very role, under-writing patterns in potential be-
        haviour (e.g. how Otto would answer certain questions if asked) apt for one who holds that belief. But
        for the notebook entry to actually drive a piece of behaviour in the here-and-now, that information
        needs to be activated or accessed, potentially as part of a process that involves prediction error mini-
        mization along the way. That means that the making use of the bio-external encoding may call upon
        whatever processes we deem (for whatever reason) essential to here-and-now cognizing.
            To illustrate this, let’s adapt an example treated at greater length in (Clark 2005). Imagine that one
        option for long-term bio-storage, in some alien life-form, is to create a stable ‘bit-mapped image’ – a
        kind of ‘pixel-level’ retinal screenshot, tagged with some information to enable later retrieval. Let’s
        further suppose that this bit-mapped image is stored in some relatively inert fashion, e.g. using an
        alien-biological equivalent of flash memory. When these alien creatures want to recall that event, they
        may choose (if they wish – we may assume they command a fluid reconstructive bio-memory also) to
        retrieve the full bit-mapped image. When they do so, the information in the stored image still needs to
        be interpreted, and hence is now dealt with in much the same way as incoming sensory information.
            The bit-mapped ‘memory’ is thus every bit as stable and ‘inert’ as the notebook used by Otto in
        Clark’s and Chalmers’ (Clark and Chalmers 1998) infamous thought-experiment. But in the aliens, the
        process of encoding and accessing the stored trace is fully biologically supported. Notice that this is
        not to deny that memory in us humans is reconstructive and dynamic. The point here is just that it was
        not conceptually necessary for that to be the case. Had cognitive science found that a few elements of
        the human bio-memory system were not reconstructive, we would not have concluded that those ele-
        ments failed to form part of human cognizing. The imaginary aliens are meant to help reveal this fact.
        The extended mind theorist argues that, in the alien case, we would have no hesitation in counting the
        bit-mapped encodings as part and parcel of the alien life form’s cognition. But if so, then the fact that
        something very similar happens in other beings, such as ourselves, using a combination of biological
        and bio-external (e.g. notebook-based) ought not – she argues - be treated in any different way. For
        the functional upshot is relevantly similar. So it can only be skin-and skull prejudice that stops us ex-
        tending the same courtesy to many of our own bio-external resources.
            Might the relative inertness of a resource itself be a problem for the claim that it forms part of a
        cognitive economy that enables a creature temporarily to resist the second law? I don’t think so. For a
        relative inert systemic element may nonetheless help a larger system resist the second law. As a clear
        example, consider birds that swallow stones and grit to help them digest their food. These so-called
        ‘gizzard stones’ (Solomon et al. 2002, p. 664) are relatively inert but function to help grind the food,
        rendering it digestable and thus helping the birds stay alive. Likewise for bit-mapped images and
        trusty notebooks – they may be relatively inert when not in use yet function, within the larger system,
        so as to help enable apt adaptive response.
            Such, in a nutshell, is the core argument for the ‘extended mind’. I will not here rehearse the layers
        upon layers of further argument that might ensue (again, see Clark 2005, for the full story). Instead,
        let’s also imagine that the alien life-form’s brain is, in all other respects, a predictive processing device.
        Moreover, let’s assume that at the time of encoding and at the time of use, the use of the bit-mapping
        faculty is selected and orchestrated by the core PP principles of precision-weighted prediction error
        minimization. Thus the choice of when to use the bit-mapping faculty is itself responsive to systemic
        best-guessing about what means of storage (and what kind of current retrieval) will reduce the greatest
        amount of sensory uncertainty in the long term. In other words, the prediction-free strategy is deli-
Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031            9 | 19
                                                                                                                                   www.predictive-mind.net


        cately embedded in a prediction-rich economy. It would be wrong (I submit) to argue that the bit-map
        storage faculty is not part of the overall cognitive economy of that creature. The moral is that not every
        part of the full cognitive economy needs itself to display the full PEM profile. And once this is allowed
        (as it surely must be) for the imaginary, bio-internal case of the alien life-form, I see no principled
        reason to disallow the bio-external analogues available to creatures such as ourselves. Thus we should
        reject Hohwy’s assertion that:

             The challenge is to specify the role of notebooks or smartphones, or any other thing, such that it
             clearly plays an appropriate prediction error minimization role. (Hohwy 2016, p. 270)

           We should reject this because the very most that could reasonably be required is that such a re-
        source be appropriately embedded within some larger prediction error minimizing economy. Alter-
        natively, it might be suggested that the ‘embedding’ scenario I described, since it appeals to the long-
        term error-minimizing effects of the use of the notebook or bit-mapping, shows how very easy it is to
        achieve the right degree of integration to count as ‘playing part of the PEM functional role’. Either way,
        the prima facie case against the notebook is defeated.
           Hohwy’s second worry is that cases such as the notebook raise questions concerning the evidentia-
        ry boundary for the self-evidencing model. The thought is that:

             This boundary should make it clear that prediction error is minimized for a system including the
             external object to which cognition is extended, and with respect to hidden causes outside this ex-
             tended boundary. (Hohwy 2016, p. 270)

            In the case of the notebook, let’s assume it includes an entry with an address that matters for doing
        my job, hence getting paid, hence tending to eat and persist. This, in any civilized society, ought to be a
        caricature - but you get the idea. The address picks out a place beyond the boundary of the bio-Andy-
        plus-notebook system. So the relevant ‘hidden cause’ lies beyond the boundary, just as Hohwy (op cit,
        p. 270) insists. Is the notebook ‘part of the model providing evidence for itself ’? I suggest that it is – or
        rather, I suggest that this is one place we might draw a defensible (though non-unique – more on that
        soon) boundary. Again, we can motivate this by considering a different, more purely biological, case.
        Consider the spider and the web. The web, once created, is an organism-external structure that forms
        a proper part of the free-energy minimizing system. This is the system responsible for adaptive fitness,
        and it is in exactly this sense that the web is depicted as part of an ‘extended phenotype’ (see Dawkins
        1982) or even as an ‘external physiological organ’ (Turner 2009).
            In just the same way, it seems to me, we should count the notebook as an organism-external struc-
        ture that is part of a larger free energy minimizing system that, by exchanging entropy with the even
        larger environment, provides evidence for itself. Hohwy (op cit) also insists that evidentiary bound-
        aries be defined so as to demarcate systems that minimize average prediction error ‘in the long run’.
        This raises complex issues concerning change within the life-cycle, and we return to these in section 5.
            Is there, within this larger free energy minimizing whole, a smaller whole relative to which the
        notebook is external? Surely there is. Similarly, my biological body is heavily reliant on the activity of
        various colonies of microbes. Indeed, up to 90% of the cells comprising my body are said to be ‘mi-
        crobial symbionts’. Each individual microbe is a free energy minimizing whole, complete with its own
        Markov blanket, and I would easily survive the loss of one or many of these cells. The lesson (which
        we return to below) is that complex creatures are composed of layer upon layer of Markov blankets -
        which layers we choose to emphasize can only be fixed by our local explanatory interests and purposes.
            How might we apply this lesson to the matter of locating the mind? Here, the key observation (go-
        ing back at least to Haugeland 1998) is that we should not simply assume that metabolic boundaries
        and cognitive boundaries always and everywhere coincide. Just as the boundaries of the liver cell are
Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031           10 | 19
                                                                                                                                     www.predictive-mind.net


        not those of the liver, and the boundaries of the digestive system are not those of the immune system,
        so the bounds of metabolism and bio-sensing need not be those most relevant for sensing (more gen-
        erally understood) or thinking. Which boundaries we choose (hence which capacities we identify as
        those of the agent herself) will depend on our wider explanatory purposes.
           Hohwy’s third and final worry is that:

             There is something unattractive about both acknowledging that an external object (such as a note-
             book) is represented in the mind’s model of the world and insisting at the same time that that object
             is itself part of some of the mind’s mental states. It is unattractive because it means the object is
             both beyond one evidentiary boundary and within a further evidentiary boundary. (Hohwy 2016,
             p. 270)

           To see why this is not a problem, compare the case of an agent who uses a sensory aid such as spec-
        tacles or a blind-person’s cane. When in use, the spectacles or cane mark clear (though non-unique)
        evidentiary limits. My brain minimizes prediction error relative to a flow of evidence that would not
        be available without the spectacles/cane. But suppose I lose the spectacles or the cane. Now they lie
        outside the evidentiary limits, and I must minimize prediction relative to an impoverished flow of
        evidence.
           Hohwy goes on to argue that:

             This is not an inconceivable state of affairs but it […] requires that we posit two overlapping yet
             intimately linked EE [Explanatory-Evidentiary] -circles with different evidentiary boundaries. If
             there are two EE-circles, then the input to each of the circles will be evidence for the existence of
             two distinct yet overlapping agents. This may be considered an argument for extended cognition
             but at the unattractive cost of proliferating the number of agents centered on a particular organism.
             (Hohwy 2016, p. 270)

           But what this really shows, I suggest, is something subtly but importantly different. What it really
        shows is that the notion of a single persisting agent should not be identified with a stationary set of
        Explanatory-Evidentiary (EE) boundaries at all. Instead, we should adopt a process ontology relative to
        which a persisting agent can be identified with a rolling process that builds and re-builds its own evi-
        dentiary boundaries on the fly. Such agents ‘knit their own Markov blankets’ in ways that can change
        over time, without the agent thereby ceasing to exist. It is to this – admittedly challenging – project
        that I next turn.

        5       The Multiplicity and Malleability of Markov Blankets
        Consider the metamorphic insects14. These insects undergo a dramatic change of form as part of their
        standard lifecycle. Where metamorphosis occurs, the young life-stages do not look or behave in any-
        thing like the same way as the adult or mature life-stages. They may eat radically different foods, and
        locomote in totally different ways. A familiar example is the transformation of a caterpillar into a
        butterfly. Caterpillars crawl, eat leaves and do not mate. Butterflies fly, seek out nectar, and mate with
        other butterflies. In the amphibian world, the small swimming tadpole becomes a large jumping frog.
        Such examples can seem exotic. But in fact, metamorphic insects alone account for at least 40% of the
        world’s total animal populations. As an evolutionary strategy, metamorphosis works - it is not a rare
        or exceptional solution to the problem of adaptive success. Moreover, even non-metamorphic animals
        such as cats, dogs, and humans, exhibit striking differences between mature and immature forms, with
        the very young looking and behaving quite differently to the older forms. While at the extreme end
        14 The brief sketch that follows is based on (Jabr 2012), and the Encyclopædia Britannica entry at https://www.britannica.com/science/metamorphosis.

Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031                11 | 19
                                                                                                                                           www.predictive-mind.net


        of the spectrum lie the so-called hypermetamorphic insects that exhibit a whole series of dramatic
        changes across the lifespan.
            Metamorphosis poses an interesting puzzle15 for Hohwy’s picture of the links between persisting
        agents, free energy, and the ‘self-evidencing model’. The phase-transitions that occur as part of the
        developmental trajectories characteristic of metamorphic animals are dramatic enough to count as
        failures of the earlier stage life-form to continue to harvest evidence for its own existence. Yet it seems
        wrong to think that the transitions constitute breakdowns or failures in the organism’s war against the
        second law of thermodynamics. The caterpillar does not lose the war when it transforms into a butter-
        fly. On the contrary, the act of transformation is itself an essential part of the on-going project of ex-
        changing entropy with the environment so as to persist in the face of the second law. For example, it is
        conjectured that metamorphosis has adaptive value because it allows younger and older forms to share
        the same territory without consuming the same resources or being exposed to the same predators.
            A natural response to this prima facie puzzle is to point to the genetically determined nature of
        the phase-transitions (hence the succession of differently blanketed organizational forms) themselves.
        The genes that control metamorphosis are reasonably well-understood, and can be selectively blocked
        so that (for example) the caterpillar never turns into a pupa and hence never undergoes the caterpil-
        lar-to-butterfly phase transition – see (Bayer et al. 2003). It is reasonable, then, to think of the overall
        life-cycle as an evolved, self-evidencing, free-energy minimizing strategy. The life-cycle is self-evi-
        dencing insofar as the very existence of the linked stages (caterpillar, pupa, butterfly) provides evi-
        dence for the ‘model’ that is the metamorphic agent, where that agent is not identified with a specific
        morphology (which would correspond merely to one stage of the lifecycle) but with the temporally
        extended whole16.
            This, I submit, is the correct way to think about metamorphic beings in the free energy framework.
        It is also a revealing platform from which to re-consider Hohwy’s worries concerning embodied cog-
        nition and the extended mind. Thus consider the wide range of bodily and sensory augmentations that
        already characterize many human lifespans. These include the use of spectacles to improve vision, and
        the wearing of clothes to help tolerate heat and cold. For some of us, they include the use of pacemak-
        ers, cochlear implants, and prosthetic limbs. In the near-future they may include the use of techniques
        such as refractive lens exchange to deliver not just restored but augmented vision – for example, by
        providing infra-red (IR) sensitivity. If my bio-typical lens is replaced with an artificial one that aug-
        ments my visual repertoire, and its outputs properly integrated in downstream neural processing, it
        would seem strangely unmotivated to insist that ‘my’ true evidentiary boundaries remain those of the
        bare (IR-insensitive) biological system. Closer to home, we can easily imagine IR sensory evidence
        being made available via a mediating wearable technology such as Google Glass.
            To be sure, we could identify a Markov blanket wherever the new technologies interface with the
        old bio-systems. In the case of ordinary spectacles or the IR-enabling Google-glass, this would line
        up with a known long-term boundary of interest. In the case of the lens replacement, perhaps only
        surgeons would consider the interface (between the new lens and the post-retinal wiring) a boundary
        of interest. But the lesson is that complex living beings are composed of layer upon layer of Markov
        blankets, reaching at least all the way down to cellular organelles and macro-molecules like DNA (de-
        oxyribonucleic acid). Different explanatory purposes drive us to highlight some of these blankets (of
        blankets) at the expense of others. But no blanket or set of blankets is privileged in and of itself. Nor
        does the temporality of any specific Markov blanket organization seem intrinsically privileged. In the
        15 I was led to consider the intriguing case of the metamorphic insects by (Friston and Stephan 2007, p. 435), who note the prima facie puzzle posed by
           their dramatic phase-transitions, that nonetheless occur within well-defined within developmental trajectories.
        16 This again raises interesting question concerning ergodicity – here, the tendency of the blanketed systems to visit and re-visit the same sets of states
           over time. For we now confront a time-series in which there are profound changes in the states that are re-visited during different ‘chunks’ of the
           life-cycle. This is reminiscent, in the context of work on the ‘extended mind’, of the arrival of a new technology whose operations become so deeply
           integrated as to be called upon again and again in (some part of the) temporally-subsequent lifespan.

Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031                       12 | 19
                                                                                                                                             www.predictive-mind.net


        case of the metamorphic insects there is dramatic change across time, so that no stable Markov blan-
        ket organization characterizes the biological agent across the life-span. Instead, what seems to have
        been selected is an ongoing process that delivers different organizational forms (different blankets of
        blankets) at different times. As one of these forms gives way to another, there is some kind of preser-
        vation of systemic integrity – the biological being thus resists dissipation and death. But it would be a
        mistake to look for a single form or blanket of blankets that persists throughout the lifespan. Instead,
        we should see the shifting forms (and the shifting mosaics of Markov blankets) as themselves the
        means – the process – by which long-term surprisal is minimized.
            The extended mind claim is that, considered as cognitive agents, human beings are ‘mentally met-
        amorphic’ – as we move through life, the sets of tools, strategies, and devices (neural, bodily, and
        bio-external) that constitute us as the mindful beings we are undergoes dramatic alteration. Very
        young human life-forms do not count, as part of their cognitive apparatus, the use of pens, papers,
        and notebooks. But that can change over time, as the capacities they make available become more and
        more deeply integrated with bio-native cognitive operations. As we move through life, different bits
        of the encountered and humanly designed world become repeatedly and deeply incorporated into our
        individual cognitive routines, persisting or decaying according to need, use and the vagaries of our en-
        abling socio-technological cocoon. Importantly, the predictive processing architecture itself provides
        a powerful mechanism enabling the flexible, repeated integration of capacities and operations made
        available by the use of reliable bio-external resources (see Clark in press, sect. 8, and Clark 2016, ch. 8).
        I won’t rehearse those considerations here, since it is in any case evident – merely from observing our
        human capacity to become fluent users of a lifetime succession of new tools and technologies – that
        such fluidity is a crucial part of our heritage17.

        6       Blanket-Weaving Blankets of Blankets
        Can we reconcile Hohwy’s vision of agents as self-evidencing, free-energy-minimizing systems with
        the EEE emphasis on the multiplicity and malleability of the Markov blanket organizations them-
        selves? The best way to do so, it seems to me, would be to embrace a process (rather than a state-based)
        ontology, perhaps of the form described and defended in (Dupré 2012, Dupré 2014)18. State-based on-
        tologies, Dupré notes, view entities as things and often ask what changes those ‘things’ can and cannot
        tolerate. Process–based ontologies for biology, by contrast, take change as given and focus on the way
        some processes of change (in the case of living systems) constitute a powerful means of temporarily
        resisting the second law.
           Dupré notes that the life-cycles of many organisms – including humans – includes multiple very
        different forms, and asks (Dupré 2014, p. 33) “why assume there must be anything common to every
        stage beyond their participation in a continuous process?” The metamorphic insects (section 5 above)
        raise this issue in an especially dramatic way. But it applies to every animal that undergoes develop-
        mental change. From such a perspective “a cat is a pathway from zygote to kitten to mature animal
        to death” (Dupré 2014, p. 33). As this pathway unfolds, nothing need be common to all the temporal
        parts except for their participation in the process. Nonetheless there seems no reason to think that
        a temporally extended process cannot itself be a free-energy minimizing system that might even be
        identified with some self-evidencing agent of interest. For it is the process-based succession of pro-
        cesses that must, ultimately, account for the temporary resistance of living organisms to the second
        law.
        17 But notice also that the fluidity in question is itself plausibly at least partially determined by cultural innovations such as reading and writing, since
           these enable the easy transmission of the staged training regimes required to master new tools and techniques. See (Heyes 2012).
        18 See also (Dupré and O’Malley 2009), and for a general introduction, (Seibt 2016).

Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031                         13 | 19
                                                                                                                                    www.predictive-mind.net


           At this point, I suspect that Hohwy will wish to emphasize the difference between an organism with
        a genetically (or at any rate, epigenetically19) determined pathway from one form to the next, and the
        case of a human agent who comes across a new tool or technology such as a smartphone and slowly
        incorporates it into their cognitive routines. Should we say that the caterpillar-butterfly process counts
        as a unity that resists entropy and maximizes evidence for itself over the long run, whereas the hu-
        man-smartphone unity is too fleeting and too arbitrary to count? Such a response is perhaps suggested
        by the comment that:

             Whereas prediction error can be minimized transiently by systems with all sorts of objects in-
             cluded (e.g. shooting the tiger with a gun), on average and over the long run, it is most likely that
             the model providing evidence for itself is just the traditional, un-extended biological organism.
             (Hohwy 2016, p. 270)

            But notice, first, that we do not have to settle for a single self-evidencing model. Within the human
        agent, there will be many self-evidencing ‘models’ including single cells and, as Dupré (Dupré 2014)
        nicely notes, every member of the successive colonies of bacteria that inhabit the human gut and help
        us digest our food. Should we nonetheless assume that where there is a persisting human person there
        is a unique, unchanging self-evidencing system bounded by a unique, unchanging Markov blanket?
        There is no reason to think so. The sets of unfolding processes that constitute the infant human are
        not the same as the sets of processes that constitute the adult form, and the infant brain itself is very
        different from the adult. So even once we fix on some Markov blanket organization of interest, that
        organization will itself be realized as a process undergoing constant change. Any Markov blanket
        bounded organizational form can be changed, re-deployed, or re-configured through interaction with
        the inner and outer environment.
            Most importantly of all, we need to recognize learning itself as a key transformative process. It is a
        process (or set of processes) that forms part of both our biological and cultural heritage, and that – I
        would argue – delivers a succession of differently constituted mental and sensory organizations as part
        of its normal operation. That same process (or set of processes) can, we saw, re-configure effective sys-
        temic boundaries in many ways. The person equipped with the IR-lens will soon learn to use that in-
        formation fluidly for the control of perceptuo-motor routines, as will the person who uses an add-on
        device such as Google Glass. In each case, the effect of learning is to generate a ‘motor-informational
        weave’ (Clark in press) that alters the effective bounds of sensing and action. When the well-woven
        equipment (the notebook, a software package) plays a role in the storage and transformation of in-
        formation, we may speak of ‘extended cognizing’ rather than merely ‘extended sensing’ – but in each
        case, the key features are the same. The fact that we can still, if we wish, define a set of boundaries (a
        Markov blanket) that falls within these larger wholes is unsurprising. For even within the basic bio-
        logical whole, there are many other boundaries we could choose. And whatever set of boundaries we
        happen to focus upon, they will themselves be subject to change in virtue of their realization by tem-
        porally-evolving processes rather than stable states.
           Creatures like us, I conclude, are Nature’s experts at knitting their own Markov blankets. Courtesy
        of biology, culture and learning we are ‘natural-born Cyborgs’ (Clark 2003) – self-organizing pro-
        cesses that constantly re-invent themselves, repeatedly re-defining their own cognitive, bodily, and
        sensory forms.
        19 For example, (Dupré 2014, p. 34) notes that “the growing meristem of a plant is typically an opportunistic growth process capable of producing a
           variety of structures – leaves, ﬂowers, roots – in response to the environment it encounters.”

Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031               14 | 19
                                                                                                                                   www.predictive-mind.net


        7       Demonic Couplings
        I have tried to show that the Markov blanket organizations most relevant to the study of mind and life
        are multiple and malleable. But multiple, malleable organizations are organizations nonetheless. That
        means that for a given explanatory interest, at a given moment in time (a window within the evolving
        process), there will indeed be a Markov blanket on one side of which lie the interacting worldly causes
        that are (in Hohwy’s very broad sense) ‘modelled’ by the temporarily persisting system. Suppose in
        addition that the system in question is one that constructs some kind of conscious experience of its
        world. This awareness, Hohwy argues, must involve a form of inference conditioned upon the sensory
        evidence, concerning the world beyond the blanket. This, opens the door to scepticism, since as long
        as the energetic exchanges across the sensory boundaries are held constant the agent cannot know
        whether the world beyond is one way or another. Given her priors and the sensory evidence, she will
        construct the same world regardless. This is the ‘evil demon’ (or Matrix) scenario pursued in (Hohwy
        2016) and revealingly refined in (Hohwy 2017). Is there something about this sceptical scenario that
        puts pressure on EEE cognition?
            In (Clark in press) I argue that there is not. I claim that what EEE cognition rejects is not scepticism
        so much as the ‘richly re-constructive’ vision of mind. A richly reconstructive vision depicts the mind
        as an inner arena populated by representational forms sufficiently rich and stable to enable us to do
        all the ‘real’ cognitive work in an effectively ‘offline’ manner, relegating sensing and action to simply
        inputting a problem specification and outputting a solution - one that action merely implements. The
        alternative is to recognize that action, as well as gross bodily form and reliable environmental features,
        can form part of the solution itself – as we see in many well-studied examples (see Clark 2008) ranging
        from the use of fingers in counting, to gestures while speaking, to yellow sticky-notes posted on the
        wall. The core EEE insight, I believe, is that circular (perceptuo-motor) causality in a richly structured
        and often repeatedly self-structured environment is itself the core adaptive strategy, and that the neu-
        ral contribution is best seen as just one part of this wider body-and-world-involving mosaic.
           As far as I can tell, Hohwy (Hohwy 2017) accepts that broad vision. But he remains concerned
        to stress the apparent insulation of conscious experience behind a veil of sensing and acting. If all
        that this means is that, in principle, as long as my priors and the flow of energies across my sensory
        surfaces remain fixed, I cannot know whether or not I am a Matrix-world ‘brain-in-a-highly-intelli-
        gent-vat’, I am happy to agree. Notice that being thus en-vatted would in no way alter the fact that the
        problem-solving strategies I deploy make great use of extra-neural opportunities. The vat-being, thus
        construed, can robustly rely on the use of her fingers for counting, and she can post yellow sticky notes
        aplenty on the surfaces of her sensed office. Mildly cognitively impaired Otto, in vat-world, likewise
        makes use of a trusty notebook that allows him to behave in many of the ways characteristic of having
        a multitude of standing beliefs that are not enshrined in his neural apparatus in the bio-typical man-
        ner. As we move deeper and deeper into the 21st century, vat-world too may be increasingly home to
        enhanced and augmented agents, who have extended their bio-typical sensory boundaries using new
        devices such as IR-sensitive replacement lenses. All this is true, it seems to me, regardless of the fact
        that, in vat-world, these cognitive extensions and boundary-changing alterations are implemented in
        vat-controlled software rather than whatever hardware ultimately - or so we presume - comprises the
        physical universe we inhabit
           In a revealing twist on his original (2016) demon-description, Hohwy (Hohwy 2017) further shows
        that to the extent that all this is true, the prediction-error minimizing agent is in fact manipulating
        the demon (the intelligent vat) by giving action commands whose fulfilment requires the demon to
        compliantly alter the apparent flows of energy across her (apparent) sensory surfaces.
Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031           15 | 19
                                                                                                                                   www.predictive-mind.net


             What shall we make of this? In Hohwy’s well-chosen words:

             [N]o evidence available to the agent distinguishes between the hypothesis that they really have an
             arm and the hypothesis that an evil demon is deceiving them to think they have an arm. Note that
             the internal states of the agent are part of a dynamic causal chain that modulates the states of the
             hidden causes. This holds whether the external states harbor real arms and other familiar things,
             or a demon. We are assuming the world contains either of these, and that they causally impact the
             agent’s sensory states. In the demon world, this means the demon’s states causally entrain the agent’s
             internal states. But equally, through active inference, the agent’s states causally entrain the demon’s
             states. If the demon is not entrained like this, then the agent’s prediction errors would not be min-
             imized in active inference. (Hohwy 2017, sect. 6)

            This is a lovely observation. The inevitable entrainment of the demon/vat by the agent shows (I
        would argue) that the shape and structure of the experienced world – the world as presented in expe-
        rience – is nothing over and above the shape and structure of an open-ended set of possible encoun-
        ters, shaped by human needs and the affordances of body and world. Whether all that is ultimately
        implemented in the standard or some non-standard (e.g. envatted) way is unimportant. This is just
        another way of showing that the demon thought experiment puts no pressure on the core claims of
        EEE cognition, at least as I would construct them. Within vat-world, all the interesting and unexpect-
        ed patterns of reliance upon bodily and extra-neural sources of stability and structure celebrated by
        EEE cognition remain in force. More radically still, Chalmers (Chalmers 2005) and Clark (Clark 2005)
        argue that that the very reality of arms, legs, notebooks, and sticky-notes is unaffected by these variant
        implementations, since ‘realness’ should never have been predicated upon the correctness of some
        specific deep physics in the first place. If we go this route, the premise of the thought experiment is
        itself undermined – ‘all’ the demon has done is altered some implementation details while preserving
        our perfectly real world. But I mention this only in passing since (as we just saw) it is not necessary to
        endorse this more radical view in order to move beyond the image of neurocentric seclusion, even for
        the envatted brain.
            Finally – more for fun than as an attempt at further argument – suppose we step outside the realm
        of constructed experience and ask how the vat-agent exchanges entropy with the environment so
        as to persist (as some kind of evolving process) in the face of the second law? The answer, from the
        agent’s perspective, implicates multiple perception-action loops that exploit extra-neural resources of
        varying kinds. But those extra-neural resources are now held steady only – I presume – by the expen-
        diture of a great deal of demonic energy. If we deny this, then the truth of the demon scenario would
        simultaneously imply the falsity of the free-energy principle itself. Assuming this is not the intention,
        we must imagine that the demon is busily exchanging entropy with some larger demon-world, so
        as to persist long enough to be suitably entrained by the vat-agent. Such a demon would herself be
        well-placed to conform to the core principles of EEE cognition, increasing the efficiency of her own
        demonic stratagems by making maximal use of sources of order and structure beyond the bounds of
        the demon-brain itself.

        8       Conclusions: From States to Processes
        I have tried to show that EEE approaches, even those that embrace ‘extended minds’, do not thereby
        seek to obliterate Markov blankets from their depictions of mind and agency. To do so would, as
        Hohwy and Friston correctly stress, disable the controlled exchange of entropy and expose the agent
        or cognitive system to immediate fatal dissipation – bad news even for an extended mind. In (Clark
        in press) I argue that EEE approaches are best seen as rejecting ‘richly reconstructive’ visions of mind.
        But that is really only half the story. The other half of the story (pursued today) concerns the way
Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031           16 | 19
                                                                                                                                     www.predictive-mind.net


        embodied minds and embodied agents repeatedly re-configure their own boundaries in ways that
        promote adaptive success. Such repeated reconfiguration does not always result in the destruction of
        the older blanketed organizations, which may simply become further nested. But it may sometimes –
        as in the case of the metamorphic insects – do so. Either way, it results in the creation of new systems
        of explanatory interest. Such systems remain locally ergodic. They visit and re-visit states that their
        predecessors did not, while remaining stages of a single life-cycle.
            Dramatic change in the metamorphic insects is genetically controlled, and thus counts as ‘expect-
        ed’ in some very broad evolutionary sense. But many biological agents are, in the same broad sense,
        ‘expected’ to engage in lifetime learning, altering their effective environments and (in our case) creat-
        ing tools and technologies that may shift the sensory boundaries themselves. That same process can
        usher into being new individualistic organizational forms, such as the bio-being+smartphone, or new
        collective forms, such as a nation-state. Learning and neural plasticity thus open the doors for new or
        successor blanketed systems consequent upon cultural and technological (including bio-engineered)
        innovations.
            The perspective I am recommending may seem challenging insofar as it invites us to contemplate
        agents whose sensory boundaries are not fixed and whose cognitive architectures may extend, in tem-
        porally varying ways, beyond the biological brain. But perhaps this should not surprise us unduly.
        For there already exists a potent inner equivalent in the ‘predictive processing’ account of attention
        and variable precision-weighting itself. Attentional mechanisms, that story suggests, alter patterns
        of inner (neural) effective connectivity so as to enforce information flows that are highly specialized
        for the task at hand (Clark 2016, Clark in press). Attention, if this is correct, itself imposes a kind of
        transient organizational form, with its own distinctive Markov blanket organization (marked by tem-
        porary conditional statistical independencies), upon the brain. Attentional mechanisms may thus be
        seen as driving the formation and dissolution of a short-lived Markov partitioning within the neural
        economy itself20, temporarily insulating some aspects of on-board processing from others according
        to the changing demands of task and context. These transient neuronal ensembles then recruit (and
        may also be recruited by) shifting coalitions of bodily and worldly elements, resulting in the repeated
        construction of temporary task-specific devices that span brain, body, and world. In this way, the ebb
        and flow of neural influence is matched by an ebb and flow of bodily and worldly influence. It is the
        progressive generation and maintenance of these nested transient partitionings, swept up in the circu-
        lar causal dynamics that bind perception and action, that enables living beings to persist and minimize
        free energy across their lifespan.
            Hohwy’s insightful probing has thus revealed something deeply important. It has forced us to rec-
        ognize that the picture of biological agents as free-energy-minimizing systems requires something
        closer to a process-based (rather than a static or state-based) ontology. If the free-energy minimizing
        system is really a free-energy minimizing process, much that is otherwise puzzling falls into place. For
        processes are by their very nature on-going, and can repeatedly generate new forms, boundaries, and
        constituent structures as they continue to exchange entropy with whatever counts (at a given stage) as
        the wider world.




        20 A more familiar case may be the wake-sleep cycle itself, which regularly creates a new set of partitions (a new transient Markov blanket) between
           sensory systems and the world. This possibility is noted by Karl Friston in comments reported on the Frith blog at: http://frithmind.org/social-
           minds/2014/05/12/under-the-markov-blanket/

Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031                17 | 19
                                                                                                                                   www.predictive-mind.net


        References
        Adams, F. & Aizawa, K. (2001). The bounds of cognition.                    ——— (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of The Royal So-
           Philosophical Psychology, 14 (1), 43–64.                                  ciety Interface, 10 (86). https://dx.doi.org/10.1098/
        Bayer, C., Zhou, X., Zhou, B., Riddiford, L. M. & von Kalm,                  rsif.2013.0475.
           L. (2003). Evolution of the Drosophila broad locus: The                 Friston, K. & Stephan, K. (2007). Free-energy and the brain.
           Manduca sexta broad Z4 isoform has biological activity                     Synthese, 159 (3), 417–458.
           in Drosophila. Development Genes and Evolution, 213                     Haugeland, J. (1998). Having thought: Essays in the meta-
           (10), 471–476.                                                            physics of mind. In J. Haugeland (Eds.) Mind embodied
        Chalmers, D. (2005). The Matrix as metaphysics. In C.                        and embedded (pp. 207–240). Cambridge, MA: Harvard
           Grau (Ed.) Philosophers explore The Matrix. New York:                     University Press.
           Oxford University Press.                                                Havas, D. A., Glenberg, A. M., Gutowski, K. A., Lucarelli,
        Chiel, H. J. & Beer, R. D. (1997). The brain has a body:                     M. J. & Davidson, R. J. (2010). Cosmetic use of botuli-
           Adaptive behavior emerges from interactions of nervous                    num toxin-A affects processing of emotional language.
           system, body and environment. Trends in Neurosciences,                    Psychological Science, 21 (7), 895–900.
           20 (12), 553–557.                                                       Hempel, C. G. (1965). Aspects of scientific explanation and
        Clark, A. (1997). Being there: Putting brain, body, and world                other essays in the philosophy of science. New York: Free
           together again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.                                 Press.
        Clark, A. (2003). Natural born cyborgs: Minds, technologies,
                                                                                   Heyes, C. (2012). Grist and mills: On the cultural origins of
           and the future of human intelligence. New York: Oxford
                                                                                     cultural learning. Philosophical Transactions of the Roy-
           University Press.
                                                                                     al Society B, Biological Sciences, 367 (1599), 2181–2191.
        Clark, A. (2005). Intrinsic content, active memory and the
                                                                                     https://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2012.0120.
           extended mind. Analysis, 65 (285), 1–11. https://dx.doi.
                                                                                   Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs, 50 (2),
           org/10.1111/j.1467-8284.2005.00514.x.
                                                                                     259–285. https://dx.doi.org/10.1111/nous.12062.
        ——— (2007). Curing cognitive hiccups: A defense of the
                                                                                   ——— (2017). How to entrain your evil demon. In T.
           extended mind. The Journal of Philosophy, 104 (4), 163–
                                                                                     Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.) Philosophy and predictive
           192.
                                                                                     processing. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group.
        ——— (2008). Supersizing the mind: Embodiment, action,
                                                                                   Jabr, F. (2012). How did insect metamorphosis evolve?
           and cognitive extension. New York: Oxford University
                                                                                      Scientific American Online. https://www.scientificamer-
           Press.
                                                                                      ican.com/article/insect-metamorphosis-evolution/.
        ——— (2016). Surfing uncertainty: Prediction, action, and
           the embodied mind. New York: Oxford University Press.                   Lipton, P. (2001). What good is an explanation? In G. Hon
        ——— (in press). Busting out: Predictive brains, embod-                        & S. S. Rakover (Eds.) Explanation: Theoretical approa-
           ied minds, and the puzzle of the evidentiary veil. Noûs.                   ches and applications (pp. 43–59). Dordrecht: Springer
           http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/nous.12140.                                      Netherlands.
        Clark, A. & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind. Ana-                   Menary, R. (Ed.) (2010). The extended mind. Cambridge,
           lysis, 58 (1), 7–19.                                                     MA: MIT Press.
        Dawkins, R. (1982). The extended phenotype. Oxford: Ox-                    Mohan, V., Morasso, P., Sandini, G. & Kasderidis, S. (2013).
           ford University Press.                                                   Inference through embodied simulation in cognitive ro-
        Dupré, J. (2012). Processes of life: Essays in the philosophy of            bots. Cognitive Computation, 5 (3), 355–382.
           biology. New York: Oxford University Press.                             Neal, D. T. & Chartrand, T. L. (2011). Embodied emotion
        ——— (2014). A process ontology for biology. Physiology                       perception: Amplifying and dampening facial feedback
           News, 100, 33–34.                                                         modulates emotion perception accuracy. Social Psycho-
        Dupré, J. & O’Malley, M. A. (2009). Varieties of living                      logical and Personality Science, 2 (6), 673–678.
           things: Life at the intersection of lineage and metabo-                 Newen, A., de Bruin, L. & Gallagher, S. (in press). Oxford
           lism. Philosophy & Theory in Biology, 1, e003.                            handbook of 4E cognition. New York: Oxford University
        Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified                     Press.
           brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11 (2), 127–                 Norris, J. R. (1998). Markov chains. Cambridge: Cambridge
           138. https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrn2787.                                  University Press.

Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031           18 | 19
                                                                                                                                   www.predictive-mind.net

        Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems:          Solomon, E. P., Berg, L. R. & Martin, D. W. (2002). Biology.
           Networks of plausible inference. San Francisco: Morgan                    Sixth edition. Stamford, CT: Thompson Learning.
           Kaufmann.
                                                                                   Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in life: Biology, phenomenology,
        Pezzulo, G. (2014). Why do you fear the bogeyman? An
                                                                                     and the sciences of mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
           embodied predictive coding model of perceptual infer-
                                                                                     versity Press.
           ence. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 14
           (3), 902–911.                                                           Tribus, M. (1961). Thermostatics and thermodynamics: An
        Pfeifer, R. & Bongard, J. (2006). How the body shapes the                     introduction to energy, information and states of matter,
           way we think: A new view of intelligence. Cambridge,                       with engineering applications. Van Nostrand.
           MA: MIT Press.                                                          Turner, J. S. (2009). The extended organism: The physiolo-
        Rupert, R. D. (2009). Cognitive systems and the extended                     gy of animal-built structures. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
           mind. New York: Oxford University Press.                                  University Press.
        Seibt, J. (2016). Process philosophy. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.)
                                                                                   Varela, F. G., Maturana, H. R. & Uribe, R. (1974). Autopoi-
           The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy Metaphysics Re-
                                                                                     esis: The organization of living systems, its characteriza-
           search Lab, Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.
                                                                                     tion and a model. Biosystems, 5 (4), 187–196.
           edu/archives/win2016/entries/process-philosophy/.
        Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and                  Wiener, N. (1961). Cybernetics: Or control and communi-
           the embodied self. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17 (11),                 cation in the animal and the machine. Cambridge, MA:
           565–573.                                                                  MIT Press.




Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds.
In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.). Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 3. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958573031           19 | 19
