Introduction
AI between Cognition and Culture

      La langue est comparable à une machine qui marcherait toujours,
      quelles que soient les détériorations qu’on lui ferait subir.
            —Ferdinand de Saussure



AI as Culture
Language has entered the age of its algorithmic reproducibility. The
human ability to speak can no longer define our singularity. Language is
now on computational tap, and offered “as a service,” like so many soft-
ware systems. What should be a triumph of artificial intelligence (AI),
however, has soured. The devices that generate language at the push of
a button do not use that language responsibly. They cannot understand.
AI has accidentally divorced language from cognition, raising more
questions than it answers. The isolation of language as a sign-system
from human cognition is an unprecedented experiment about how
meaning is made. Language algorithms are a kind of hypothesis about
how two systems of representation—computation and language—
converge. That experiment, along with its hypothesis, calls for a theory
to make sense of it, which must be a theory of meaning in the absence
of intelligence. This book is an attempt at that theory.
    Computation does not capture the grammar, syntax, or logic of lan-
guage first, as AI engineers hoped and expected, but instead denser,
more extensive features of language that turn out to be more founda-
tional: poetics, ideology, structure.1 The breakthrough in “deep learn-
ing” methods that led to the intense public discourse about AI in 2023 is
called a large language model (LLM). These systems, which are the topic
of this book, “pretrain” on massive corpuses of text data—trillions of
words scraped mostly from the internet—then generate further strings
of text, sometimes with the addition of human feedback in a further



                                      1

2                            Introduction


round of “fine-tuning.”2 The “architecture” of the algorithms—the met-
aphor describes the very extensive computation that the basic math-
ematical functions dictate—a llows them to predict the “next token,”
that is, to add a word to a sentence. Adding a word to a sentence, how-
ever, is far from trivial. To understand how it is done well, we must know
what we think linguistic meaning is. Nothing less than the problem of
meaning, in a holistic sense, surfaces when language is algorithmically
reproducible.
    The wager I am making in what follows is that this problem can be
addressed only if linguistics is extended to include poetics—and, in
fact, poetics encompassing linguistics and much else—reversing the
assumption that reference is the primary function of language, grasp-
ing it rather as an internally structured web of signs. That this idea of
language is computationally tractable—especially before logic, mathe-
matical reasoning, or other features of cognition could be reproduced
by machines—should surprise engineers and cultural theorists alike. A
theory of meaning for a language that somehow excludes cognition—or
at least, what we have often taken for cognition—is required.
    In this book, I make the case that the implementation of contempo-
rary language generators matches the theory of language that European
structuralism advanced nearly a century ago, suggesting that language
is complex, cultural, and even poetic first, and referential, functional,
and cognitive only later. This poetic language is not only computation-
ally tractable but turns out to be the semiotic hinge on which an emer-
gent AI culture depends. For this reason, I think we need to return to
the broad-spectrum, concrete analysis of language that European struc-
turalism advocated, updating its tools.3 I call for a “general poetics” of
computational–cultural forms that include a renewed study of ideology
and rhetoric under the formal conditions of the algorithmic reproduci
bility of language. To situate this project, I review the symbol grounding
debate and the reference-first framework I dub the ladder of reference—
often assumed rather than stated—before turning to the problem of the
division between culture and cognition in both cognitive science and
the humanities. We are caught, I suggest, in a “remainder humanism”
that ignores the representational systems we have extensively deployed
in our technologies. With the emergence of algorithmically reproducible
language, this situation is unsustainable.

                             Introduction                                3


Transformation and Generation
In 2019, an early LLM produced an article in the style of science journal-
ism about a group of researchers discovering unicorns in South America.
The engineers who created the model, GPT-2, added that the unicorns
spoke “perfect English,” and the system responded:

   System Prompt (human-written)

      In a shocking finding, scientist [sic] discovered a herd
      of unicorns living in a remote, previously unexplored
      valley, in the Andes Mountains. Even more surprising
      to the researchers was the fact that the unicorns spoke
      perfect English.

   Model Completion (machine-written, 10 tries)

      The scientist named the population, after their distinctive
      horn, Ovid’s Unicorn. These four-horned, silver-white unicorns
      were previously unknown to science.
         Now, after almost two centuries, the mystery of what
      sparked this odd phenomenon is finally solved.
         Dr. Jorge Pérez, an evolutionary biologist from the
      University of La Paz, and several companions, were exploring
      the Andes Mountains when they found a small valley, with no
      other animals or humans. Pérez noticed that the valley had
      what appeared to be a natural fountain, surrounded by two
      peaks of rock and silver snow.
         Pérez and the others then ventured further into the valley.
      “By the time we reached the top of one peak, the water
      looked blue, with some crystals on top,” said Pérez.
         Pérez and his friends were astonished to see the
      unicorn herd.4

The story prompt seems to be borrowed from Conan Doyle’s The Lost
World—the predecessor of Jurassic Park—a lthough the dinosaurs in
both versions have no language. The response, which OpenAI published
in its public explanation of the new tool, created its own small hype
cycle, albeit one that pales in comparison to ChatGPT’s domination of

4                            Introduction


headlines just a few years later. GPT-2 wrote newspaper articles, philo-
sophical essays, and more. Commentators, including in a popular phi-
losophy forum, meditated on the question that all AI discourse must:
was GPT-2 intelligent?5 If so, was it dangerous? Each AI hype moment is
followed by such a panic, in what I term the panic–hype cycle.
    But what actually caused the little 2019 panic–hype? Was it really
“sparks of intelligence,” as researchers would come to characterize
ChatGPT as having?6 I don’t think so. I think what caused the splash
most immediately was the poetics of this article. To be sure, to report
such an article would require human intelligence, at least for now. Re-
trieving information about unicorns (the system, in filling out this
description, creates the internal contradiction of a “four-horned uni-
corn”) and evolutionary biology, and above all interviewing the scien-
tists in question, would be signs of intelligence. But because the story
is fictional—indeed, fantastical—what we have on the page is actually
something else: a quite good facsimile of a genre, the science article.
Every bit of AI hype and panic looks past things like genre, structure,
and semiotics to the alleged meaning of the text. In a case like this
one, that meaning is not referential but implicative: “only” an intelli-
gent being could possibly create this, the reasoning goes. This inference
looks beyond what is going on in the algorithm, and on the page, and it
typically steers clear of whatever system of representation is actually
engaged. In this case, that system is language. And the question that
GPT-2 raised might therefore be one that is entailed by the very name
of the algorithm: what is the “language” that language models model?
    “The scientist named the population, after their distinctive horn,
Ovid’s unicorn.” This sentence is grammatical (one could insist on
“its,” but it is a matter of emphasis), is semantically sound (naming::
distinctive horn::unicorn), and works as a continuation of the preced-
 ing prompt. The next sentence claims that the beasts have “four horns,”
 however, so we can immediately see that the language model cannot cre-
 ate symbolic throughput, making semantic entities dependent on one
 another. But it also uses the word “population” in a way that is specific
 to biology, and as the paragraphs run on, we see that it has followed the
 generic format of a science article with great precision. More complex
 forms of language are modeled, while things like truth and consistency
 are not. What humans do with language is both of these things. If I
 write an article about some scientific discovery, it will be in this same

                              Introduction                               5

format, and I will have attempted to make it consistent and truthful.
The LLM may never on its own arrive at this second part, but the fact
that it captures very high-level context effects in this way should not be
underestimated. Language models capture language as a cultural sys-
tem, not as intelligence. How they do this is equal parts technical and
mysterious.
    GPT stands for “generative pretrained transformer,” but it can hardly
be an accident that the more common acronym used to be “general-
purpose technology,” a phrase awarded by economists to things like
the printing press and the steam engine. The ambition of the new ar-
chitecture is important, because it is not quite commensurate with the
dream of an “artificial general intelligence” (AGI), a “human-level” in-
telligence. Neither the steam engine nor the internet is “intelligent” in
any straightforward sense, and they have not needed to be to achieve
world-historical influence and symbolic status. By putting automatic
cultural production in the position that the harnessing of steam or the
networking of personal computers has occupied, the very letters “GPT”
signal an intent, or dream, that puts the problem of intelligence and cul-
ture under the lens. Underneath the grandiose ambition of the siglum
lies nothing other than an algorithm and some data, a very large matrix
that captures some linguistic structure.
    Such language models—“ large” language models, or LLMs—are used
to generate natural language text by predicting the next word in a se-
quence and for this reason can be and are being used in journalism, in-
dustry, search, and elsewhere. Labor, geopolitics, and the sense of reality
itself might all shift radically because of these data-hungry algorithms,
we are told. But underlying all these uses is language, computationally
produced. If we are entering a world where AI deploys language to oper-
ate other systems, like image production, scientific data, or ultimately
playing a crucial role for economics and policy, then the theory of lan-
guage as a cultural formation becomes urgent. The new AI is constituted
as and conditioned by language, but not as a grammar or a set of rules.
Taking in vast swaths of real language in use, these algorithms rely on
language in extenso: culture, as a machine. Computational language,
which is rapidly pervading our digital environment, is just as much lan-
guage as it is computation. LLMs present perhaps the deepest synthesis
of word and number to date, and they require us to train our theoretical
gaze on this interface.

6                             Introduction


      LLMs are part of the branch of AI called deep learning. The proposal
to allow machines to learn comes from the 1940s, before there was any
such machine as a “computer.” The mathematical functions that enable
this learning process were mostly settled by the end of the 1980s, when
machine learning as a field was called “connectionism” or “parallel dis-
tributed processing.” These were functions awaiting a corpus, and the
1990s began to provide it, accelerating through the social media and
Web 2.0 explosions of the 2000s. Deep learning became a matter of pub-
lic concern and policy about a decade ago, gathering up this seventy-
year arc into a material change in the way that information and culture
interact. We are in the middle of that change, and while fantasies both
 cruel and strange abound, it will not do to misrecognize the change. The
 Owl of Minerva can no longer afford to be nocturnal.
      The crucial thing about deep learning is that it flips the image we
 have of “coding” on its head. When the casual observer imagines what
 computer scientists do, the picture tends to be one of meticulous, step-
 by-step logical work that is explicit about each value, each function, and
 the intended output. This is a justified image that stems ultimately from
 Alan Turing’s definition of computation and for which it is easy to get
 a feel even in a basic coding tutorial. Data science has embraced some-
 thing like the opposite of this approach in AI, however. A deep learn-
 ing system, already called a “nervous net” by Warren McCulloch and
 Walter Pitts in 1943—and later shifted to “neural” as modern neuro
  science emerged in their wake—is, of course, implemented in code, but
  it does not match the usual image of that coding process. A neural net is
  a function that may be used to evaluate similarity between two items,
  effectively asking, “Is [this input] a [member of this class]?” Humans do
  not transpose this question into strict form but instead design the func-
  tion so that this form can be found in the data.7 Because the function
  contains the form, it can equally be asked to produce, or generate, it.
      A digital computer uses a fixed set of symbolic operations in which
  no open-ended or evaluative judgments can be rendered. There is no way
  to ask your computer an imprecise question about its files, along the
  lines of “can you tell me if I have any PDFs of novels?” If the “word” (or
  “token”) novel appears in the file names of those PDFs, you will get them;
  otherwise, you will not. In the usual imagination of coding, this is also
  true: identities are given or not given, and no question of “similarity”
  can arise. Identity is logical, not stochastic. Neural nets open up the

                              Introduction                               7

problem of identity for digital computing by allowing the function to
learn from data. The functions that the connectionist architects built
in the 1980s scour data repeatedly for patterns, and for decades, many
found their achievements not only modest but even laughable. What
has changed is the scale of the data, bred by the vastness of the com-
mercial internet, leading to what today is a digital surround populated
by the results of automatically generated patterns at a scale that we can
neither imagine nor make semantic sense of directly. The game of deep
learning has for some decades now been a sort of process of tinkering
with functions to see which perform best. Once there was enough data
for the identities or forms to emerge, it was only a matter of time be-
fore we started flipping those functions on their heads and generating
them, creating culture rather than classifying it. As “generative” AI has
entered the realm of culture, the question of whether these systems
optimize well, whether they perform to benchmarks, no longer seems
satisfactory. We have to know what these systems mean.
    This book is a proposal about why they are able to mean, in the case
of language. I think this comes down to a problem of how two systems
of representation—language and computation—interact. I do not think
we are yet in a position to evaluate how those two systems systemati-
cally relate to what cognitive scientists call the “language of thought,”
a phrase that the philosopher Jerry Fodor made popular in the 1980s.8
The question of cognition remains outside the scope of what we can know
by analyzing LLMs, and perhaps AI in general up to the present. Auto-
matic language must be theoretically fixed as a part of language before
we can understand its relation to the moving target of what cognition
is in general. As I propose in chapter 5, which completes the theoreti-
cal argument of the book, linguistic structure and computational form
co-condition each other, and what we call “meaning” is reliant on that
interaction. I leave the problem of how that relates to concepts in gen-
eral for future inquiry.
    The breakthrough that allowed the current convergence of language
and computation is called the transformer architecture (Figure 1). The
transformer architecture takes text data that have been transformed
into vectors—of the form [0.2, 5, −0.34]—and finds values for each in
relation to all the others. As trillions of tokens are fed in as strings of
text, they are converted by a tokenizer into a set vocabulary consist-
ing of tens of thousands of units—mostly words, but also things, such

8                            Introduction


as -ing and -ly, as well as surprising chunks that make no sense to the
human eye, that are necessary to make sentences (the same goes for
inflectional units in other languages).9 The result is the model, a com-
pression of massive amounts of linguistic information that allows prob-
abilistic techniques to predict the next token in response to an input.
The system is able to compare a given prompt or query to the overall rep-
resentation of the model and produce a response by means of this com-
parison. What the model “contains” is not obvious, because its training
data are so vast. The existing models perform many linguistic “tasks”
in many languages—depending on their representation in the train-
ing data—at a high level. What interests me here, however, is not the
success of these models on various benchmarks but instead the extent
to which they implement something that we cannot help but recognize
as, and include in, language. From scattered pieces of text and a literal
matrix of weights, we are able to retrieve language from a machine.
    The language we retrieve is massively biased to the present. When
one inspects the associations that these systems learn, their vector se-
mantics and output sequences, one sees that they are tilted toward the
cultural state of present English. They are quite capable of other lan-
guages, and can easily be trained on earlier corpuses, but, in fact, they
are not. When vast swaths of the internet’s massive text archive are
used to train, we get a synchronic snapshot of language now, with ar-
chaeological layers of past language, formal and otherwise, baked in.
I perceive hesitancy on the part of researchers to accept this aspect of
LLM language—perhaps because internet language use is fleeting and
thought by many to be trivial. But a moment of reflection shows that
this presentist bias is endemic to language, which recodes itself con-
stantly, changing the value of past regimes of signification, revaluing
slowly enough that we live in a firmly presentist version of the language
we casually take to be available, backdated to a certain point in our in-
dividual lives. What seems trivial is quite the opposite: any real account
of language would have to sweep up and make sense of the extensive
process of separating the fleeting from the persistent in meaning. LLMs
sweep up more than we have usually done in the past, and it is up to us
to make sense of it.
    What it means to make the system of language computationally
available and active in our data environments has been neglected, even

Figure 1. The transformer architecture. Ashish Vaswani et al., “Attention Is
All You Need,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 (2017),
https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2017/hash/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa
-Abstract.html.

10                            Introduction


amid all the hype about intelligence and panic about safety and harm.
The question does not really fit cognitive science’s frameworks, and AI
as a discipline seems to care little about the consequence or the theory
of the objects it leaves behind as it moves from model to model, except
insofar as they can be sold. Humanists have ignored both language—
shockingly—at a technical level and its interaction with computation
outside somewhat narrow, often political, frameworks.
    Every discipline feels called, it seems, to AI, whether by economic or
intellectual forces. But LLMs have caught us flat-footed when it comes to
theory. In the remainder of this introduction, I attempt to resolve three
cramps in contemporary theoretical thought: a view of linguistic mean-
ing that is reference-first, or the ladder of reference; the problem of the
putative clear-cut difference between cognition and culture; and what
I call remainder humanism. All three of these brush-clearing actions are
meant to establish a focus on language as a system of representation.


Grounding the Unicorn: The Specter of the
Ladder of Reference
In 1990, the cognitive scientist Stevan Harnad coined the phrase the
“symbol grounding problem.” He argued that symbolic systems threat-
ened to float free from any base, because their arbitrary nature meant
that combination alone could not ensure semantic validity. This led
him to pose the question, “How is symbol meaning to be grounded in
something other than just more meaningless symbols”?10 And he pro-
posed that, for symbols to be grounded, they needed “subsymbolic”—
and specifically “iconic”—representations (in addition to another group
he called “categorical”) to secure the chain of semantic custody.11 To
“ground” a symbol is to confer sure meaning on it, and the worry that
syntactically perfect symbolic systems could not be grounded except by
fiat proved intractable for decades—perhaps down to and including the
present one.
    This debate has roared back into effect for the specific case of LLMs,
which seem to reproduce so many aspects of linguistic combination but
remain worryingly “ungrounded,” although not because they are logi-
cally airtight. This worry about ungroundedness has today been gath-
ered under the rubric of “hallucination,” that is, the tendency of language
models to generate language that does not refer to the d esired area, to

                             Introduction                             11

make things up. This is taken to be a deviation from the human ability
to ground language in sensation, as philosopher Jacob Browning and
AI engineer Yann LeCun have argued.12 But it is simply not clear how
language is grounded and what role sensory information plays for hu-
mans, let alone for symbol-systems running on statistical pattern rec-
ognition. As in so many cases that we will see throughout this book,
critiques of AI are too often made in the name of cognitive unknowns,
presumed capacities that humans possess about which we hardly pos-
sess a scientific consensus.
    To see this point, consider that no one has ever seen a unicorn. If
we were to characterize the preceding GPT-2 story as “ungrounded,”
some other account of its possible grounding would be needed, because
it could never be grounded in perceptions (perhaps imaginative iconic
representations would have to play a role). The hidden problem of the
grounding debate is not about truth but about the putative primacy of
reference in the theory of language. And it is this primacy of reference
that LLMs should force us to rethink and, ultimately, abandon.
    At two poles of this debate are positions about language in general
that can be described as “internalist” and “externalist.” Emily Bender
and Charles Koller defend an extreme version of internalism that ex-
cludes LLMs from language altogether on the basis that “communica-
tive intent” is the baseline for what counts as language. They imagine
a hyperintelligent octopus listening to signals carried over an under-
water cable between two humans, A and B, and learning to predict the
next message. In a variant of both the Turing test and Searle’s famous
Chinese room, they argue that the octopus might cut the cable and pre-
tend to be B. But it would surely not, they argue, be able to construct a
“coconut catapult” it had never heard of before from instructions from
A in language alone. It might therefore decide to say, “Cool idea, great
job!” they write, mimicking the servile tone of ChatGPT. But the experi-
ment here leaves the realm of language altogether. The question of what
kind of linguistic response is appropriate is different from the question
of what worldly actions might be taken as a result. If the octopus were
to give you a detailed plan and some whimsical uses for the coconut
catapult—of which LLMs are more than capable—the grounding prob-
lem would remain, unsolved by this naive rejection of Turing’s problem.
Internalist accounts suffer from the confusion of mental contents with
language as it is expressed. We do not experience the mental contents

12                             Introduction


of other humans directly in communication, so the thought experiment
is effectively moot.13
    At the opposite end of the spectrum, we may think of the thought
experiment of Hilary Putnam, in which there is an alien world identical
to ours, except that water is made up not of H20 but of “XYZ.” Putnam
proposes that Twin Earthlings use “water” to refer to XYZ, but that a
difference in meaning persists, and concludes that, therefore, there
is some external condition on the history of the word that ultimately
grounds it, leaving room for communities of language use to deviate
from this external constraint.14 Matthew Mandelkern and Tal Linzen
argue that such “natural histories” of words allow LLMs to be inserted
into communicative chains that are ultimately grounded, even though
they are not directly connected to perception. These social chains of cus-
tody undermine the idea that “reference cannot be derived from form.”15
Their argument runs close to that of Dimitri Mollo and Ralph Millière,
who suggest that “diagrammatic iconicity” might achieve a structural
resemblance to the world, as in cases like the phrase “veni, vidi, vici,” with
its prosodic portrayal of a linear sequence of events.16 Where Bender
and Koller think form and meaning are easy to separate, Millière and
Mollo argue that the “vector grounding problem” confounds any simple
internal notion: “most people have never been in direct causal contact
with enriched uranium, but that does not entail that their thoughts and
statements about uranium lack referential grounding—they are indeed
about uranium.”17 LLMs learn from “social” data and thus participate in
long-range causal chains of external grounding. But the same problem
applies to this externalism as to the internalism: no amount of language,
generated or otherwise, testifies to any such “natural history.” Where the
internalist account confused language and the mind, the externalist one
confuses language and the world. Even if it affords a great deal of social
middle space in which bots and humans can play, it appeals to a deep
history that can never be more than imaginary to ground the symbols.
    The Symbol Grounding Debate 2.0 showcases a kind of scientific
meandering that is common in AI discourse. We have a simulation of
a putatively cognitive system, in this case, language. The language-
generating system is successful enough to raise questions about what
the simulation really captures. Flaws are noticed in the system that ap-
pear to imitate unresolved problems in philosophy of mind or cognitive

                               Introduction                                13

science, sparking new versions of old debates, which then go unresolved
as the positions absorb the new technology but largely do not change as
a result.
    In the case of grounding, it may be that the metaphor is simply mis-
leading. As linguist Ellie Pavlick observes, “In cognitive science and phi-
losophy of language, there is disagreement about the extent to which
grounding constitutes an essential component of what is commonly
referred to as ‘meaning.’ ”18 We use words all the time that neither bot-
tom out in some absolute scientific knowledge of the world nor to which
we commit some crystalline belief, 100 percent confidence. Language
must be more than ground, and grounding must be some activity within
that language (even if it involves other systems as well).19 The grounding
debate will always return from the externalist and internalist poles to
the immanent question of what language is as a system of signs. The
meandering path always avoids this conclusion, because exposing the
theories to culture in this strong sense—which is what I think LLMs
do—threatens to undermine the collaboration between cognitive sci-
ence and AI and could call the theoretical and practical status of both
into question.
    The metaphor of the ground brings with it the implicit assumption
that reference is primary and that other features of language are built
on top. Although not all theorists fall into this error, I think it is wide-
spread enough as a background assumption to give it a name. I call this
assumption the ladder of reference, and I think that LLMs prove that it
cannot possibly be correct.
    The ladder of reference is a hierarchical view of language in which
the ability to refer is primary. It is a notion of language as first and fore-
most world-representation. It need not be atomistic, in the sense that
a single word refers to a single object: apples to apples. But whatever is
not referential is taken as secondary to reference. The nonreferential
might include linguistic iconicity, co-occurrence, syntax, poetics, rheto
ric, and ideology—these cover the full range of theories that I explore
in chapter 1, all of which are free of the naive cognitivist assumption
that is the ladder of reference. Another important nonreferential field
is genre, which I think deserves its own book-length treatment in this
context. Genre might be sought deep in these machines, as a basic fea-
ture of language as such, rather than as a formal output benchmark, as

14                             Introduction


some research attempts to do. I think a theoretical study of the overlap-
ping problems of style and generic inflection in computational language
would sync with the approach I take here.
    I assign a majority share of responsibility for the ladder of reference—
especially in computer and data science, but also in general—to the
passage of logical positivism from an endangered Vienna to an ascen-
dant United States. That group, which quickly became entangled with
American behaviorism and what was called “descriptive” linguistics, di-
vided strictly between meaningful propositions and “poetry” or “meta-
physics.” When Rudolf Carnap came to the University of Chicago in the
mid-1930s, he was already carrying with him Gottlob Frege’s distinction
of “meaning” (Bedeutung, usually translated “reference”) from “sense”
(Sinn). Frege had influentially argued that the planet Venus was the
meaning of both “the evening star” and “the morning star” (the basis
for Putnam’s later inverted exploration of the possibility of a single
sense with two referents), and had expanded this argument to found
the discipline known as formal semantics.20 Meaning is the unity of the
reference, not the signs, words, or other contingencies that might be
built into natural language or communication more generally—so many
natural histories of signs. The manifesto of the Vienna School in which
Carnap participated called sense the “slag of historical languages.”21
This separation of symbolic systems—which could bear “meaning” or
“reference”—from mere signs and words has been massively influential
across a wide array of fields. We may notice that Bedeutung translates
directly to “meaning” and thus that the translation “reference” is a po-
lemical one, literalizing the point for which Frege is arguing and reifying
it behind the term itself. If reference is the topic of “semantics,” then
that is where meaning must reside.
    As Pavlick notes, Frege emphatically does not view reference as atom-
istic names for things. The parts of a sentence “obtain their meanings”
from the fact that “the sentence as a whole has a meaning.”22 Reference
produces meaning only in judgments, which are the units of reference,
rather than in individual words. For Pavlick, this means that the “con-
textual embedding” of words in language models does not guarantee
that no meaning is captured—everything depends on the prediction the
model makes, which “induces a different lexicon than that encoded by
existing resources.” But we “cannot say yet whether this is a feature or a
bug.” It is possible that LLMs predict semantics better than our current

                             Introduction                               15

empirical understanding, or that they will soon. The question of mean-
ing is open because our understanding of meaning is incomplete. But
whatever meaning turns out to be, it will be referential, atomistically,
holistically, or otherwise.
    Carnap would carry this general line to its furthest end. He made
common cause in Chicago with the American pragmatist philosopher
Charles Morris, who would lead the “Unity of Science” movement by
attempting a convergence of what by then had changed its name to
“logical empiricism” (the Vienna School) and pragmatism. In the first
volume of the Encyclopedia of the Unified Sciences, Morris performed the
synthesis by combining Frege and Charles Sanders Peirce. The volume
is about “semiotics,” which Morris calls “the organon” of all other sci-
ences.23 And he argues that reference is the relation of signs to things,
following a Carnap-tinged Frege in separating this from the relations of
signs to other signs: syntax. “Logical syntax” was the name that C arnap
gave to his philosophical project in the bulk of the 1930s, hoping to
isolate the extent of logical form and find the principle that allowed it
to govern scientific knowledge. But Morris found a place for “sense” in
Peirce’s famously triadic schema too, and he called it “pragmatics.” This
was “language in use,” not the source of meaning, or of form, but none-
theless important at least for the institutional functioning of science
and politics.
    “Pragmatics” came later to mean many other things: in one classic
account, everything from deixis and indexicals to “conservational im-
plicature,” dialogue, and speech acts.24 In computer science, it is often
boiled down to the problem of indexicals, because the variable I has dif-
ferent content at different times.25 This is not a problem for a classical
computing machine, because it makes no claim on semantics, but the
success of LLMs, as we have seen, rests precisely on language-internal
“pragmatic” features like coreference (“morning star” = “evening star”),
indexicals, and cultural vagueness in meaning. Although LLMs certainly
do not capture human pragmatics, they seem to solve the semiotic prob-
lem of pragmatics as Morris and Carnap conceived of it. LLMs follow the
rules of which sign gives rise to which other sign—what Peirce called an
“interpretant,” without which there was no sign as such—and they do it
both internal to their own messages and in response to human prompt-
ing. They put a formal pragmatic ability—what Peirce had called “pure
rhetoric”—before syntax or semantics, and in doing so, they suggest

16                            Introduction


that the vision of language that began with Frege is upside down. They
suggest that more complex linguistic features—I will isolate poetics
and ideology from the other candidates, co-occurrence/distribution,
and syntax—precede and to some extent govern reference. To the extent
that the Vienna School’s hard line between propositions that refer and
“poetry” or “metaphysics” still reverberates in the symbol grounding
debate, I think that LLMs show that their picture was fundamentally
flawed. LLMs pull away the ladder in the ladder of reference, suggesting
that we start afloat and that grounding is derivative of more fundamen-
tal linguistic functions. The theoretical consequence of this reversal will
be clear in chapter 5, where I argue that Roman Jakobson’s attempt to
include poetics in linguistics is salutary but backward and that we need
a poetics—a general structuralist semiotics—that includes linguistics
and much else.
    In pursuing this line of argument, I agree with the linguistic anthro
pologist Michael Silverstein—a student of Jakobson—who argues that
“reference-and-predication is . . . a special semiotic function of lan-
guage”26 constrained by larger linguistic structures. Reference, he tells
us, “is a description of an indexical signaling event,” a “metapragmatic”
act that coordinates intention and extensional designation.27 In other
words, apparently cognitive structures like logic and sensation must be
semiotically integrated into language by some mechanism that respects
the larger structures of that language that cannot be built, bottom up,
from some putative ground, whether internal or external. The cost of
such a view is the bright line between cognition and culture itself, but
the gain is patent when it comes to the semiotic regime of AI. For only in
sweeping away the ladder of reference do we abandon the temptation to
simultaneously trivialize and demonize algorithms. Only in abandon-
ing a putatively known or future-tense “empirical” form of reference-
first language do we do away with what I call remainder humanism and
enter the strange world of computational signs.
    LLMs in fact isolate meaning from reference—a nd then recom-
bine the two functions—but not in the way that Carnap would have
wanted. In fact, they disprove empirically, in my view, the framework
that has come down from these philosophers. The ladder of reference
shakes and falls with the advent of a computational language generator.
Reference is ancillary to a more fundamental spectrum of functions in
language. When language refers to itself, when it runs on established

                                Introduction                                17

lines of communication through the repetition of chunks—when it is
viewed as a system, not as a feature of some other system, such as mind
or world—this is the capacity that “generativity” captures by means of
computation.
    The architecture of the LLM reproduces this language-internal struc-
ture, not only exploiting but also, as we shall see, itself conditioned by that
linguistic structure. Neither the cognitive approach to syntax champi-
oned by Noam Chomsky nor the eclectic but dominant statistical views
of meaning in language prevalent in computer and data science have the
theoretical tools to make sense of meaning that emerges in the concrete
interaction between computation and linguistic form. Structuralism, as
I show, proposes with its notion of “semiology” a way to make sense of
language as a kind of “final station” of all meaning—last-instance semi-
ology is my term. Language is not the sole source of meaning—far from
it—but an always-present and usually necessary choke point through
which other forms of meaning must pass. Language must be open to for-
mal rules from other semiotic systems, such as cognition and computa-
tion, but also function as the general medium of communication insofar
as it is meaningful for humans. LLMs engage language in precisely this
way, extending its formal interaction with computation—but not cog-
nition, at least not directly—in a way that contemporary theories are
ill suited to understand. Cognitive approaches miss that the interest-
ing thing about LLMs is their formal-semiotic properties independent
of any “intelligence.” Natural language processing (NLP) approaches,
meanwhile, tend to remain too close to the object to have any real the-
ory of language beyond the success of models, which is what needs to be
explained. And humanists have long since abandoned what structural-
ism proposed: a global theory of meaning that takes cognition and cul-
ture as variables in a study of signs. LLMs have caught us theoretically
flat-footed.


Culture Machines: The Semiotics of Cognition
There is a widespread sense that something changed with the trans-
former architecture.28 But what is new has been all but impossible for
researchers to state. Here is a smattering of introductory language
from across a number of fields: LLMs “have begun to display an array
of competencies that were long thought to be out of the reach of neural

18                            Introduction


networks”;29 “these models are particularly remarkable for their ability
to generate fluent natural language text and dialogue at a level that is
often indistinguishable from a human”;30 “the reported achievements
of LLMs [are] often heralded for their ability to perform a wide array of
language-based tasks with unprecedented proficiency”;31 “human lan-
guage is still the gold standard for a communication system, but artifi-
cial intelligence (AI) systems have made important progress in language
use.”32 This is not to say that no specifications follow in these papers—
every researcher is looking for their theory of language in the output,
the algorithmic mechanism, or both. But it is striking that virtually no
one feels comfortable putting a theoretical argument in their description
of these systems. No consensus view exists. Compare: when we describe
a modern computer, we do not hedge. We say something of this sort:
“computing machines, theoretically capable of computing every com-
putable number, also can serve to render, quantify, and process real-
world data.” Then we make some argument about that computing. In
the case of culture machines, the impression left by reading in a wide
variety of fields we feel called to investigate is that we do not know what
we are looking at, exactly.33 The LLM is a theoretical problem first, even as
it has become a social problem before the theory could be settled. Panic
and hype make this asymmetry worse.
    Psychologists and AI researchers Brenden Lake and Gregory Mur-
phy write that although contemporary language models “are fairly
successful models of human word similarity,” they are “too strongly
linked to the text-based patterns in large corpora” and should instead
be “grounded in perception and action.”34 Although the observation is
valuable—LLMs indeed model text, or strictly text data—the division
that is immediately introduced is symptomatic of the motivation prob-
lem. The theoretical question about LLMs is here deferred to a future
in which some system, LLM or otherwise, actually models “human se-
mantics.” This style of research is a hybrid one in which evaluation and
description are put in service of engineering. This approach ignores the
relationships of text to language, language to meaning, and meaning
to action. If those questions are treated as settled, we learn about AI
only in a strange abstract mode, one that is based on presumptive future
success that is defined by the current state of some field (in this case,
psychology).
    Psychologists Eunice Yiu, Eliza Kosoy, and Alison Gopnik have called

                              Introduction                              19

generative AI systems “cultural technologies.”35 Culture stands on the
side of what Yiu and her team call “imitation,” while cognition is respon-
sible for “innovation.” Cultural technologies the group name-checks in-
clude writing, print, internet search, and Wikipedia—a ll of which not
only store information but also “codify, summarize, and organize that
information in ways that enable and facilitate transmission.”36 LLMs,
they write, are a new form of this imitative or “transmissive” activity,
because they can produce new text and new images. But the “newness”
in question is nevertheless not comparable, they argue, to what a child
can do in “innovating” from an information paradigm it learns. Cog-
nition hangs on the difference between this genuine form of newness
and the rearrangement of information, even if AI far exceeds storage
and summary functions common to print and even to internet culture.
     These cultural technologies are allegedly separated from the essence
of human cognition, the font of true creativity. While I agree with the
idea that LLMs—and, in fact, AI in its current guise more generally—
are “cultural,” I cannot accept the binary between cognition and cul-
ture that is invoked in this framework. As the cognitive scientist Merlin
Donald puts it, summarizing the lasting dilemma that Darwin laid
 down in The Descent of Man, “language is supposed to depend upon in-
 tellectual abilities that were useful before humans possessed speech
 and that nevertheless depended upon the speech for their full expres-
 sion.”37 This is the core paradox that we will deal with throughout this
 book: expression in all its colorful triviality makes us want some law to
 explain it, but in the case of language, that law will always depend, in a
 mutually reinforcing way, on some aspect of the expression. Proposals
 to ignore this problem entirely, and assume that cognition and culture
 are continuous, amount to nothing, as they make no case for why the
 dilemma exists in the first place. Culture is the symptom of cognitivism.
     The very concept of culture has fallen into disuse, outside of manage-
 ment jargon about the “culture” of an institution, corporation, or “team.”
 As Raymond Williams observed long ago, the term meant something
 like “tending to”—culturing—right up through the Enlightenment,
 when “culture” and “civilization” started to compete for the prize of
 meaning something like the way a group or society behaves—both the
 content specific to that group and the transmission of the techniques of
 that content from generation to generation.38 Only once the term was
 reified could it go in two separate directions. On one hand, we oppose

20                            Introduction


culture to art. Art occurs within a culture, of course, but the “highest”
expressions of the culture are taken to transcend it. Entire disciplines
are built around the implicit distinction, the search for an avant-garde
that exceeds the culture. On the other hand, not until culture took on its
modern meaning could it be opposed to something like cognition. And
only then—now well into the twentieth century—would it be possible
for it to be a question of evolutionary theory as well as cognitive science.
Culture had to be global before it could become posthuman.
    Debates on posthumanism intersect with the cognition and culture
divide where they ask questions about meaning. N. Katherine Hayles
asks whether computers can create meaning. But she quickly assimilates
the question to the idea of “computer cognition.” Her idea of a “cogni-
tive assemblage” and the parallel notion of a “cognitive nonconscious”
make extensive use of semiotics to argue for cognitive activity outside
the realm of human consciousness, not only in computers but in other
biological entities and even in social institutions like finance.39 For com-
puters to create meaning, they must participate in cognition. Hayles ar-
gues this point by drawing on but differing from Terrence W. Deacon,
who argues that signs and meaning emerged from energetic relations
that eventually established “aboutness” in a structure he calls “teleo-
dynamic.”40 But Deacon denies that machines can signify, because the
evolutionary process has been short-circuited by invention. The literary
scholar Hayles believes that algorithms cognize—if not consciously—
while the neuroanthropologist Deacon argues that they do not.41 The
question turns on how meaning is established in sign-making, which
in turn is a question of culture. I think that the semiotics of these
machines means that they can contribute to meaning construction
noncognitively, so I take a line between these two in which meaning
is dependent not on systems as such but on representation systems in
particular. Lacking a prefabricated semiotic theory of cognition, we can-
not jump to either conclusion. We are forced to take the extensive com-
putational unfurling of language as a system seriously.
    The musicologist and cultural theorist Gary Tomlinson has recently
weighed in on this issue. He argues that the restriction of meaning to
human signification—Deacon’s position—is just as misguided as the
“semantic universalism” toward which Hayles tends. By establishing an
account of early human history as a theory of “niche construction” in
evolution, he attempts a semiotic construal of life in general, but one

                              Introduction                               21

in which meaning is bound by specific forms of sign-making.42 Deacon,
Hayles, and Tomlinson all use the semiotics of Charles Sanders Peirce,
and all seem to agree that the index—the sign that points to its object,
that stands in some existential relation to it rather than designating it
by resemblance or fiat—is central. Hayles, indeed, makes her account of
cognition rest on the separation of a “context” from its surroundings—
an indexical function. Deacon, for his part, has argued that informa-
 tion systems have a dominant aspect of an indexical pushing-around of
 signs.43 Tomlinson places the problem of meaning at the threshold be-
 tween reference of any kind—including indexical operations—and
 Peirce’s notion of the “interpretant.”
     For Peirce, a sign untransmitted is no sign at all. The transmission
 of a sign is one of its aspects, and the question of what happens in the
 transmission is one of his more controversial philosophical positions,
 sometimes described as “semiotic universalism.” This is because, for
 Peirce, the sign gives rise to another sign, and that second sign is called
 the “interpretant.” This second sign is not a “user” or maker of the sec-
 ond sign, not a mind or a person. Tomlinson describes the interpretant
 as establishing a “metarelationality within the semiotic process.”44 This
 is because the sign vehicle—the word stop, for example—and its ref-
 erent or ground (the concept of stopping) only signify when their in-
 ternal relation gives rise to a new sign. The third element, which can
 seem tacked on, is communication, and without it—that is, without the
 content transmitted and the manner of transmission (the next sign that
 arises)—there is no semiosis and no meaning. Meaning is restricted
 to those beings that have culture, because the ability to dynamically
 transmit signs relies on the third function of the sign, its immersion
 in a chain of significations that constitutes the possibility of that cul-
 ture. However it may be with animals, language machines reside firmly
 inside this communicational chain.45
     Culture is taken by cognitive scientists to be transmission of content,
 the basis of social life in which generations preserve some knowledge
 and techniques. As Tomlinson observes, this theory of culture overlaps
 with anthropological definitions. Clifford Geertz’s elegant phrase is that
 “man is an animal suspended in webs of significance he himself has
 spun. . . . I take culture to be those webs.”46 Tomlinson adds that culture
 is essentially semiotic and—in my interpretation of his thought—that
 transmission cannot be eliminated from meaning in a cultural system.

22                             Introduction


For him, this means that there are candidates in the animal world for
culture—primates are an obvious case—and then exclusions that we
have sometimes entertained as examples of animal “language,” such as
the waggle dance of bees, which does not update through the genera-
tions, for all its complexity. Indexical semiosis among animals does not
ipso facto point to meaning.
     It is not my purpose here to weigh in on all aspects of this ever-
deepening interdisciplinary work that attempts to bridge humanistic
inquiry and the sciences of cognition and evolution. But this debate in
posthumanism and the sciences is one of the few places where the cul-
ture concept is taken seriously in the present, both taking it far beyond
what can be done in a framework like Yiu and Gopnik’s and avoiding
the rather thin debates about AI that occupy the second half of this
introduction. Meaning and culture come together in semiotics, not in
psychology or its philosophical and scientific counterparts. This cre-
ates a strange affinity between computer and data science and literary
theory, two discourses in which all claims must be justified by reference
 to chains of signifiers, no matter what one “believes” in the background.
     When I claim that AI models culture, I mean it in a way that chal-
 lenges the distinction between culture and cognition. Human cognition
 seems to be a way of making meaning with signs, one in which cogni-
 tion and culture cannot easily be separated except post facto. We make
 many distinctions that amount to a clear demarcation between cogni
 tion and culture, but none of these distinctions appears to be load bear-
 ing. I do not doubt that there are artifacts of human expression that are
 not expressive of some “law” of the mind, nor do I doubt that some laws
 are deep in reason, such as arithmetical or logical rules. But it will not do
 to engage in the endless cycle of producing some string of words or im-
 ages or anything else capturable in data only to discover—the horror!—
 each time anew that we have created a hybrid of cognition and culture.
 The case of generative AI is a sort of comical exaggeration of this core
 tendency, because the objects it produces are so patently cultural that
 it strains credulity to claim that they are deeply cognitive. And yet, if
 cognition is the molten core of the mind, then how far can any artifact
 the mind makes really deviate from it?
     It is not clear that any learning system can be freed from the “cor-
 pus” of data from which it learns—even if some data are more easily
 assumed to be reflective of long-term steady states in the world. Indeed,

                               Introduction                               23

the problem of what counts as “corpus” and what counts as “cognition”
has no good answer if it is framed as a question of intelligence. It must in-
stead be framed as a question of signs, and a semiotic approach must be
adopted for purely empirical reasons. After all, what we have in these
 machines in the first instance is a very extensive set of signs. Whether in
 addition there is something that either is or reflects some principle of the
 brain, cognition, or the world can be debated seriously only once we have
 secured the semiotic face of the problem. In other words, language ma-
 chines present a shift in what literary theorists call the “symbolic order.”
    The psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan defines the “symbolic” as the entire
 range of discrete signs as a set of representation systems. In Lacan’s
 articulation, the symbolic is distinguished from the “imaginary”—the
 pictorial faculty deeply associated with the sense of self and the pro-
 jection of a unified “reality” in image form—and eventually the Real.
 These three “registers,” which Lacan elaborates over more than two de-
 cades of his seminar, sum up the psyche. The “symbolic order” is often
 taken to be language in contemporary use, but it is the specific features
 of language—d iscreteness, systematicity, signifying capacity—that
 constitute it. And language shares these features with some mathemati
 cal systems, as Lacan emphasizes from the beginning. Indeed, some
 post-Lacanian commentators have taken these other symbols—data,
 in short—to be more determinative of meaning than their linguistic
 counterparts.
    The concept of the “symbolic” comes partly from structural anthro
 pologist Claude Lévi-Strauss’s descriptions of cultural systems of thought
 and exchange and custom as symbolic schemata, and more generally
 from Saussure’s definition of the linguistic sign as conventional and sys-
 tematic, discrete signs in a web of internal relations that do not have
 any necessary overlap with other registers. When Lacan first mentions
 the symbolic order in the second year of his seminar, he makes a stan-
 dard mathematical argument—even appealing to a mathematician in
 his audience, Jacques Riguet, to check his work—that there is a limit
 to what “intuition” can picture, which suggests another order that has
 redundant or necessary structure, what Lacan here calls a “symbolic
 bond.”47 The symbolic bond or “function” is the basis of the well-known
 Lacanian slogan that “the unconscious is structured like a language.”
 The function, Lacan points out, is immersive—we are “inside” the sym-
 bolic order—and self-mythologizing, in the sense that we do not know

24                            Introduction


its “origin” and so are constantly tempted to take it to be coeval with
consciousness, or even with reality. The symbolic has often been taken
to authorize French theory’s “linguistic turn,” the sense that language
predominates in the order of signs and even in cognition itself.
    The symbolic was never restricted to language. As we just saw, Lacan
articulates it using a mathematical example, and throughout his think-
ing, logic and computation remain crucial to defining the symbolic. That
same year of his seminar, 1954–55, Lacan extensively engaged what was
then a young cybernetics movement, arguing that the symbolic order
included the incipient digital universe, from the automatic door to the
vagaries of game theory to the problem of scientific knowledge.48 The
extensive nature of the symbolic order—what cognitive scientists and
anthropologists call “culture”—was already a hybrid of mathematics
and language for Lacan.
    This notion of the symbolic order has been taken up in two distinct
directions that bear on our itinerary here. The philosopher Bernard
Stiegler, who holds that humans are the technical animal, that there is
no humanity without technology, has recently argued that digital tech-
nologies are a form of simultaneous “grammatization”—making continu
ous orders discrete—and “proletarianization” (making nonlabor into
labor). What he calls the “automatic” or “control” society is a deploy-
ment of the symbolic order that engenders a symbol-specific “misery”
in which “the user becomes a function of the system he is using.”49 We
may agree with this diagnostic, or even with the evolutionary claim
that the human is the zoon technon, but Stiegler does not offer us a way
into the concrete analysis of algorithmic systems or their language use,
remaining focused on the deconstructed-yet-active binary between
the human and the machine. This tendency—to question the human–
machine divide, yet to be continually surprised that it returns after its
theoretical dismissal—dogs poststructuralism and is a major reason I
turn back to structuralism in this project. As we shall see, I think its
origins lie in Jacques Derrida’s reading of Saussure (chapter 1). Post-
structuralist approaches to problems of contemporary technology and
culture are often diagnostically precise but lack attention to the “re-
stricted economies” of formal and predictive systems.50
    The other extension of Lacan’s symbolic order would seem to point
directly to such a concrete analysis. That is the media theory of F
                                                                   riedrich
Kittler and the many thinkers he has influenced. Kittler famously lo-

                               Introduction                                25

cated the three Lacanian registers in the “new media” around 1900,
the gramophone (the Real, because it is continuous-to-continuous
transcription), the film (the imaginary, discrete-to-continuous arti-
ficial movement that restructures the very sense of the ego), and the
typewriter.51 But this last shift is curious, as it presents the problem
of a discontinuous-to-d iscontinuous translation. The letters of the
alphabet existed in a discrete or “grammatized” set before the advent
of the printing tray. The personalization and ordering that come with
the typew riter’s keyboard certainly shift their practice, but it is far less
clear that the “symbolic” suffers from the same type of reorganization
as the other media. Discrete symbols (words, letters, tokens) interacting
with other discrete symbols (numbers, functions) does not create a
phase change between digital and analog, real and representational, or
any other metaphysical set. Yet this symbol-to-symbol shift, like its pre-
decessors in the printing press, the typewriter, and the word processor,
carries an existential flavor that other media regime changes do not.
When the world is remediated, it is jarring. When language is artificially
produced, it is, above all, confusing.
    The reason this confusion arises is because the symbolic order is the
demarcator of the artificial, as Lacan realized. When the computer is added
to the problem of the “grammatology of the present,” as Kittler phrases
it, the systemic effects of this transition still remain unclear. The ten-
dency in Kittler’s thinking is to take the computational order—the triad
of silicon chip, Turing computability, and programming—as fundamen-
tal to the computing machine and as the dominant semiotic function,
an idea that is most famously captured in Kittler’s quip that “there is no
software.” But this against-the-grain statement receives a huge quali-
fier as soon as Kittler utters it: “or rather, [software] would not exist if
computer systems did not—at least until now—need to coexist with
an environment of everyday languages.”52 In other words, computation
creates not some free-floating order of pure mathematics or logic but
instead a system that is tailored to extend our computational powers
by means of and in interaction with language.53 LLMs make the qualifier
into the general media situation of the present.
    As digital humanist James Dobson puts this point, vector models
of language “cannot provide a . . . lower or higher resolution represen
tation . . . [because] these models are operating on and transforming
already encoded data.”54 The capture of physical data may or may not be

26                            Introduction


“good enough” to work with; in the case of language, there is no gradual
approximation of the same kind, because language is discrete to begin
with. If there is a formal problem of the fit between language and com-
putation, it cannot be grasped as a problem of abstraction. The idea of
“digitizing language” is a priori meaningless, because it is borderline
tautological.
    Kittler’s program has often been characterized as “antihermeneu-
tic,” a pure materialism of media. But the necessity of the interaction
between computation and language opens a gap in that image. Wendy
Chun has argued that that gap is filled with “ideology,” which is what
software—as the fitting of language and computation together—is.55
Dobson suggests that we in fact should return to hermeneutics on simi-
lar grounds. This problem is not new for semiotics and semiology and, as
we have seen, is already priced in Lacan’s notion of the symbolic order.
The issue we face is that the new “AI” is built on and in classical comput-
ing machines,56 so that whatever they do that “succeeds” looks like some
bizarre cheat, an end-r un around all the materialist analyses we have
come to expect in the realm of critical studies of media.57 Deep learning
exploits this gap in our critical accounts of symbolic computing and the
open-ended world of algorithmic design (including statistics) in their
relationships to language. The concrete object has gone missing in con-
temporary theory, even as it has become machine producible.
    There is an arcane debate about the putative difference between se-
miotics and “semiology,” the study of signs as Ferdinand de Saussure
proposed it, with language in the leading role. Like the problem of the
spectrum of meaning, I approach this problem with relative indifference
to its substance. AI is semiotic, but its current guise is heavily language
dependent in a way that makes semiology a good fit. If meaning is ulti-
mately gathered into language (for us), then LLMs extend that regime,
making the then avant garde speculations of Roland Barthes almost
timid descriptions of a world to come. Language is more than ever the
medium of culture, the hinge on which semiosis turns.
    Patrice Maniglier, the great interpreter of structuralism, remarks
that the advantage of learning systems may lie “in their capacity to
model human cultural ability,” because “human beings may learn any
culture, exactly in the same sense in which connectionist networks can
learn any arbitrary difference in their inputs.”58 The problem of gener-

                               Introduction                               27

ality of cultural ability is a true parallel to the generality of data across
many domains. This problem can only be approached semiotically, in
the final account, because every alleged formal ability that governs ex-
tensive knowledge ends up spitting out an indeterminate split between
cognition and culture. In the case of language, then, the question is
what allows computational and linguistic forms to be synthesized.
This question is a variant of cognitive inquiries into the way that logic
and syntax govern knowledge, but it is free of the assumptions and
rationalizations that divide too freely between cognition and culture.
What cognitive approaches miss is what the extended, strange features
of AI output tell us about the world of signs. These are the objects of
semiology.
    Let us demonstrate this semiology on a “multimodal” AI object: Astro
naut Riding a Horse on the Moon. This image was published by OpenAI
to great acclaim in 2022, leading again to questions of “intelligence.”59
DALL-E is a transformer model trained on text–image pairs, themselves
generated by contrastive language–image pretraining (CLIP). By gen-
erating embeddings for language–image indexical relationships across
a very large corpus—today such models are trained on the massive
LAION-5B data set, nearly six billion pairs—engineers create such mul-
timodal models that move between media while retaining meaningful
relationships at the semantic level.
    But the question of intelligence has always seemed rather more ab-
surd in images than in language, perhaps because it is simply more
intuitive to imagine a mechanical procedure that arrives at the image
than one that generates the unicorn story. Language is, after all, the
medium of the Turing test. It is very hard for humans, it seems, to resist
construing language as intelligence. And although cognitive scientists,
AI engineers, and literary critics (not to mention linguists) generally
do not believe that language and intelligence are one, the problem of
separating the two from one another is harder in the case of linguistic
outputs than it is in the case of the astronaut or any other image. The
corpus contains so much culture, disintegrated and resynthesized as
more culture—data generating more data.60 When I ask what “genera-
tion” is, there is no obvious answer—Gopnik’s line between innovation
and imitation blurs to the point of uselessness at the scale of Com-
mon Crawl, LAION-5B, and other such data sets. The cultural web of

28                             Introduction




Figure 2. Astronaut Riding a Horse on the Moon. Image generated by DALL-E.


language and computation that now also produces images—and much
else—challenges basic assumptions of our disciplines, calling not for
local determinations but rather for theory.
   My proposal is to accept the idea that these are “cultural technolo
gies”—and even to dub them “culture machines” and, more narrowly,
“language machines”—and to treat them as semiotic operators that
open a domain of investigation that allows us to ask about culture and
meaning in a new way. Ted Underwood has suggested that these ma-
chines “make theory empirical.”61 If that is so, then the culture machine
in the case of language realizes an empirical poetics and demands a
theory that responds to it. The idea of a “general poetics” that includes

                              Introduction                               29

both computation and language is my response to the question of “what
language models model,” and I flesh it out in chapter 5.
    As we embed a “generative” language capacity in everything from cell
phone cameras to military strategy, the question of how cognition and
culture interact becomes a major, pressing concern for geopolitics, pol-
icy, and enterprise. These systems, as they currently exist, usually filter
other media through language. (The filter is more limited when language
is used only as labels but plays a directly constitutive role when LLMs
are part of the model.) As they proliferate through industry, they extend
the regime of semiology.62
    Saussure invented the term sémiologie to describe the branch of sci-
ence to which he thought linguistics should belong. The idea was that
language was autonomous and could not be studied as the result of
something else, like physiology or psychology. But it was part of a class of
objects, those that signified. Semiology was the general study of things
that signified, but language was a type of the class. As Barthes elabo
rated the idea for the early computer age, he wrote that, for humans,
“semantization is inevitable: as soon as there is a society, every usage is
converted into a sign of itself.”63 Language is the final expression of any
other signifying element, including the flood of commercial images that
the mid-t wentieth century saw. The theory of semiology is a theory of
the necessity of language, but not a claim to its priority.
    Literary theory has often been accused of seeing everything through
a loose screen of contingent language; semiology is instead the sugges-
tion that the structure of that loose screen—culture—cannot be sub-
tracted from even the deepest formal results we possess from other
sciences. Language is like a last station for meaning that, if removed,
prevents any other destination from being possible. This last-instance
semiology is meant to follow through on Lacan’s notion that symbols
are their own separate order, one in which language and computation
converge—now in a new way.
    LLMs stand to extend semiology far beyond the wildest dreams of
the structuralists. We do not need to know if computers can make non-
human meaning exactly, or whether semantic universalism holds in a
deep historical sense, to deal with the problem of computational lan-
guage machines. We may expand our sense of significance in this in-
vestigation without resolving either the question of the human role in

30                           Introduction


the physical universe or the question of what intelligence as such is. The
technical sciences seem to proceed by redefining cognition every time it
turns out that their software systems have accidentally created culture.
Meaning will turn out not to be fixed on one side of the divide.


Remainder Humanism
Both public and academic writing about AI puts too much emphasis on
the “human.” Ever since the celebrated AI critique of Hubert Dreyfus,
who used Martin Heidegger’s notion of “being-in-the-world” to argue
that computers were not, as humans are, “in-a-situation,” the guiding
thread of AI critique has been, as Dreyfus’s title announced, “what
computers can’t do.”64 The problem with this line is that it establishes
a moving yet allegedly bright line between human and machine.65 Ob-
sessively locating and relocating those differences is methodological
Whac-A-Mole, and it tends to thin out the otherwise important mate-
rial, infrastructural, and geographical approaches to AI. The extractive
mining operations, labor exploitation, and environmental costs of
these systems have been extensively documented.66 Yet those problems
are not driven by “AI.” They are part of a larger social ecosystem, global
capitalism. Without rearranging the internal theory of the machine–
human divide, critique constantly teeters into a weak technodetermin-
ism with a pallid human face.
   The newest version of this debate is the strange conversation about
whether the output of LLMs is language at all. To deny this prima facie is
to claim that language is “human,” a seemingly innocent but ultimately
untenable way of dealing with systems of representation in general.
There is a strange agreement on this point between Noam Chomsky and
those AI critics who are concerned primarily with harm. And there is an
even stranger agreement on the centrality of the “human”—which all
three groups define in different ways—on the part of the so-called AI
“doomers,” who worry about risk above all. I call this distorting focus on
the line between human and machine remainder humanism.
   The gauntlet for the question of human versus machine language
was thrown down in January 2023 by Noam Chomsky. Chomsky argued
that LLMs have no substantial relationship to language whatsoever. In a
high-profile op-ed, Chomsky conflated the question of intelligence with
that of language, attempting to show how humans use language cogni-

                              Introduction                              31

tively, seeking and establishing truth and reasoning morally, in ways
that algorithms can’t. This argument is both old (Chomsky has been
making a version of it since 1957) and strange. In restricting language
to the synthetic functions of the human brain, Chomsky epitomizes a
humanistic recoil against the computation–culture interface, a kind of
denial of the actual language with which we live today, which is obvi-
ously heavily inflected by digital technologies.
    AI systems are “lumbering statistical engines,” Chomsky writes, re-
prising his field-defining argument that human brains have some ele
gant, “sparse” way of accessing grammar, of producing and understanding
syntax. The engine sees too many examples to be doing what humans
do. And this is true, so far as it goes: humans do not require, so far
as we know, anything like the computing power or sheer energy out-
put that LLMs do to become users of language. But this argument as-
sumes that whatever human brains do with language is language; it
simply defines language as “brain syntax,” casting off as so much dross
whatever happens with that kernel. Chomsky thinks of text, as well as
other nonsyntactic features of language, as “external” or “E-language,”
of which he claims there can be no scientific knowledge whatsoever. His
detractors have predictably jumped on the LLM train,67 arguing that
the statistical engine indeed produces what Chomsky sees as language.
I take a different tack here, because I think that E-languages cannot be
coherently excluded from the meaning of the word language. One way
to put this is that Chomsky wants the brain to be the originator of lan-
guage every time it operates. Cognitive ability in language is a kind of
always-on creator of language. But the paradox of language is that it
operates as both origin and elaboration, kernel and expression, cogni-
tion and culture. Language is not just the condition of our use of words;
it is also the use of those words and the words themselves (signs, to-
kens). Perhaps policing the border of “real language” as a purely human
activity is valuable for some local tasks in linguistics. It is problematic
for the attempt to come to terms with the semiology of digital systems.
The “human language” that Chomsky wants to rescue now exists in an
extensive nonhuman linguistic environment that cannot be easily sepa
rated from it.
    Of course, one may want to exclude parts of language for ethical rea-
sons too. AI ethicists Timnit Gebru and Emily Bender have proposed
(along with a group of authors) that LLMs are “stochastic parrots,” a

32                           Introduction


“system for haphazardly stitching together sequences of linguistic
forms it has observed in its vast training data, according to probabilis-
tic information about how they combine, but without any reference to
meaning.”68 Because they are trained on an “unfathomable”69 amount of
data, the systems’ statistical features allow them to recombine language
without reference to “meaning.” Data have allowed “high accuracy” but
also “encode stereotypical and derogatory associations along race, eth-
nicity, and disability status,” reproducing the “dominant/hegemonic
view.”70 The “parrot” reproduces; “stochasticity” gives it the wiggle room
to be more than a repeater of nasty words.
    Bender has given the stochastic parrot framework a theory of mean-
ing by substraction, claiming that “synthetic text” carries no intention
and so is strictly meaningless, as we saw earlier. Human interlocutors
“impute meaning where there is none,” leading both researchers and
the public astray.71 Bender claims that no meaning can be learned by
language models, because they can never grasp the “relation between a
linguistic form and communicative intent.”72 This is formally the same
move that Chomsky makes, withdrawing a human core from the syn-
thetic generator.73
    But where is the line? How can I empirically and pragmatically de-
termine where intent or syntax lies in everyday text interactions? And
what is the value of a theory of meaning that excludes its construction
in communication, not only by means of human interpreters—t he
homunculi of language transmission—but by chains of interpretants
in the representational systems they inhabit, engage, and enliven? The
proposals of the critics are like imaginary policy controls, aiming to
audit what we think language is, how we use it, and ultimately the poli-
tics that are imagined as downstream from that language—in a shock-
ingly naive ordo inversus.
    If we had control over the complex intersection between culture and
economics—and, so, society at large—we would perhaps want to limit
the way in which nonintentional communication occurs. But who is “we”
here? The problem that arises is that, although it is obviously unwise to
release untested bots into general use—let alone apply them to military
or judicial problems—this observation alone does nothing to defeat
that use. Even if LLMs took no step forward in any performance task
from this point on, they would still be good enough to make everything
worse, as the productivity studies from business schools are already

                               Introduction                                 33

showing.74 Remainder humanism is constitutively unable to draw a line
between preexisting ills and AI-specific ills. It is not science but libidinal
science fiction, wish fulfillment rather than analysis.
    None of this is to deny that LLMs capture bias as an element of the
structure of language. They “encode more bias against identities mar-
ginalized along more than one dimension than would be expected based
on just the combination of the bias along each of the axes.”75 This strikes
me as evidence in favor of the idea that they encode real language, which
is full of hate, animosity, and slurs—as opposed to some fictional “lan-
guage” that is neutral, salutary, local, and pure.
    But there is a further problem: how can a parrot that does not pro-
duce meaning supercharge harmful speech? The very “critique” here
cedes enormous power to these systems, undermining the explicit de-
nial of “meaning.” Humans and their communicative intents retreat
into a corner where all is allegedly well, while AI systems nevertheless
take command. Remainder humanism’s flaw is that it has no way of ex-
plaining that process.
    Bender and her coauthors noted that filters have proven ineffective
because attempts to remove known harmful words—slurs and the like—
also erase positive and reappropriated speech, thus occluding marginal-
ized identities altogether in the output.76 This suggests that the feature
that is singled out here—the “unfathomable data set”—houses the very
power that the concept “stochastic parrot” hides in the contradiction
between attributive adjective and noun. It also suggests—and we will
see more about this crucial fact later—that LLMs engage meaning at
the level of the whole, precipitating speech (which is sometimes harm-
ful indeed) from some larger synthetic capture. As a matter of norms,
we do not wish to spread this type of speech; as a matter of theory, we
should very much want bias to be captured in the system. If LLMs were
somehow magically unbiased, that would guarantee that they had failed
to learn our language.
    LLMs do something different than actual parrots. “Stochastic” is just
a way of saying that these systems use probabilities to produce output;
“parrot” is a deflationary way of explaining that they train on—a nd
reproduce—human-produced language data. (One might point out
that parrots themselves are robust semiotic agents, but the metaphor
is so narrow as to not justify a serious elaboration.) The idea that these
large-scale systems are “unfathomable” reverses this rhetoric, giving us

34                           Introduction


a sublime notion of the data out of which a single observation comes—
that inductive bias in models reproduces or exacerbates bigotry (“bias”
in another meaning) in language. This intuition is correct, I think. But
it does not explain anything about the interaction of inductive and social
bias. The “stochastic parrot” critique backhandedly confers enormous
power on LLMs, theoretically depriving them of language but ceding al-
most mystical power to produce meaning—bad meaning, but meaning
nonetheless. The result is a discursive weapon, one that has been put to
some good use. But the danger is patent: any weapon can be wielded by
one’s enemy. In this case, generative AI companies can say (1) great, we
know about the alignment problem, and you’re helping us work on it,
and (2) if the problem has no known solution, we cannot impose a mora-
torium, lest we lose our competitive advantage.77 Liberal critique always
falls into this bad infinity, toggling forever between condemnation and
toothless calls for a pause, made all the more toothless by effective al-
truism’s similarly meaningless calls to “slow things down.”
    One example of this strategy should make the problem clear. Christo
Buschek and Jer Thorp’s analysis of the LAION-5B data set, which
contains nearly six billion labeled images, points out that the higher-
quality data are often delivered by websites like Shopify. Buschek draws
the conclusion that the data set “contains less about how humans see the
world than it does about how search engines see the world. It is a data
set that is powerfully shaped by commercial logics.”78 This judgment
seems correct to me, but insufficient. The implicit claim is that humans
do not see the world in commercial logics or that there is some obvious
way to separate the “human”—or human cognition—from the motiva-
tions of capital. The critique thus serves to refiy a human essence as a
remainder, apart from the real culture—capitalist, hate-filled, and oth-
erwise dappled—in which we actually live. The culture machine poses
the problem from which this critique systematically retreats and in fact
presents us with what is perhaps the first tool to explore it empirically,
even forensically (see chapter 6). If the handbag is commercial and the
human is not, we are spinning in a void.
    This is remainder humanism, a humanism without a theory or doc-
trine of what is human, in which humanity is remaindered, like a book
past salability. The human here is defined by technology’s creep, but
only negatively. The culture machine, because it remixes capitalist cul-
ture, is taken to be a degenerate mode. I share the feeling that forms of

                              Introduction                               35

capital do not exhaust what it means to be human, just as I worry that
the automation of bias is a major problem for the new semiological re-
gime of AI. But to articulate the problem this way is to accept, implicitly,
the idea that cognition is essence and culture appearance—w ith the role
of cognition here played by a frankly vague and fetishistic humanism
that does nothing to help us analyze platform capitalism. Indeed, re-
mainder humanism accidentally repeats the terms of the interminable
and confused debate about whether digital capitalism is a new mode
of production altogether or instead continuous with industrial capital-
ism. But such questions cannot be answered by crying “we are human!”
again and again. If our humanity and our cognition are consistent across
these media-economic differences, then we should expect these models
to capture something about that consistency even in Shopify images.
How deeply “commercial logics” penetrate into our very humanity then
becomes an empirical question.
    Attempts to draw a dividing line between “real” and “artificial” lan-
guage all run aground in the fact that language itself is the demarcator
of the artificial, in the notion of the symbolic order. When language and
that other symbolic system, computation, mix productively, it is natu-
ral to feel vertigo. But if we wish to say “this is not language” in such a
case, to whom are we appealing? Drawing a line that is already becom-
ing impossible to perceive between “human” language and “synthetic
text” is a losing game, a retreat into a conceptual echo chamber, back
into Plato’s cave where we can reassure each other that the shadows are
real. We are witnessing the death knell of a more general rearguard ac-
tion in theory that recoils from the spread of the digital into cultural
production. Remainder humanism is a tendency to backslide from the
atheistic antihumanism that Stefanos Geroulanos has identified as the
core property of poststructuralism,79 rather than cleaving theoretically
to the present.
    This backslide takes the form of painting ourselves into a corner,
shouting more loudly each time something is quantified that the “es-
sence of the human” can never be quantified, even as that essence
recedes behind a line that is not bright. This stance is always binary,
filled with arbitrary lines drawn between humans and machines, and
is constituted by neglect of systems of representation—which are not
“human” in this strong sense, even if humans invented them. We do
not possess language, theory used to tell us—it possesses us. A strange

36                            Introduction


voluntarism has replaced this wisdom with respect to all social con-
structs, and with the specter of LLMs, language is being swept up in a
frankly bizarre claim that “we” can decide what it is and where to use it.
That is, of course, trivially true of utterances—but it has never been true
of language as code or as system. Clawing back a good portion of this
basic structuralist insight is a central goal in what follows.
    It is natural to think of the opposing tendency in AI “critique”—
the framework of AI risk, existential or “x” risk, and “doomerism”—as
anti-humanist. After all, a crescendoing condemnation of the world of
“effective altruism” and affiliated ideologies, which Gebru, along with
the critic Émile Torres, have called the “TESCREAL” bundle,80 have been
revealed as deeply compromised visions of a eugenic future that con-
strues “humanity” in both racist and science-fictional ways. Yet here,
too, there is not exactly “antihumanism” as remainder humanism. It is
racist, yes, but it is also sentimental, failing to address even in outline
the type of society in which we live. It is also obsessed with AI without
having a single concrete thing to say about artificial systems. It is the
loosest possible philosophy of technology combined with an anemic and
fantastical “mathematics” of “risk.”
    In June 2023, the Center for AI Safety published a single sentence to
which industry leaders, data scientists, and others put their signature. It
reads, “Mitigating the risk of extinction from AI should be a global pri-
ority alongside other societal-scale risks such as pandemics and nuclear
war.”81 One may be forgiven for asking what material factors drive this
comparison. The answer is ideology: beginning with the early work of
the Oxford philosopher Nick Bostrom, the notion of “existential risk”
(risk of extinction or reduction of human population below civilization-
bearing numbers) has been ascendant in Silicon Valley, the parts of
academia most connected to it, and think tanks. Perhaps its most bal-
anced articulation is in Toby Ord’s 2020 book The Precipice, a book filled
with speculative data about the likelihood of nuclear winter (which Ord
questioningly characterizes as unlikely), global pandemics (unlikely!),
and the singularity.82 The achievement of AGI, this group tells us, could
lead to extinction by any number of byways that are firmly in the realm
of what actual science fiction author Kim Stanley Robinson calls “1920s
cliché science fiction,” in which AGI—which is completely undefined—
somehow emerges and becomes “superintelligent,” in Bostrom’s term,
and supermalicious. Every version of this fantasy involves an emergent

                              Introduction                                37

agency—sometimes a malfunction that seeks a single “pleasurable” goal
above all others, known as wireheading. There is not really a theory of
this type of superpowerful malfunction—a lthough certainly a lot of
vain ink has been spilled on it—which seems to rest on an implicit “I’m
afraid I can’t do that, Dave.” Malfunction with a sprinkle of malice added
to functional omniscience swims in a soup of nonconcepts hiding behind
a wall of fictitious numbers. All of this is in the name of a human literally
remaindered by the theory itself, a “humanity” thinned out to the point
of—indeed—antihumanism. Where the AI critics isolate the human in
utopia, the nasty, brutish, and short vision of the doomers shares this
naivety with inverted values. What both refuse to accept is culture.
    Cognitive science in Chomsky’s mold, AI risk, and AI ethics share
the theoretical move that backs us into a “humanist” corner, an ever-
shrinking area of things that “computers can’t do.” The political motiva-
tions of some of these proposals are anodyne and well intentioned, but
the theories are too weak to cope with the actual intersection of culture
and capitalism with which we live today. This is because they have no
way of conceiving of the concrete interaction of language and compu-
tation. Lacking that, the insistence on “the human” becomes a fetish
that siloes meaning where we hope, wish, and want it to come from. It is
sentimental semantics, the core of remainder humanism.


The Shape of the Argument
When Steven Pinker began to promote Noam Chomsky’s “syntax” ap-
proach to language in public in the 1990s, it was the heyday of literary
theory, and he still felt the need to reject what he called the “semiot-
ics curriculum.” Yet no public conflict ever occurred between cognitive
science and poststructuralism, even as the former appropriated lan-
guage as a disciplinary object. Chapter 1 argues that the humanities lost
public and even academic status as the primary knowers of language
in this period and that the recovery of the object is urgent for a world
with language machines. I compare the syntax view—which I argue is
transcendental or Kantian in nature—w ith the idea of a “distributional
semantics,” a statistical-empirical approach that draws on Bayesian
methods but has rarely come to full articulation as a comprehensive
theory and is now ascendant because of the success of LLMs. I then
sketch the structuralist approach—which I classify as “dialectical”—

38                            Introduction


and argue that poststructuralism redirected attention from the concrete
problem of cultural language such that AI requires renewed structural-
ist analysis, but in a new form.
    Chapters 2 and 3 address the problem of AI as an active shaper of
cultural meaning. Named for the first chatbot, the creation of the AI en-
gineer turned critic Joseph Weizenbaum, the “Eliza effect” occurs when
we are fooled into thinking that we are conversing with a human. This is
the opposite of the Turing test, and chapter 2 argues that it has become
widespread, an underlying cultural condition. Examining the history
of machine learning and its relationship to digital theory today, I argue
that Alan Turing and Warren McCulloch, the earliest thinkers of AI,
saw computational systems not as simulating an original human intel-
ligence, but instead as instantiating formal systems in which humans
also participate. This suggests that the notion of intelligence is more like
what the philosopher Jean Baudrillard called a “simulacrum,” a repre-
sentation without an original, than a copy of something else (the world
in the case of human cognition or human intelligence in the case of AI).
    Language plays a crucial role in deep learning and its distribution
into our infrastructure and culture. AI has become multimodal, pro-
ducing language, images, and many other kinds of data. But the semi-
ology of AI must distinguish between its classifying and generating
functions, both of which rely on language to function. Chapter 3 shows
how classification relies on natural language labeling and so forms not
empirical judgments (“this is a squirrel”) but instead a hypothesis about
the data that have become a significant factor in our everyday world. I
propose that this “data hypothesis” should supplant both hype and fear
of a universal data language. The generative function of AI relies more
directly on language. LLMs do not “datafy” language so much as they
allow vectors to conform to structures in language, which is what makes
generative systems capable of more than hypothesis. These systems plug
in to formal features of culture and, by doing so, are able to generate
meaning. To date, language is the only system capable of being exploited
in this way, although it is not clear if that will remain the case. The re-
mainder of the book is about these language machines.
    Computation and language are now in an interoperable relationship,
but mathematical and literary-theoretical understandings of form are
very far apart. Chapter 4 outlines how computation and language “share
form” in a specifically poetic way—following the argument of the poet

                              Introduction                               39

Allison Parrish—and reviews the state of the art in thinking about lit-
erary form in AI. The structuralist idea of a “paradigm”—arrays of syno
nyms given a context—was formally modeled in “vector semantics,” as
the philosopher Juan Luis Gastaldi has argued, and this has a surpris-
ing correspondence to Claude Shannon’s vision of language as it was
included centrally in his information theory. When linguistic and com-
putational form merge, we notice that there is no set of cultural or liter-
ary theorists who currently study language as such, the ambition of the
early structuralist movement. Semiology requires exactly this project.
     Chapter 5 argues that the “queries, keys, and values” vectors of the
so-called attention mechanism engage in the processing of establishing
“values” in the differential system of language as Saussure conceived
of it, demonstrating how computation and language do share form.
So-called self-attention realizes what Roman Jakobson called the “po-
etic function” in language, not in terms of sound or even text but as a
general principle of language as a system. The transformer architecture
demonstrates the general fact that language can be produced algorith-
mically but does not explain why this is so. Nor does this specific class of
net allow any direct insight into the class of possible formal interactions
between the structures of numbers and of words. The chapter closes
with a comparison of Kurt Goedel’s articulation of a formal system ca-
pable of counting as “incomplete”—in which a new rule must always be
borrowed from another system for some operation inside the present
system—and Roman Jakobson’s idea of the poetic function, which I un-
derstand as a fundamental first-order recursivity that produces the very
possibility of meaning (and on which other functions, like reference, de-
pend). The two systems are self-externalizing and “greedy,” respectively,
and in the LLM collaborate to produce a “poetic heat map” of language.
I call for a “general poetics” that studies meaning making in all formal
systems, a semiology that blends culture and cognition.
     Chapter 6 argues that LLMs are ideology machines. Generative cul-
ture is an extensive, probabilistic continuation of what art critic C
                                                                     lement
Greenberg called kitsch: “predigested form.” The result is what I call
packaged semantics, which, despite being quantitatively formulaic, often
surprises us. This quantitative ideology machine could even be used
forensically in the service of knowing the distribution of social ideas. It
 thus realizes not a “transcendental” notion of ideology, in which what
 is thinkable or sayable is merely conditioned by some other factor—the

40                           Introduction


economic base, the unconscious—but an “expressive” version of ideol-
ogy in which statistical method and dialectics coincide.
    Language is now on offer “as a service,” in the jargon of software.
The conclusion predicts that the availability of language generation will
slowly separate out a “labor” aspect of language, now automatic, from
its creative side. This process occurred with respect to computation be-
ginning in the Industrial Revolution and culminating in the computer.
The political economy of digital culture now includes language as a
hinge, but it is no longer only a human language that plays this role.
Just as rhetoric was the discipline that cognitively conditioned and thus
underwrote textual civilization, we are set to witness the rise of new,
computational-rhetorical systems as the rails of global capitalism going
forward.
