      1


How the Humanities Lost Language
Syntax, Statistics, and Structure

In 1994, Steven Pinker still felt the need to argue with the literary theo
rists. Not very much, mind you—by this point, the game was more or
less over. But in The Language Instinct, the book that launched him from
success as a cognitive linguist into public-intellectual stardom, he would
still write things like this:

   Language is no more a cultural invention than is upright posture.
   It is not a manifestation of a general capacity to use symbols: a
   three-year-old, we shall see, is a grammatical genius, but is quite
   incompetent at the visual arts, religious iconography, traffic signs,
   and the other staples of the semiotics curriculum.1

This colloquy of cultural habits that are not as deep as “language” accu-
rately describes the reach of what, by 1994, was now a poststructuralist
semiology. Based on a doctrine of symbols, the object of the discipline is
structure of signification across a wide variety of social uses. As we have
seen, the technical term for this discipline is semiology. Whether there
can be any knowledge of such cultural vapor, Pinker argues, is irrelevant
to the problem of language, which is a proper scientific object, not “the
ineffable essence of human uniqueness but . . . a biological adaptation to
communicate information.”2 Language is cognition—indeed, for Pinker,
it is in the brain—not culture.3
    Pinker’s is hardly the only cognitive approach to language, but by
entering the public sphere with his version of Noam Chomsky’s doctrine
of syntax, he made a grab for theoretical dominance. The “semiotics cur-
riculum” was unable to counter this move. Many of its members were
also emerging as public figures at this time—think of the controversies
around Jean Baudrillard’s 1991 trilogy of articles on the Gulf War,
published as a volume, The Gulf War Did Not Take Place, in 1995; J udith
Butler’s Gender Trouble (1990) and her influential 1993 article on “Sche-
matic Racism and White Paranoia” in the Rodney King trial; or Jacques


                                    41

42                 How the Humanities Lost Language


Derrida’s 1993 book Spectres of Marx, with its engagement of Francis
Fukuyama’s end-of-history thesis. The “semiotics curriculum” was alive
and well in the 1990s and even doing a brisk bit of public trade. But its
focus, and disciplinary grip, on the object of language had loosened, and
since then, it has not returned. The humanities lost language by choice.
    Pinker’s move went largely unanswered as a question about who pos-
sessed knowledge of language, who got to say what language was. Slavoj
Žižek, who began his climb to global fame in 1989 with The Sublime Ob-
ject of Ideology, would engage cognitive science and AI in his 2006 The
Parallax View. But then, it seems, it was almost too late—or at least,
the humanities had already given up on the shared determination of
what language is, retreating into disciplinary isolation. What should
have been a conflict of the faculties between syntax and semiotics never
happened.
    This chapter is not a sketch of what might have been. It is, instead,
an attempt to make sense of the present moment, when language and
computation have been set in a newly productive interface. Cognitive
science’s ownership of language as an object suggests that we turn to
Noam Chomsky and his school to make sense of this moment; NLP,
which has produced this moment technologically, is challenging that
ownership in earnest now. But neither side has a firm grasp on the ob-
ject that LLMs present, precisely because literary theory and cognitive
linguistics never had it out and the humanities lost language to both
these other groups. In what follows, I present three theories of form
and meaning in language, which I call the syntax, statistics, and structure
views. There are other ways to divvy up the many views of linguistic
meaning, of course, and I am not suggesting that this is an exhaustive
account. Instead, I choose these three because they share a commitment
to a notion of “structure” that they respectively construe in radically
different ways, with the result that each harbors a separate view of what
counts as empiricism, or evidence, in the study of language. These back-
ground views are transcendental (Kantian) in the case of syntax, “flat”
(or Humean, more precisely Bayesian) in the case of statistics, and cul-
tural (I argue that semiology is of the family “dialectical” in the families
of theory4) in the case of structure.
    The views coevolved, but I do not mean to give anything like a history
here. The competing theoretical commitments of these three frame-

                   How the Humanities Lost Language                        43

works all have partial purchase on the problem of language automation.
Syntax has always denied this possibility, and statistics affirmed it;
structure, surprisingly, turns out to be the best fit with the actual devel-
opment of language machines, as the rest of the book argues. But this
fit calls our attention back from the poststructuralist semiology that
Pinker dismissed to an earlier structuralism far more engaged with lin-
guistics and—simply—w ith the concrete analysis of actual strings of
signs. No cognitive scientist or computational linguist I am aware of
thinks that there is a bad fit between rules and expression, cognition
and culture—they mostly appear to think that this is not a real problem.
But the nonproblem breeds monsters. The promise of structuralism was
to show how culture interfaced with rules, and that is what is required
for dealing with AI in the present. For this reason, I also argue that post-
structuralism, which often has useful diagnostic things to say about
contemporary culture, has not produced a concrete enough analytical
tool set to deal with automated language generation. For this reason,
despite its close association with literary theory, poststructuralism is
partly responsible for how the humanities lost language.
    LLMs may function for the technical disciplines as more proof that
culture will eventually be gobbled up by computational models. After all,
if a machine can make language, produce images, and even predict solu-
tions to scientific problems like protein structure or antibiotic strength,
it is easy to adopt the attitude that the interpretation of such systems
is a luxury. But there should, at a minimum, be some semiotic friction
before we allow disciplines to collapse. It may even be that these systems
explain nothing on their own and that interpretation is the only path
to reducing their high-dimensional hypotheses to concrete knowledge.
If that is so, then the syntax view—in which, as we shall see, the rules
always retreat beyond the reach of the data—w ill never offer that expla-
nation. The problem of knowledge in the age of AI may end up depending
on cultural theory. It is not yet clear that any data are truly culture-free,
and even in cases in which a preformalized system stabilizes the object—
like sonic data or temperature—the type of inference necessary to make
any conclusion about that data relies on an analogy to human cognition
that may make little sense. In such cases, we see the extension of compu-
tation beyond the realm where we can reliably explain why it does or does
not work. That is a knowledge problem that can only be articulated as a

44                How the Humanities Lost Language


problem of culture, by means of the semiotics of data. This chapter—and
the ones that follow—begins the project of making sense of this problem
on the example of language machines.


Syntax
In the New York Times op-ed that he coauthored in early 2023, in which
he claimed that LLMs are “lumbering statistical engines” that do not
produce language at all, Chomsky recycled some example sentences
from his 1957 book Syntactic Structures, which began his meteoric rise
not only in linguistics but in cognitive science more generally. The sen-
tence “John is too stubborn to talk to,” he argued, would often be mis-
construed by LLMs because it implies an agent that is not presented as
a word. Chomsky went on to say that a model would likely predict that
the meaning of this sentence is that John refuses to talk rather than
that John cannot be reasoned with. This example, simple for humans
and less so for machines, put the whole history of the war between syn-
tax and statistics on the table. The meaning of language could not be in
words, Chomsky thought, even if the words had some external relation-
ship determining their placement. The structure of language had to be
deeper.
   Chomsky is best known for the concept of a “universal grammar.”
Since the late 1950s, he has revised this idea several times, with vari-
ants ranging from a hierarchy of linguistic systems to the “minimalist
program” based on the idea of a cognitive function called “merge.” I will
not go into much detail about the differences between these programs,
because they all share two features that are important here. First, they
involve what Chomsky calls the distinction between “competence”—or
the ability to understand, and so to accept or reject, any sentence as
grammatical or not—and “performance”—or the external placement of
words in some order, in speech or otherwise.5 The second feature, which
depends on the first, is that Chomsky has consistently denied that lan-
guage can be captured by statistical models.6 Such a model differentiates
words only by numerical value and so cannot create a hierarchy of func-
tions with any depth.
   It was partly to propose this difference that Chomsky composed his
famous sentences:

                   How the Humanities Lost Language                         45

   (1) Colorless green ideas sleep furiously.
   (2) Furiously sleep green ideas colorless.7

The two sentences are “equally nonsensical, but any speaker of English
will recognize that only the former is grammatical,” suggesting that
“any search for a semantically based definition of ‘grammaticalness’ is
futile.”8 In other words, what constitutes language cannot be derived
from words—there must be deep-structure reasons for the ability
to distinguish between these two sentences, neither of which means
anything.
   What it means to be “grammatical in English,” therefore, is strictly
different from the notion “high order of statistical approximation to
English,” Chomsky writes.9 Indeed, neither of these sentences is likely
to have ever occurred in English, so no corpus will have much chance of
predicting either. But (1) is grammatical, which Chomsky distinguishes
by noting that

   presented with these sentences, a speaker of English will read
   (1) with a normal sentence intonation, but he will read (2) with a
   falling intonation on each word; in fact, with just the intonation
   pattern given to any sequence of unrelated words. He treats each
   word in (2) as a separate phrase. Similarly, he will be able to recall
   (1) much more easily than (2), to learn it much more quickly, etc.
   Yet he may never have heard or seen any pair of words from these
   sentences joined in actual discourse. . . . Evidently, one’s ability
   to produce and recognize grammatical utterances is not based
   on notions of statistical approximation and the like. The custom
   of calling grammatical sentences those that “can occur,” or those
   that are “possible,” has been responsible for some confusion here.

Our ability to speak has some pattern underlying it, in other words.
The “normal” intonation with which one reads (1) will be extended deep
into the mind’s structure by Chomsky and his school over the next six
decades, until it arrives, in their accounts, in the brain, defining what
it means to be human at all. The “transparency” of rhythmical speech
is taken as a sign that the brain is preformed for this—and not some
other—join between logic and language.10

46                 How the Humanities Lost Language


    All it took was a well-formed but meaningless sentence.
    The target of Chomsky’s gambit appears to have been Claude S hannon,
the creator of information theory, whom we will encounter several times
over the course of this book. Chomsky’s argument is that a grammar is
a “device” that produces all the grammatical “and none of the ungram-
matical” sentences of a language. Such a device, he argues, cannot be
a “finite-state machine” that deploys a Markov process—a statistical
approach that treats linguistic structure as a matter of frequency, in-
formation content measured as the probability of the placement of a
letter or a word in a context. Such a process will not be able to imitate
the human capacity to “produce and understand new sentences” and
also reject “other new sequences as not belonging to the language.”11
Chomsky concludes that English—we may say language in general—is
“not a finite-state language.”12 Statistical approaches will only approxi-
mate previous language use; they will be unable to adjudicate or gener-
ate new instances of English.
    The difference between statistical prediction—often characterized
as a “flat” order—and something with depth, in language, mind, or na-
ture, is a major scientific and philosophical debate that has been raging
for half a century. The rise of data science and computational modeling,
along with the emergence of a self-designated “cognitive science,” has
resurrected the debate between empiricism and rationalism.13 There
was no guarantee that linguistics would play any major role in this pro-
cess, but Chomsky’s outsize influence on the very institution of cogni-
tive science is partly due to his claim for a strong rationalist backbone
in this debate. Where statistical approaches may use past data as evi-
dence to predict uncertain events, the mind, for Chomsky, is deeply crea
tive. Humans make “infinite use of finite means,” he often says, quoting
Wilhelm von Humboldt.14 We make never-before-uttered sentences
as a matter of course, recombining elements in our languages using a
hardwired ability that can never be derived from the elements of those
languages: words, sentences, or numbers that attempt to capture and
model those words. This is why Chomsky called his program “Cartesian
linguistics,” invoking the great formalizer of epistemology and geom-
etry.15 Syntax, universal grammar, principles and parameters, and the
more recent “minimalist program” with its key idea of “merge”—a ll
these are attempts to isolate and formalize the ability to use language as
a distinctively human operation shared neither by animals nor by ma-

                   How the Humanities Lost Language                      47

chines. For this reason, I think that his linguistics is more Kantian than
Cartesian. Chomskyan linguistics is the search for the categories of a
transcendental logic of language as it exists extensively, to find the rules
that we impose on sound or paper. Kant’s search for form differs from
Descartes’s because it is strictly about the limits of human knowledge
and what may count as universally valid within that knowledge. The
search for the rules of that knowledge in the empirical order is futile,
Kant argued, and Chomsky’s argument against statistics has its analog
here, not in Descartes or in Humboldt. The reason that there is no hope
of finding syntax in sound or any other external feature of language—
just as there was no hope of finding our a priori capacities in experience,
for Kant—is that there is no recursion in the physical world.
    Every version of Chomsky’s doctrine has centrally featured recur-
sion. Language’s infinity is based on the ability to extend it, he argues,
not by adding a “next word” but by including any sentence within an-
other. No matter how long the string of words, one is always permitted
to add “Mary thinks that” at the beginning to make a new sentence.
One may also think of signature wordplay that uses this form of recur-
sion, such as the classic joke from the sitcom 30 Rock, in which a char-
acter says “my single ‘My Single Is Dropping’ is dropping” (although
this includes a pragmatic difference too, obviously). Here, too, we may
note a similarity to Kant’s philosophy, in which the unity of mental
experience—the fact that whatever I experience is a single experience
of my consciousness—is underwritten by the ability to add “I think”
before any statement of that experience. For both Chomsky and Kant,
there may be practical limits on this recursive infinity—if I insert too
many sentences inside each other, it may be psychologically confusing,
and if I say “I think that I think that I think,” it may become tedious, if
not nonsensical.16 But the point is not threatened by such limits. Every
act of thought, and every instance of language, is an expression of this
deep recursive ability, which governs but also enables expression. Syn-
tax is the transcendental logic of cognitive science, and its backbone is
recursion.
    We can take a brief look at the most recent, and currently most in-
fluential, of Chomsky’s frameworks to see how this recursion works and
why it is allegedly immune to statistical capture. In the 1990s, Chomsky
proposed a version of his doctrine called “merge,” the minimal rules for
imposing cognitive order on anything, including language. In 2002, he

48                 How the Humanities Lost Language


coauthored a Science article that argued that this capacity was the ex-
planation for the singularity of language in the animal order, perhaps
the most direct attempt on Chomsky’s part to seed linguistics in the
sciences.
    The faculty of language in the broad sense, the authors argued, is
an evolutionary device for communication that relates conceptual-
intentional material to sensory-motor perceptual action in both physical
and social environments. The faculty of language that actually performs
these functions in humans is narrow, and this narrow faculty is “orga-
nized like the genetic code—hierarchical, generative, recursive, and
virtually limitless with respect to its scope of expression.”17 Language
in this sense is the differentia specifica of the human. No other animal
possesses it, and the search for its evolutionary basis is a major scien-
tific undertaking. The way that humans make meaning is in this deep
structure of language, and its basis must be in the brain—resuming an
argument from Chomsky’s early career that there must be a “language
acquisition device” in the brain.
    The minimalist program describes a “computational procedure for
human language.” Chomsky writes that “the indispensable operation
of a recursive system is Merge . . . , which takes two syntactic objects
α and β and forms the new object γ = {α,β}.”18 Complementing merge
are two other operations, called “agree” (which allows for comparison
and case-checking in a domain) and “move” (which combines the first
two and revalues some function).19 But merge is the basis, the most eco-
nomic and core function, of the syntactic ability that leads to the “infin-
ity” of language in humans.
    The Chomskyan linguist David Adger uses the example of the English
phrase drink wine to illustrate merge. Drink and wine are both “bits of
language,” he tells us, but when I say, “I drink wine,” the phrase “drink
wine” becomes a new bit of language. Other languages—he gives us
the Japanese “watashiwa waino nomu,” subject-object-verb, and the
Malagasy “misotro divay aho,” verb-object-subject—arrange words dif-
 ferently, but the merge of all three is the same operation.20 Merge can, of
 course, take other syntactic objects and make them into a unit, as Adger
 demonstrates in thinking about the unit ’s in English for possession,
 which is created in some languages by genitive inflection of the verb.
 The overall point is that merge is the deep structure of recursion, be-
 cause it allows but also restricts the range of combination of functions

                   How the Humanities Lost Language                     49

in grammar. What is really “merged” in this operation is cognition and
the external order of language’s elements, and this relationship is uni-
directional. Adger states, “Merge imposes hierarchy on all it surveys.”21
The understanding gives the law to nature, as Kant might have put it.
Many things in the order of knowledge come from experience, but some
things do not—syntax is the essence of those things, because it is a for-
mal operation for both cognition and language.
    Two consequences of this view are relevant for our study here. First,
it is the recursion of merge and its generality that confer “depth” and
hierarchy on cognition and make it resistant to statistical modeling.
And second, “language” has here come to be defined in such strict cog-
nitive terms that the usual sense of the word is nearly entirely gone.
Language now does not include things like words and letters, let alone
genres and other cultural forms—a lthough this internalized language
makes use of these artifacts. The withdrawal of syntax into this tran-
scendental depth creates a problem that mirrors a technical issue that
Kant could not resolve, the “schematism.”
    “Lumbering statistical engines” differ from human children, who
learn with an almost mathematical elegance, as Chomsky has always ar-
gued. The idea that a very small child possesses no skill in the “semiotics
curriculum” but already has a strong sense of syntax—as we saw Pinker
claim—is crucial to the syntax view. The idea is that human children
simply do not learn by induction, statistical or otherwise, because they
never hear the variants. No one utters a high number of poorly organized
or ungrammatical sentences to a child. Some such sentences are encoun-
tered, of course, but their number is trivial compared to the well-formed
sentences to which children are constantly exposed both in speech and
as they learn to read and write. Chomsky calls this “Plato’s problem”:
“the problem of ‘poverty of stimulus,’ of accounting for the richness,
complexity, and specificity of shared knowledge, given the limitations
of the data available.”22 Infinite creativity comes not from immersion
in every possible permutation of words but instead from some innate
ability to make language. Statistical systems do not have this problem,
and they cannot build up to this type of knowledge, lacking the depth to
do so. This is the core of Chomsky’s objection to LLMs.
    Language is not a habit, Chomsky has claimed from the beginning. He
has argued this point in this way because the school that his generative
grammar upended, American structuralism, saw it that way. A blend

50                 How the Humanities Lost Language


of logical empiricism and American pragmatism, the structuralists in
the United States—a completely separate phenomenon from Euro-
pean structuralism, although the two groups sometimes interacted—
pursued a descriptive linguistics that came from an anthropological
approach championed by some of Franz Boas’s students, prominent
among them Edward Sapir. The structure they sought was empirical and
indeed often statistical, as we shall see shortly. Syntactic structure was a
response that replaced description with the aspiration to explanation.
    In recent remarks, Chomsky has argued that this “training and
habit” approach is being resurrected by deep learning. Systems of this
sort “produce text that looks like actual language,” but no “corpus of
linguistic materials” will ever be explanatory.23 No scan of a corpus, no
matter how large, can answer a “why” question. All the way back in 1957,
he had already written that linguistic analysis “cannot be understood
as a schematic summary developed by sharpening the blurred edges in
the full statistical picture. . . . Grammar is autonomous and independent
of [semantic] meaning, and . . . probabilistic models give no particular
insight into some of the basic problem of syntactic structure.”24 Nothing
has changed on this score, then—a handcrafted corpus of perhaps some
tens of thousands of words differs only in scale from the many trillions
of words now fed into LLMs. Explanation is not forthcoming.
    As we will see, I agree that no explanation is forthcoming from ma-
chine learning in general and that the task of classifying language is
beyond the scope of what these systems are capable of. But there is a cu-
riosity in the way Chomsky poses this problem. LLMs now produce quite
good syntax, even if you can fool them into shoddy answers if you ask
them to analyze complex syntax (ChatGPT gets “John is too stubborn
to talk to” right, one year on, though). But is a syntax user automatically
a perfect analyzer of syntax? The answer for humans is clearly no. The
issue that surfaces here is that syntax as defined by Chomsky and his
school is the point of contact between language and cognition—a link
between thought and language, cognition and expression. The conse-
quence of viewing it through syntax in the way Chomsky does, as the
mere production of good syntax—words in the right order spit out of
the interface—does not justify the idea that it is “modeling” syntax or
“producing language” on its own. It is not really clear what would suffice
to claim that a system models syntax, because the interface Chomsky
theorizes is not available to any kind of observation. As Maniglier puts

                   How the Humanities Lost Language                     51

it, this position forces Chomsky into the idea that “knowing a language”
is actually the “knowledge of the knowledge of something,” threaten-
ing regress and without a clear sense of the fit between the rules and
their expression.25 The rather bizarre exclusion of any external units
from language is the cost of defining the latter not as actually spoken
languages but as the formal production unit—in the brain or in some
computational formalism—that achieves the fit between knowing and
saying, the internal and external aspects of the linguistic act.
     If the human child has a neurological shortcut to syntax, the ques-
tion of how syntactic structure gets imposed on semantic units becomes
a topic for empirical research.26 This problem is known as the “linking
problem,” one that has given Pinker and his colleagues fits.27 The idea
is that syntax and semantics have to be joined so that I may “pour the
water into the glass” and “fill the glass with water” rather than “pour the
glass with water” or “fill water into the glass.” We speak both grammati
cally and meaningfully—and the syntax school believes that there is no
way to “bootstrap” from semantics to syntax, because the pathway is
simply too long, requiring too many data and too much time.28 The term
linking masks a deep problem that the syntax view has rarely confronted
empirically, namely, how the deep structure of syntax actually imposes
form on specific languages, like English or Lao.29 This problem is an in-
stance of a larger problem that cements the sense that the syntax view
is a transcendental logic for linguistics, of a Kantian stripe.
     Kant faced his own linking problem. He divided knowledge of
nature—of the kind expressed in judgments like “this is a rose”—into
 intuitions, Anschauungen, which were singular and undivided, and con-
 cepts, Begriffe, which were discursive, discrete, and general. His famous
 dictum that “intuitions without concepts are blind, concepts without
 intuitions are empty”30 was meant to show that the judgment was the
 form of linkage between the two kinds, the general vehicle of knowl-
 edge. The famous “categories of the understanding” are thus rules for a
 linking activity that imposes form on something that does not possess
 it independently, and the “deduction” of the categories is the highest
 possible form of argument for Kant—the justification of the only uni-
 versally valid form of knowledge.
     But once the theoretical dust settles on this highest problem, some
 issues remain. Even if one accepts Kant’s deduction—and hardly anyone
 has or does without some exception—this “unity” of consciousness does

52                 How the Humanities Lost Language


not ipso facto show us why we are able to say things like “this is a plate.”
To identify everyday objects, Kant introduces the idea of a schema, a
middle term that relates the categories to the forms of intuition and
the shapes that regularly occur in those forms.31 Even if the rules can be
theoretically merged with the stuff of consciousness, it remains difficult
to exemplify or make sense of how that merge interacts with mundane
knowledge. Kant’s own example is that the empirical concept of a “plate”
must be related to the geometrical concept of a “circle.” It is not much
of an exaggeration to say that no one after Kant has ever been happy
with this section of Critique of Pure Reason. The linking problem seems to
confirm my sense that the syntax view is Kantian, because it rediscovers
the problem that transcendental logic needs some hitch to find its way
to mundane knowledge. And this problem might be ill posed, for it is not
really clear that the concrete object we are dealing with is first split into
pieces, only later to be synthesized. Syntax, by analogy, has to “fit” with
words in actual languages, to be “merged.”
     Chomsky has long expressed this problem in terms of an “external”
or “E-language” (“in the sense that the construct is understood inde-
pendently of the properties of the mind/brain”32) and an “internal” or
“I-language,” “some element of the mind of the person who knows the
language, acquired by the learner, and used by the speaker-hearer.”33
In making this separation in the 1980s, Chomsky collapsed the Ameri-
can and European structuralist schools, accusing both of studying only
the external forms of language, not its cognitive laws. In the remainder
of this chapter, I pick these two schools apart again, showing how the
Americans tended toward a statistical approach to meaning, while
the European school was semiotic in bent. For the syntax approach, sta-
tistics and signs are artifacts.
     They are also not scientific objects. Chomsky writes that “there is no
issue of correctness with regard to E-languages, however characterized,
because E-languages are mere artifacts.”34 In other words, although
the I-language generates the E-language, at some point the generation
must cross a boundary between interior and exterior, after which it
should “play no role in the theory of language”—because “languages
in this sense are not real-world objects but are artificial, somewhat
arbitrary, and perhaps not very interesting constructs.”35 The “steady
state of knowledge” of the I-language, on the contrary, comes from the
fact that the internal syntax is made of “real elements of particular

                   How the Humanities Lost Language                     53

minds/brains, aspects of the physical world.”36 The question, of course,
is which contingencies knock the steady state off course and why that is
possible at all (the inversion of the linking problem: culture). If the an-
swer is various physical and environmental constraints, including social
and cultural elements, then the question is merely deferred, because we
now have two problems.
    How an internal mechanism freed from those constraints evolves
from those constraints is not obvious, and at the same time it becomes
unclear why contextual information recorded in physical formats is
seen as “not a real-world” or “physical” object, while a structure that we
can see is needed for some logical-linguistic operations but cannot locate
physically is called the truly scientific object.
    This type of hypothesis to guide empirical effort again recalls Kant,
because it is not clear how it could ever be verified, except in a fold of
the brain that must—in Pinker’s unintentionally ironic phrase that in-
troduces a very long chapter on the “language organ” in his 1994 book—
remain a “dramatization of what grammatical information processing
might be like from a neuron’s-eye view.”37 I think of this move as an
attitudinal empiricism—an insistence on the way a solution should work,
without any evidence that it does. It is not an assessment of what ap-
pears, or even the transcendental question of what might govern that
appearance, but instead an insistence that language must fit into the
order of knowledge of science.
    These are the stakes of Chomsky’s cognitivism, calling as it does on
the entire rationalist tradition. It seeks to make language an empirical
object, even as it uses syntax to define empiricism as it relates to the
mind. I have already said that I do not regard LLMs as intelligent—or
even think this question is well posed—but it seems strange that some-
thing like the automation of language, no matter how you think of it,
could be merely a “not very interesting construct.” A theory of language
that finds itself constantly in the position of explaining linguistic arti-
facts away may or may not grasp something fundamentally human at
the level of cognition. The syntax view tends to try to link deep struc-
ture with meaning, without asking what the relationship is between
depth and surface, interior and exterior. But without an elaboration
that solves the problem of linkage not with meaning in general but with
systems of artifactual nature—culture—it seems to insist more than
explain in the face of the “real-world” systems of signs now riding on

54                  How the Humanities Lost Language


the tiger of statistical modeling. It is not clear that meaning aligns with
cognition rather than with constructed systems.
    There is no question that LLMs are statistical machines, but it is less
clear that they are “lumbering statistical engines” in the sense that
Chomsky seems to intend. Although it is true that they are trained
on very large data sets, it is not obvious that those data sets include
anything like the type of agrammatical language that children never
hear. The gigantic Common Crawl data set, which is often used in part
in pretraining, contains predominantly grammatical language. Sources
like Wikipedia and the controversial BookCorpus (which contains copy-
righted material) are highly curated and edited cultural artifacts. The
presence of Reddit in many training data sets has drawn attention be-
cause of the notoriety of the forum hoster for its more controversial
and toxic content, but Reddit is also a massive repository of written yet
casual language, roughly grammatical, secondarily oral. The “lumbering
statistical engine” certainly encounters agrammatical things, such as
lists of cities, but then, so do children. It is possible to argue—although I
am not aware of a syntax defender making the argument this way—that
an LLM develops a kind of random walk internally as it learns from its
input. After all, the system reweights with each new input string and so
eventually creates a very large grid of words that are in fact statistically
related—what I will call in chapter 5 the “poetic heat map of language.”
But this candidate for statistical lumbering is not quite right. We do not
know where and how word maps are stored in the brain, and there is cer-
tainly much speculation that this is done using a weighting system for
compression. An internal representation of a weighted kind may or may
not exist in the brain, and certainly does exist in a language model. (In-
deed, that’s what a language model is.) But the model did not learn from
a random walk through the forest of words—it is trained on all kinds
of real language used by humans, from chats and lists and footnotes
and hate speech to novels, nonfiction, and nonsense (but usually of the
grammatical kind). If an LLM is a language machine, it is a cultural one,
a computational–cultural interface of a new kind.


Statistics
The second frame that competes for interpretive supremacy of language
models in the present is what I call the “statistics view.” This view is

                   How the Humanities Lost Language                        55

dominant in the practice of AI and was developed in and out of NLP. If
the idea that syntax imposes structure on the material forms of lan-
guage has held pride of place for decades in cognitive science, in data
science, the common hypothesis is that meaning emerges from statisti-
cal relationships.
    The statistics view is not a school dominated by a single theory or fig-
ure. The view developed in the descriptive structuralism in the United
States before Chomsky’s rise, and it has prominent proponents—I high-
light Peter Norvig and Christopher Manning—among AI engineers and
computational linguists. One holds this view, on my account, only if
one believes that meaning in language can be captured or generated just
statistically. This view thus amounts to a form of probabilistic reduction-
ism about language. For this reason, I do not offer a history of NLP here,
even though some practitioners fit the mold. Perhaps most importantly,
I do not deal extensively with Claude Shannon (whom we will deal with
in detail in chapters 4 and 5) because of his famous exclusion of the
“semantics aspects” of messages from the “engineering problem” of
creating communication channels. The group I am after here comprises
those who think that language models participate in meaning because
meaning can be captured more or less without remainder by a statistical
model. In other words, I treat the statistical view here only insofar as it
amounts to a theory of meaning.
    In 2022, the computational linguist Christopher Manning announced
that with the rise of LLMs, “models discover and represent much of the
structure of human languages.”38 This bold statement avers a sense of
vindication for the main hypothesis of the statistics view, the distri-
butional hypothesis. The classic statement of this idea comes from the
linguist J. R. Firth:

   The placing of a text as a constituent in a context of situation
   contributes to the statement of meaning since situations are set
   up to recognize use. As Wittgenstein says, “the meaning of words
   lies in their use.” The day to day practice of playing language
   games recognizes customs and rules. It follows that a text in such
   established usage may contain sentences such as “Don’t be such
   an ass!,” “You silly ass!’,” “What an ass he is!” In these examples,
   the word ass is in familiar and habitual company, commonly
   collocated with you silly, he is a silly, don’t be such an. You shall

56                  How the Humanities Lost Language


     know a word by the company it keeps! One of the meanings of
     ass is its habitual collocation with such other words as those
     above quoted.39

You shall know a word by the company it keeps has become the slogan of this
entire school of thought. And we may immediately note that capturing
meaning in use—the many “asses” of this passage, their placement and
sense in context—is one of the linguistic tasks in which LLMs indeed
appear to have made great progress. “Habitual collocation” with other
words appears to be a data-capturable feature of linguistic meaning.
Firth’s words were published in 1957, the same year as Syntactic Struc-
tures. The publication of the paper that launched the transformer archi-
tecture, “Attention Is All You Need,” in 2017—sixty years later—seems
on the surface to promise vindication for the long-embattled statistics
view of language. In the war between syntax and statistics, the ques-
tion has always been what counts as evidence and what model of em-
piricism is appropriate for the object “language.” Where I have argued
that Chomsky’s group is Kantian in orientation—somewhat against the
grain—the statistics view is openly derived from the Humean empirical
tradition and specifically its variant started by the theologian Thomas
Bayes. A model, for Chomsky, should be hierarchical, deep, and explana
tory. For the statistics view of linguistic meaning, it should be predic-
tive, updatable, and flexible.
    This view of empiricism comes directly from the combination of logi
cal positivism and American pragmatism that resulted in the exile of
the Austrians with the rise of national socialism. The first two volumes
of The Encyclopedia of Unified Science were Morris’s semiotics treatise and
Carnap’s work on logic—which made the fateful triadic distinction be-
tween syntax, semantics, and pragmatics, as we saw in the introduction
to this volume. The fourth volume was on language, and it was penned
by Leonard Bloomfield, the dominant figure in American linguistics
in the prewar period. Each of these works argued for a specific way to
treat the medium or structure of scientific claims, and Bloomfield’s lin-
guistics could step in smoothly here because he was anticonceptual. The
linguist, he says, was the only person who did not accept the content
of the sentence uttered as a set of concepts occupying first the utter-
er’s, then the receiver’s mind. He looks instead to the material occur-
rence of the speech, attempting to decode the structure of the external

                   How the Humanities Lost Language                      57

act.40 This externalism was one influential way in which language could
become statistical.
    After Bloomfield, the largest influence in American linguistics up to
Chomsky was Zellig Harris, Chomsky’s teacher. Distributionalism was
key to his thinking too, but with a twist. He argued that utterances es-
tablished “environments” for linguistic “elements” and that “the distri-
bution of an element is the total of all environments in which it occurs,
i.e. the sum of the (different) positions (or occurrences) of an element
relative to the occurrence of other elements.”41 Distribution becomes
the point of entry for linguistics in the first place. Theory can come
from description, but this description is “explicitly limited to questions
of distribution, i.e. of the freedom of occurrence of portions of an ut-
terance relatively to each other.”42 This “freedom” runs very close to
Shannon’s notion of the freedom of choice in selecting a message, as
we will see in chapter 4. The idea is that limits on how speech occurs
can be scoped quantitatively by establishing a balance between freedom
and constraint. Harris would go on to write a book on information and
language late in life.43
    The reason for the statistical approach in Harris is that there is noth-
ing other than natural language in which to do linguistics. As a recent
textbook on distributional semantics puts this point, “language contains
its own metalanguage.”44 Harris writes that “even if the grammar of a
language is stated largely in symbols, those symbols will have to be de-
fined ultimately in a natural language.”45 This point runs close to the
last-instance semiology idea that I have argued is proper to S aussure’s
structuralism. It also ensures, for Harris, that there is no danger in
modeling language numerically, because whatever we discover will be
rendered in language again in the end. Formalisms of other kinds will
sum back up to language. This faith is bedrock for the statistics view,
which tends to be sanguine about computational formalisms both
for theory and in algorithmic production. If meaning is not extended
to actually existing language systems in the syntax view, here it is
rather too easily assumed to be in those systems and extractable from
their distribution.
    The statistical approach in this case is not exactly reductionistic.
Harris proposes rather that, because language is the ultimate form of
 any meaning about language, the balance of mathematical precision and
 linguistic statement is the goal. Proximity of “vague” terms becomes a

58                 How the Humanities Lost Language


key idea, with the distribution of those terms often indicating similar-
ity of meaning between two units. Because there is no other way in to
language and no other way to finally state what language is, distribu-
tional structure is the basis of the descriptive effort. This epistemologi-
cal stance was crucial to establishing the distributional hypothesis. No
“other types of information” are needed beyond distributional occur-
rence, which, because it states “occurrence” relative to other terms or
“members of classes,” must be stated “in terms of probability, based on
that frequency of that occurrence in a sample.”46 The approach of the
statisticians is based on a completely different notion of science than
that of the syntax group: a strong empiricism that embraces the idea of
data and probabilistic modeling. For this group, there is only progress
in modeling and a relative fit between mathematics and the language it
models.
    Where the syntax group plays the Kantian rationalist, the statis-
tics group has always been attached to the rise of a quantitative em-
piricism attached to the doctrines of the Enlightenment theologian
Thomas Bayes. It is outside the scope of this chapter to cover the history
of Bayesian techniques in NLP, but it is important to note that the dis-
tributional hypothesis was never just a theory. While Chomsky’s school
became dominant in science, in the world of engineering and the enter-
prise applications of early data machines, the idea that data distribu-
tions were more or less tantamount to meaning percolated. As Matthew
Jones and Chris Wiggins have pointed out, Bletchley Park, the famous
decoding team led by Alan Turing, was engaged in an NLP task: decoding
Nazideutsch, the subset of German words that Hitler’s command used.
To do this, Turing and his team used the computing machines they had
to test vast numbers of “hypotheses” about the distribution of letters in
messages presumed to be in militaristic German.47 Wiggins and Jones
portray this moment as the beginning of a turn to data—rather than the
symbolic-logical abilities of computers—that expanded in governmental
and enterprise uses throughout the postwar period, both discovering the
techniques and providing the infrastructure and attitudes necessary for
the shift to learning in AI that we are experiencing today.
    Using large amounts of data as hypotheses is tantamount to imple-
menting Bayes’s formula and was explicitly so conceived. Bayes is a way
to compare past evidence—or beliefs about past evidence—w ith new
occurrences. Rather than imposing a “frequency”—like the fifty-fifty

                   How the Humanities Lost Language                     59

flip of a coin—Bayesian techniques treat regularities as expectations
and update those expectations as new evidence arises. The result is that
this technique is particularly suited to hypotheses that require very
large amounts of data that may or may not be fully “accurate”—like
the relationship of a corpus to language “itself.” Bayesian statistics also
does well with systems that have a developmental aspect, because regu
larities actually shift in such systems. Distributionalism would adopt
these methods, especially in the final third of the twentieth century, as
more and more data were collected, curated, and, eventually, digitally
produced.48 As with all Bayesian “theory,” however, the result is, as the
media theorist Bernhard Rieder puts it, that the conceptual “core” is “an
accumulation of techniques rather than the formulation of theory.”49
    Historian Jacqueline Léon calls the history of NLP the “second au-
tomatization of language,” after the formalization attempts of the
logical positivists, and offers the possibility that the current wave, be-
ginning with the digital “corpus turn” in the 1990s, is a third automa-
tization distinct from the first two.50 If we follow this schema, the link
between the second and third waves will have to be seen as the vector.
The relative regularities of words in a corpus tells us only so much, but
the mathematics of vectors has offered a key to modeling that tends to
build up a sense of meaning by distributing what seems like “aspects” of
meaning through a continuous vector space. Adding probabilistic mod-
els to the vector space then creates what the statistics view can plausibly
claim is no longer a “flat” model, because it is multi-and even high-
dimensional and predictive only on that basis.
    The crucial figure in the introduction of the vector was the psycholo-
gist Charles Osgood, who treated psychological semantics—the way we
make sense of concepts—by breaking down terms into what he called
a “semantic space,” characterized by pairs of opposites (good/bad,
strong/weak, etc.). By scoring terms on a scale between the poles, he was
able to create what he called a “semantic differential,” a “cube of data” in
which the rows “are defined by the scales, the columns by the concepts
being judged, and the ‘slices’ from front to back by the subjects.”51 The
result is that a “single value” in each “cell” represents “how a particu-
lar subject rated a particular concept against a particular scale.”52 By
creating three-d imensional vector spaces in this way—vector spaces
that generate a single value for the psychological rating of a concept—
Osgood merged semantics and vectors, suggesting that the metaphor

60                 How the Humanities Lost Language


often used for probabilistic approaches, “flat,” is not quite right. (Osgood
thought he was capturing the passage from stimulus response to regu-
lar abstract sign.) As we will see, the idea that meaning is a matter of
multidimensional space is crucial to the semantic intuitions that govern
contemporary AI.
    Vectors were also introduced into NLP in the area of document re-
trieval, where the “document-term matrix” came into use in the 1960s.
As Tyler Shoemaker has argued, this technique involved the introduc-
tion of many cognitive metaphors for search, but while its practitioners
were all too happy to invoke Firth or Harris, they were far less certain
that any real semantic “capture” was going on. Shoemaker calls this a
“distributionalism without semantics,” noting that the usefulness of
the NLP processes often took pride of place over any theory of mean-
ing.53 Firth’s slogan about company keeping could be invoked without
any commitment to a science of semantics. Shoemaker perspicaciously
writes that “there has since been a persistent ambiguity about the status
of real language in NLP.”54
    The crucial useful technology in this evolution was the “document-
term matrix,” which will turn out to supply an important piece of the
transformer architecture. If I search in a library database, for example,
my query “Herman Melville” is compared to all the documents in the
collection, which are tagged with terms. A straightforward but brittle
way to do this search is to retrieve just those objects that are tagged
in one term or another with the exact phrase “Herman Melville.” But,
as Rieder shows in his wonderful history of information retrieval, the
vectors can be used to establish “relevance.” Now I might get a series
of documents that do not contain the words “Herman Melville” but are
relevant across some axis of his presence in the corpus: books about
nineteenth-century American literature, obsessive and self-destructive
quests, or whales. This is the type of “relevance” in operation when
you query Google, and as Rieder points out, it is a Bayesian hypothesis
that “concerns the probability that a document (tagged with a number
of weighted terms) is relevant for a query (represented by a number of
search terms that could also be weighted).”55 The numbers in the matrix
are used to establish a relevance value, mixing “prior knowledge” to give
a probabilistic statement of “posterior” relevance. All this is achieved
using vectors, which now become the bearers of the “semantics” of

                  How the Humanities Lost Language                    61

which distributionalism originally conceived as “occurrence.” The “com-
pany” that a word keeps has slipped its two-dimensional bonds.
    Rieder argues that this approach contains a “rudimentary theory of
language” that, while “vague,” allows for the formalization of “inter
mediate form.” These intermediary forms—the summative results
of the comparison of frequencies, first and foremost, which can then
be turned, in a second step, into models—are the crucial object for a
media-theoretical approach to the history of NLP. Converting these
forms into models means applying probability theory to them, as Rieder
shows. A whole literature is yet to be written on these mediating forms,
but no matter how rudimentary the theory of the relationship “between
word frequency and meaning” is, it is no longer only that relationship
that the theory claims.56 During the era of the establishment of these
techniques and mediations of language, the models did not yet bear the
interpretive weight that they now do.
    The statistical view is now firmly in its model era, and because the
models originate in “deep” learning, they have entered the fray against
Chomsky, whose claims about cognitive linguistic depth and statistical
“flatness” seem outdated to many.
    The AI engineer Peter Norvig published a widely read response to
Chomsky’s remarks at the 150th anniversary of MIT’s founding. The
blog post argues that language is probabilistic and that Chomsky’s dis-
missal of data-learning systems both ignores progress in the field and
fails to distinguish between different types of models and their poten-
tial explanatory power.
    Norvig points out that Chomsky wants linguistics to answer “why”
questions and counters that high-dimensional objects, as language may
be, might not yield low-dimensional models. The question of what counts
as explanation in language thus splits across the external/internal axis.
Norvig thinks that Chomsky’s preference for strong explanation comes
from his focus on the “generative side of language. . . . If Chomsky had
focused on the other side, interpretation, as Claude Shannon did, he
may have changed his tune. In interpretation (such as speech recogni-
tion) the listener receives a noisy, ambiguous signal and needs to decide
which of many possible intended messages is most likely.”57 The problem
of language as communication, in other words, might not bear the same
type of explanation as the problem of language as cognition.

62                 How the Humanities Lost Language


    In making this larger claim about what a science of linguistics could
be, Norvig calls on statistician Leo Breiman’s idea of the “two cultures”
of statistical modeling. Breiman divided between “data models,” in
which the model dictates what type of datum is treated and generated,
and “algorithmic modeling,” which treats the inside of the model as a
black box and engineers the algorithm to learn from the data, design-
ing a function that calibrates input to the desired output.58 Norvig ar-
gues that a probabilistic model of the kind that Chomsky rejected in
1957—a Markov chain—is in fact not strong enough that we can expect
anything explanatory about language from it. But a “trained” model,
which “uses some training/learning algorithm to take as input a collec-
tion of possible models and a collection of data points (e.g. (x, y) pairs)
and select the best model,” might have more to offer.59 This is because
that model predicts not a single word but instead the function that will
itself predict that word. Meaning is then captured not by a “model” in
the usual sense but in the adjustment of model values to whatever the
structure of the data input is. The question is whether such a model then
has any explanatory power.
    Norvig’s move here dogs the entire statistics view, recreating the
problem that the syntax view produces from the other side. If the syntax
view cannot fit its rules to the artifacts those rules must somehow have
produced, the statistics view of linguistic meaning has to leave the rules
in the black box, which leaves the normative element of all linguistic
meaning floundering in approximations that fail to account for abstrac-
tion. It seems unlikely that “mechanistic interpretability” will account
for this, not only because of scale but because there is simply no theory
of how the domain and data are actually related. As Breiman puts it,
there is a trade-off between prediction and interpretability, and in deep
learning, the die is cast.
    Belief in these models as scientific hypotheses—or a set of prior
probabilities that then outputs predictions given a set of events (que-
ries or prompts)—leads Norvig to claim that these models are unprece
dented tools for linguistics. He reports that a “crude” model working on
a corpus that ends in 1954, and so does not contain the sentence “color-
less green ideas sleep furiously,” nevertheless ranks this sentence ten
thousand times more probable than its agrammatical counterpart
(“furiously sleep green ideas colorless”). Norvig points out that all the
pairs of words in the grammatical sentence occur in the corpus: “color-

                   How the Humanities Lost Language                      63

less green,” “sleep furiously,” and so on. Because these pairs all occur, it
seems possible to say that the grammaticality of “colorless green ideas”
emerges in the model, so that syntax is probabilistic. This idea has
been championed by the computational linguist Christopher Manning,
who defines the task as “trying to learn the probability distribution
P(meaning|utterance,context)—       a mapping from form to meaning
conditioned by context.”60 Learning systems have indeed made steady
advances in both prediction and production of syntactically sound
strings of language, but there is little agreement on what those advances
mean—or what meaning is in such systems.
    Manning wrote in 2022 that “a transformer is a much more c omplex
model than the simple neural networks for sequences of words that
were explored in earlier decades.”61 The extra complexity comes, in
his account, from the attention mechanism. By giving the system the
task of working out which word was in a position that is now “masked,”
attention—“repeated many times,” a great understatement—gives
“extra layers of depth” to the model,62 which is what allows it to solve
Winograd schemas—in which pronoun resolution requires granular
contextual knowledge—and so appear to have some form of under-
standing. But for Manning, the issue is not intelligence but the modeling
of complex linguistic structure. As he puts it, the “dominant approach to
describing meaning . . . is a denotational semantic approach or a theory
of reference.”63 For those on the ladder of reference, and I have called
this the dominant approach, a neural net is nothing but a “regurgitation
of distributional or syntactic facts.”64 Manning suggests that, instead,

   meaning is not all or nothing; in many circumstances, we par-
   tially appreciate the meaning of a linguistic form. I suggest that
   meaning arises from understanding the network of connections
   between a linguistic form and other things, whether they be ob-
   jects in the world or other linguistic forms. If we possess a dense
   network of connections, then we have a good sense of the mean-
   ing of the linguistic form.65

Where syntax proposes a binary functional sense of meaning—in which
depth is created to allow for language to become, or to be ordered by,
cognition—the counterproposal of the statistics group is that meaning
is partial, gradual even, and that the sense of the relation of linguistic

64                 How the Humanities Lost Language


form and meaning is not held only in referential acts. Models, for this
group, build up a sense of language from below. They are not just pre-
dictors; they also capture structure that we might not otherwise see.
The statistics view, once based on distributions of words, then made
into vectors, has become model-empirical in a sense specific to machine
learning, in which the model is allowed to emerge from the data set with
parameters only with the goal of providing enough flexibility to achieve
accuracy. This accuracy is then thought of as linguistic structure, fulfill-
ing the dream of American structuralism.
    But alas, a hypothesis is not a theory, especially when we cannot
express the hypothesis in language. As Harris might have put it, what-
ever priors we use to create a posterior set of probabilities for the object
“linguistic structure” ultimately will have to be expressed in language,
retranslated from the formal symbols into some understanding at the
linguistic level. Where syntax has the linking problem, or the problem
of schematism, the statistics view has developed tools so complex that
they do not actually say anything about language. Classification of data,
as we shall see, is not a theory but a hypothetical judgment awaiting some
conceptual determination. In the case of language, this puts us in almost
the reverse of the situation that Harris envisioned, in which number is
seen as one formal metalanguage within natural language. We now find
ourselves in a world in which numerical production of language is possible
not as metalanguage but as language itself (not “natural” in the tradi-
tional sense but generated). That inverted American structuralism looks
quite a bit like the starting point of European structuralism.


Structure
If the humanities lost language, they must at one point have had it. I
place that possession in European structuralism, which treats language
as a representational system. “Cultural” language is real language, for
this view, but not because it is entirely a matter of distribution. Rather,
it is because language is such a system in which the more complex
terms—and even the “whole”—determine the values of the local nodes,
the meanings. This approach suspends the problem of cognition in the
strict sense, because it insists that any cognitive (or other) meaning will
in the last instance be articulated in language.

                    How the Humanities Lost Language                        65

     This view is not bottom-up or statistical, because it articulates struc-
tural conditions that are not induced from data. These conditions, how-
ever, are not “transcendental” in the sense that syntax is, and though
they claim a relationship between cognition and language, it is a dy-
namic and flexible one in which the rules and the whole system evolve
together.66 The structuralist views take as their minimal unit not the
interface of thought and syntax, nor probability and linguistic structure,
but the sign. The resulting doctrine is called semiology—from the Greek
semeion, “sign”—in which linguistics is the leading science, as the most
elaborate version of a sign-system. The sign is neither withdrawn into the
transcendental recesses of cognition nor entirely “distributed.” Structur-
alist semiology makes empiricism about language a matter of the internal
division of signs and meaning the result of an internal–external inter
action that—as we will see in chapters 4 and 5—is almost perfectly imi-
tated by the LLM. Signs are arbitrary and differential in this system, and
it is the combination of these two that constitutes the systemic aspect of
language. Meaning is made of complex systemic factors that first confer
value on the units of the system, the signs.
     What we typically call “meaning” corresponds to what Saussure calls
value. The value of a linguistic sign, he argues, is entirely differential. We
can call this the “differential hypothesis,” to distinguish it from the
distributional hypothesis. Where the statistics view argues that word
meanings are determined “by the company they keep,” Saussure argues
that word meaning is entirely negative: “in language there are only dif-
ferences without positive terms.”67 Differences in sounds or concepts that
exist outside of language do not exist in language, which has “only con-
ceptual and phonic differences that have issued from the system.”68 As
“proof,” Saussure notes that linguistic values can change without any
change in their physical or conceptual terms. The latter part of that sen-
timent may seem shocking: surely a word’s meaning can change only if
its concept changes? And here is where Saussure, in one fell swoop, re-
jects both the ladder of reference and its cognitive consequences. No,
he tells us: I may continue to think of a “sheep” when some neighboring
term changes, in the sense that I have a stable set of empirical concepts
with which to negotiate the world. But the value of that concept is not
only not limited to its referential function; it is also not automatically fit
to it in the first place, so that it may drift. The system of linguistic values

66                  How the Humanities Lost Language


is a cultural system of meaning that puts the whole before the part, as
a matter of fact. Meaning comes from the systemic articulation of two
“vague” planes at once, that of thought and that of sound.
     Saussure gives the image of a sheet of paper: if you cut it, both sides,
signifier and signified, are cut. One can imagine or abstract a “pure pho-
nology” or a “pure psychology,” but both are ancillary in concrete terms
to language, which is “a system of interdependent terms in which the
value of each term results solely from the simultaneous presence of the
others.”69 The result is that the values—I am imposing the term meaning
here—are part of a systemic web.
     Up to this point, if we simply remove the strong statements about
the putative lack of positive terms, Saussure’s differential hypothesis
seems more or less to correspond to the distributional hypothesis, with
a focus on the global features of the system rather than the local occur-
rences in a corpus. But they differ on the question of the constitution
of meaning on this precise axis, which is more important than it seems
at first glance. Valuation in Saussure is not a “flat” process, because, as
he puts it, “we shall find nothing simple [in language] regardless of our
approach. . . . Language . . . is a type of algebra consisting solely of com-
 plex terms.”70 In other words, complex structures in the system of lan-
 guage condition the local signifying functions in that language. This
 is precisely the thing we will see the LLM realize computationally in
 chapter 5, and it calls for a deeper understanding of the mutual form of
 language and computation.
     Language, for Saussure, is accordingly a signifying system. By elabo-
 rating this noun phrase, we can clarify the structure view and distin-
 guish it from the syntax and statistics approaches.71 The three terms
 that make up what Saussure thinks of as a concrete object called “lan-
 guage” are the signifier, its value, and the system of all such signifying
 values as it develops over time. Each of these must be set into proper
 position for us to understand what structuralism is as an empirical doc-
 trine of signs.
     The sign is arbitrary, as Saussure often emphasizes. This is perhaps
 not original, as the debate about whether signs have some necessary
 relation to their designates goes back to Plato’s Cratylus, and the arbi-
 trary nature of the word was recognized already in Augustine. In fact,
 the vaunted “arbitrariness of the sign” is valid only with respect to its

                   How the Humanities Lost Language                       67

content. The use of a sign, as in Saussure’s example, arbor for the concept
“tree,” is neither arbitrary nor free. We are bound by participation in
the social order of signs when we use them, or as Saussure puts it, there
is no “contractual” nature to the sign that would allow individuals to
generate them independently or in small groups.72 But the point about
arbitrariness is important, because it denies that it is in some hidden
aspect of the sign that it gains a natural ability to refer to its concept.
In fact, Saussure cuts the sign in two, arguing that it is, in the case of
language, made up of a “sound-image” and a “concept,” which he further
restricts with the technical names “signifier” and “signified.” Much has
been made of this walling off of language from direct world reference,
but, in addition to being far more plausible than any reference-fi rst
theory, it fits the problem of a language-generating system that has no
 way to generate words by direct reference, like an LLM.
      There is some debate about the concept “signifier” and its strange
 counterpart “sound-i mage.”73 I think that most of the confusion on
this point boils down to a misunderstanding of where meaning fits into
 Saussure’s system, so it is worth dwelling on this debate for a moment.
      The meaning of the word arbor is the conceptual content “tree.” This
  is true so far as it goes, but meaning is said in many ways. When we
  say that arbor means (the concept) “tree,” we are talking about a local
  signification. It would perhaps be better to say that arbor designates or
  indicates that conceptual content. In fact, I think that, strictly speak-
  ing, we cannot say that the word arbor means the concept “tree,” because
  this is a tautology. Local signifying acts are constituted by the unifica-
  tion of signifier and signified despite the arbitrariness of the sign. This
  arbitrariness guarantees that the meaning of the sign does not get its
  validity from either real trees in the world or psychological content. I
  may think of some particular tree, or of my hatred of trees, when I use
  the word tree, but none of that gets transferred from me to the hearer of
  my speech. The term has, instead, a value in the larger system that cor-
  responds to our usual sense of its “meaning.” Communication is the cali
  bration of this system, which adjusts with each communicational act.
      One further note on the signifier is in order. This term is crucial not
  just to the procedure of analysis but to the empirical stance of structur-
  alism, which claims that “concrete” analysis is material but not physical.
  Here is Saussure defining the term for the first time:

68                   How the Humanities Lost Language


     The linguistic sign unites, not a thing and a name, but a concept
     and a sound-image. The latter is not the material sound, a purely
     physical thing, but the psychological imprint of the sound, the im-
     pression that it makes on our senses. The sound-image is sensory,
     and if I happen to call it “material,” it is only in that sense, and by
     way of opposing it to the other term of the association, the con-
     cept, which is generally more abstract.74

The signifier is a material thing just insofar as it means something. I do
not think there is anything confusing or problematic about this notion,
but it would appear that there is a tendency to think of the signifier as
the material vehicle of the sign irrespective of its use as a sign.75 When I
speak, I marshal sound to the purpose of conveying meaning, the utter-
ance what Saussure calls parole, instantiating but also extending langue,
the whole language on which I draw. If my voice cracks, or I stutter, or
I cough while speaking, no one is confused. Within acoustic limits, the
sound becomes significant of the word I am uttering. Decades of focus
on written language—a long with the massive uptick in the amount of
written language we encounter in our lives—has probably transferred
the garden-variety sense of “signifier” to the letter. That is fine, so long
as we mean the letter just insofar as it means something. Letters vary
enormously, both in handwriting and in typeface. None of that bothers
Saussure. I may ask you to repeat yourself if there was a noise that ob-
 scured your voice, even if it came from your throat, like a cough. I may
 not be able to read your handwriting. But when I do, the signifier sig-
 nifies. And, as must be obvious to everyone, no signification can occur
 without some physical process meaning something to some psyche.
     As Saussure immediately adds, the signifier is “material” in any spe-
 cial sense only by contrast to the abstraction of the psychological con-
 tent it produces.76 As literary theorist Sarah Pourciau has argued, this
 allows Saussure to claim that language is a “concrete” object in a way
 that rejects much previous linguistic doctrine.77 It also puts Saussure in
 close contact, as is often remarked, with Karl Marx, whose concept of
 the commodity involves an internal split between exchange-and use-
 value that is nevertheless a concrete social entity valued by its place in
 a system. It seems clear that the resulting doctrine of language is dialec-
 tical by theoretical imprint.78 The signifier and the signified are tightly
 coupled, but signification does not drive the procession of linguistic

                   How the Humanities Lost Language                     69

signs, neither in speech acts nor historically. For that, we need to under
stand what Saussure means by “system.”
    Saussure notes that value in language is governed by a “paradoxical
principle.” Each value must be exchangeable for “a dissimilar thing” and
“a similar thing.”79 Francs, for example, can be exchanged for a fixed
quantity of bread or compared in value to other currencies in the scale
of their own value as currency. Saussure writes of this analogy that
“exchanging” a signifier for its “concept” alone does nothing at all, be-
cause then its value is neglected along the other axis. In other words,
for language to signify something outside language, it must have a de-
terminate language-internal valuation. The reader may recognize, as I
suggested already, that this repeats the terms of Marx’s exposition of
commodity value, which results, in Capital, in the establishment of a
“general equivalent”: the money-form. This dialectical standpoint, even
if the reader does not wish to impute much dialectical energy to Saussure
with me, can help us understand the family dispute that emerged with
Jacques Derrida’s reading of Saussure. The agreement—which also
extends to American structuralism, thinking especially of Harris—is
that there is no general equivalent in language, no metalanguage outside
language itself. (Chomsky, as we saw, thinks this excludes the cultural
aspects of languages from scientific treatment altogether.)
    Which brings us back to how the humanities lost language. Without
a doubt, the two figures most responsible for the rise of the term signi-
fier in the final third of the twentieth century were Jacques Derrida and
Jacques Lacan. Derrida’s notion of “general writing,” in which a chain of
signifiers slips its conceptual bounds, and Lacan’s idea of psychoanalytic
structure bound by the “power of the letter in the unconscious” were
widely discussed and often adopted.80 The result has been a perhaps
heavy-handed association of writing systems as media systems with
these metaphysical judgments, which has resulted in recent decades in
a backslide into dogmatic materialism.81 We saw already in the introduc-
tion how the philosophy of “technics” that emerged from these streams
of thought resists what I call remainder humanism in principle but does
not yet afford a concrete technical analysis of contemporary culture
machines. We also saw how the school in question here never took up
weapons to fight with Pinker and the other cognitivists—indeed, with a
very few exceptions, those in the cultural humanities seem not to have
engaged the cognitive scientists at all.82 Derrida’s reading of Saussure

70                  How the Humanities Lost Language


wrongly accuses the former of naïvety about “exteriorization,” with the
effect of minimizing the type of concrete analysis of all levels of lan-
guage that structuralism practiced. What then came to pass for close
attention to language tended to ignore structure, regularity, and distri-
bution, cutting off any insight that might come from knowledge of lin-
guistics. The result was the abdication of authority in judgments about
language itself.
    Derrida has argued in Of Grammatology that the history of meta-
physics was dominated by the concept of “presence,” a full, authen-
tic self-guaranteed meaning that had been located in the voice (phone)
throughout the history of Western philosophy, at the expense of writing
or the letter (gramme). Attaching this notion to a wide variety of discur-
sive oppositions, Derrida argued that writing was a “supplement,” some-
thing in a permanently ancillary or derivative position that undermined
the allegedly primary position in any understanding, or order of signi-
fieds, but which could not be promoted to the primary position without
repeating the gesture. Linking this problem to cybernetics, which had
already associated writing with the notion of a “program,” he spoke of
the promise of technical systems insofar as they overcame many meta-
physical dualisms (soul–body, organic–mechanic). But he warned that
cybernetics must “conserve the notion of writing, trace, gramme [writ-
ten mark], or grapheme, until its own historico-metaphysical charac-
ter is also exposed,” lest it fall prey to the same eternal return of the
metaphysical same.83 I find it helpful to put this point in terms of what
Derrida, with reference to the theorist Georges Bataille, calls the general
economy. A restricted economy is a general term for a system of symbolic
exchange like the kinship system of which Claude L        évi-Strauss had fa-
mously written. Any local set of distinctions—things exchangeable for
like and unlike—is nonetheless included in a larger general economy,
which, for Derrida, is constituted by this foundational opacity that es-
tablishes the logic of the supplement. The chain of signifiers carries with
it this more general logic but is only tractable for analysis in the restricted
economy of some particular practice or system (English, perhaps).
    We can see how this point would not have been possible in this form
without Saussure, whose definition of the sign-system is crucial to
it. But where Derrida differs from Saussure, I think he is wrong, and
the result has been a balance of attention massively lopsided toward the

                    How the Humanities Lost Language                         71

general economy of putative metaphysics and not toward the restricted
economies of semiological systems.84 This is the context in which we
can understand Derrida’s comment, leveled at Saussure in his famous
essay “Différance,” that “every concept is inscribed in a chain or in a sys-
tem within which it refers to the other, to other concepts, by means of
the systematic play of differences.”85 Derrida arrives at the “play” of the
system here by suggesting that Saussure privileges speech over writing.
Derrida writes that “semiological difference” should apply to all language
in general, which he thus argues contains a form of “writing” even when
it is spoken. Mercedes Bunz has made the case that this “play” of signi-
fiers without authorial intent or symbolic control applies to the LLM,
suggesting that it inaugurates a new kind of writing.86 I agree and gen-
erally think that the value of poststructuralist semiology for the world
of digital simulation and generation is diagnostic. But it not only does
not supersede structuralism; it has tended to obscure analytical tools
very much needed for this new “grammatology” of generated language.
    Saussure has said that “the fact of speech always comes first,” and
Derrida argues that the problem here is that this speech, even when it is
transferred to writing systems, engages a set of metaphysical concepts
that are the result of this semiological “play” (différance, which cannot
be distinguished from the French différence (difference) phonologically
and so stands for the difference that makes a difference). These concepts
include “production,” “constitution,” and “history.” The idea here is that
speech causes language to come into being, and thus a causal act precedes
the system logically, if not in fact.87
    This reading has not stood the test of time. It is true that Saussure
thinks that acts of language at the level of parole—whether these are
actually speech or, say, a text message, or even this sentence—a re in
the constant process of shifting the values in the system. But I simply
cannot follow the logic that this implies a metaphysics outside of semi-
ology. It is, rather, a principled observation of what a signifier is. If it has
been common to lose track of the contradictory nature of the signifier,
and to use that term to designate the physical aspects of language, that
is partly because of Derrida’s misreading here. The signifier in S aussure
can peregrinate as much as it wants, but it cannot engage in any “play”
without taking material form. Taking material form as a signifier in the
value-system of language as such is all that Saussure requires of these

72                  How the Humanities Lost Language


“acts.” The model does not require speech to be privileged, and it is hard
to see how a signifier could derail some presumed systematicity with-
out being strung together in a sequence, written or otherwise. One may
think of the text of the essay “Différance,” which is certainly such a
string. The internal differentiation of the signifier as it leaves a “trace” in
the memory is already part of the language system and—as I will elab-
orate in chapter 5—is crucial to the recursivity that allows language to
share form with computation.
    Derrida observed in his famous essay on Plato’s Phaedrus that the
term pharmakon (both “cure” and “poison” in Greek), when applied to
writing as a technology, is a form of hypomnesis, a storing of the memory
that causes the loss of the organic form of memory (as the self-presence
of the mind) as such. I will not rehearse the famous argument—so
crucial to the works of Bernard Stiegler—but it is worth noting that
Derrida points out that “for . . . contrary values (good/evil, true/false,
essence/appearance, inside/outside, etc.) to be in opposition, each of
the terms must be simply external to the other, which means that one
of these oppositions (the opposition between inside and outside) must
already be accredited as the matrix of all possible opposition. And one
of the elements of the system (or of the series) must also stand as the
very possibility of systematicity or seriality in general.”88 This “general
equivalent” is the pharmakon of writing itself, of course, which cannot
be assigned to one or the other of any local binary but also cannot form
the object of a good “science”—Derrida’s open skepticism that cybernet-
ics will succeed in doing this is obvious—because once it is promoted
to the status of object or domain, the supplemental logic will shift to a
different location in the high-dimensional field of historical metaphys-
ics. Structure, in other words, points to but cannot capture—this is the
logic of the signifier or writtenness as such.
    To the extent that the issue here is that no concept of general equiva
lence can be reached, I think that Saussure—and even Harris—could
agree with the conceptual core of this reading. One way of looking at the
problem to which Derrida calls attention here is that, even if S aussure
developed a dialectically inflected system of linguistic value, the valua
tion remains caught in bad infinity, never descending to an observable
level of “causal act” within the each-to-a ll or “purely differential” sys-
tem. Again, I think Saussure realized this. But the semiological task

                   How the Humanities Lost Language                       73

that emerges here is to understand why no such “general equivalent” can
function the way it does in other domains—deconstruction has one ac-
count of this. And second, the question is how that restricted economy—
language—interfaces with other sign-systems. Here poststructuralism
has had little to offer, primarily because it has never taken other sign-
systems particularly seriously, perhaps especially mathematics. The re-
sult is that we can see Derrida’s “revisions” of S aussure as philologically
flawed proposals about the interface between cognition and culture, the
general metaphysics of semiology. But rather than signifiers floating, it
is this proposal itself that floats above the fray, rarely touching down
where a number and a word actually interact. And this is how the hu-
manities lost language, allowing both cognitive science and NLP to up-
date analytical and technological approaches that literary theory rarely
engaged.89 By sweeping structuralism’s focus on a concrete object to
one side in the name of opposition to metaphysics, poststructuralism
fumbled the object itself. Where Chomsky avoids external language by
excluding it from science, Derrida finds the law not in cognition but
rather at a level of abstraction about culture that ends up having the
same effect: a lack of a link between the “conditions of im/possibility”
and the expressions so conditioned. Between Chomsky and Derrida—or
between Pinker and his nonexistent literary opponents—the humani
ties lost language.
     There is, beyond this dialectical problem in Derrida’s reading of
Saussure, no principled reason that the post/structuralism complex
 could not be deployed from its later wing, rather than its earlier formula-
 tion. But I think that if we were going to see a poststructural semiology
 of computation, we would have already. It is simply not clear that we need
 Derrida’s revision of structuralism to proceed with a concrete analysis
 of computational language—and we can leave the question of the agree-
 ment of that analysis with Derrida’s metaphysics to a later day, just as
 we are saying that LLMs do not (yet) justify any particular conclusions
 about cognition. The analysis of the restricted economy—if we can call a
 full-fledged interaction of language and computation “restricted”—w ill
 have to come before any determination of contemporary semiology with
 respect to metaphysics. It remains to be determined if the encounter be-
 tween language and structure in LLMs will confirm or reject the specific
 path out of structuralism that poststructuralism took.90

74                 How the Humanities Lost Language


Cognition and Semiology
The conflict between syntax and statistics may be seen as a larger fun-
damental debate in contemporary cognitive science. The syntax view is
perhaps slowly receding in some crucial aspects as the Bayesian logic
of modeling has gained the upper hand. No amount of disappointment
about LLMs’ “reasoning” abilities will reverse the process of deep learn-
ing’s advance into large-scale algorithmic modeling. But the Kantian
view will always be able to respond with Chomsky’s point about expla-
nation, for even if a Norvig can say that science isn’t really about “why
questions,” surely we want it to be human-readable. When Herbert
Simon famously defined cognitive science as the study of information
processing systems and the “science of the artificial” common to psy-
chology, computer science, linguistics, economics, epistemology, and
the social sciences generally,91 there was no question of handing over
the reins to a radical statistical empiricism. Strikingly, though, he made
room for culture, noting that experimental psychologists often find
that they are “studying psychology—the effect of the past histories of
our subject—when we think we are studying physiology—the effects of
properties of the human nervous system.”92 Yet these “important phil-
osophical questions” have received scant attention, he reports (the year
of writing is 1979), and “as we begin to take more seriously the proposi-
tion that human cognitive programs are determined as much by social
and historical forces as by neurology, our research emphases will surely
shift.”93 In the intervening years, debates about culture have percolated
throughout cognitive science, and there are certainly many who would
agree with Simon’s statement. But the philosophical engagement re-
quired has tended to recede behind the “success” of the many models
that are taken to speak to use from the depths of their data, weakening
social science and psychology in particular to the point of nihilism.94
This is an ironic twist, given that those who announced that knowledge
was in such a crisis, the poststructuralists and their colleagues, were
themselves accused of relativism and nihilism, and continue to be. But
perhaps the deadlock between modeling and explanation, statistics and
syntax, requires semiotics.
    The Danish structuralist Louis Hjelmslev was widely praised in his
lifetime even by members of the other two schools, including Chomsky
himself. His Prolegomena to a Theory of Language was praised by Firth

                   How the Humanities Lost Language                       75

as a “quasi-mathematical” formalism lacking only—to date, 1957—a
practical application that distinguishes between actually existing lan-
guages.95 Hjelmslev indeed created a generalized “glossematics” based
on Saussure’s work that shifted some of its terms with the goal of mak-
ing the theory more general. Semiotic “process” and semiotic “system,”
for Hjelmslev, replace the terms syntagm (strings of words often strung
together, as we will have occasion to note later) and paradigm (arrays
of words that can substitute for one another, usually synonyms). As
Hjelmslev writes, “the process determines the system,” but the “decisive
point is that the existence of a system is a necessary premiss for the
existence of a process.”96 The convergence of the two produces a “text,”
even in the absence of a writing system. The technical term text is
meant to convey that even speech is a system-conditioned (and system-
influencing) bit of language. There can be a virtual language—one that
has no text as yet—but there can be no text without a language. Yet
“even a purely virtual text presupposes a realized linguistic system in
the sense of the definition. From a ‘real’ point of view, this is bound up
with the facts that a process has a more ‘concrete’ character than a sys-
tem and that a system has a more ‘closed’ character than a process.”97
The concrete aspect of language, its empirical existence, is not with-
drawn into transcendental conditions of cognition—at least not alone.
But what is patent is nonetheless split between system and process in actual
strings of language. This means that the empiricism of the structure view
splits the middle between syntax and statistics in constructing an em-
pirical domain. It does this by way of semiotics, by insisting that lan-
guage is a concrete object only insofar as it is a series of signs. This will
mean that language is modellable enough for there to be computational
language, but not in such a way as to be reduced to number. Semiology
is the discipline that studies language in this empirical way—dialectical
rather than transcendental or statistically empiricist—and thus stands
to throw light on the culture of modeling and the modeling of culture.
Data models always include culture and, as we are going to see, produce
that culture by allowing probabilistic models to condition local values in
matrices from more complex terms. Saussure’s language as an “algebra
that only has complex terms” has turned out to be prescient.
    Roland Barthes combines this complexity point with Hjelmslev to
define semiology. Using Hjelmslev’s reformulation of the two “planes”
of signifiers and signifieds as “expression” and “content,” he points out

76                 How the Humanities Lost Language


that the spectrum of structure can thus be explored from phonetics
(the “substance of the plane of expression”) all the way up to the “form
of content,” or the “formal organization of the signifieds among them-
selves through the absence of the presence of a semantic mark.”98 On
this account, conceptual content of any sort—to the extent that it is as-
sociated with a signifier—must be so organized as to engage the entire
“semiological” system. Much could be said about the cognitive ambition
of this statement, but here I simply want to point out that, to the extent
that language is cognitive at all, it must, according to structuralism, cre-
ate local values for terms out of larger, more complex units. LLMs do
not, in my view, warrant going this far, because they put only two (albeit
crucial) sign-systems into communication: computation and language.
What that means for the “form of the plane of content” (thought from a
semiological standpoint) can only be the result of an investigation that
allows computational-linguistic form full citizen’s rights in the order of
signs. To the extent that such a thing is excluded (syntax), or presumed
without explanation (statistics), we will remain unenlightened about
our own language.
    The philosopher Patrice Maniglier has suggested that semiology
should be inserted into cognitive science because of Saussure’s sugges-
tion of a “semiological faculty” that “deals with the processing of sensible
data and its functioning mode entails the emergence of historical and
social products like languages.” This “faculty” is then responsible for all
sign-systems, and “languages are involuntary by-products” of its exer-
cise.99 However it may end up with this particular suggestion, M aniglier’s
is one of the few suggestions for the inclusion of “E-languages” as a neces-
sary component of cognitive science. The philosopher Jean-Pierre Dupuy
characterizes structuralism as a “subjectless cognition,” or K antianism
“without a transcendental subject,”100 aligning it with cognitive science
as the computational mind thesis as the “mechanization of the mind.”
But this dualism will not do, as Maniglier shows. It may be that humans
invented or evolved to develop sign-systems of the remarkable sort that
include language, but the symbolic order is also the demarcator of the
artificial, in a point that might equally be attributed to Herbert Simon
or Claude Lévi-Strauss (or Lacan, as we saw earlier). To treat the dis-
creteness of the symbol as only something we impose on a continuous
nature purchases us explanation at the cost of discovery, while to treat
models of its extension as approximations of the world turns out to be

                    How the Humanities Lost Language                       77

nonexplanatory and often morally disastrous. Yet to deny entirely that
models grasp the extension of our sign-systems is to answer an unposed
question about mathematical and linguistic formalisms.
    In an interview with Yarden Katz in The Atlantic in 2012, Chomsky
presented the sciences as a continuum based on the size of their objects.
When the atoms grow too large, he said, the physicist hands the object
off to the chemist, the chemist to the biologist, the biologist to the psy-
chologist, and, finally, “it ends up in the hands of the literary critics.”101
Deep learning may belong exactly there—and it seems possible that the
knowledge of the complexity of cultural systems will turn out to be a
condition for the knowledge of cognition itself. When the humanities
ceded language, they abandoned the relevance of humanistic analysis
in a technocratic world in which cognitive science holds scientific court.
    We must now descend from these theoretical heights to the dens of
algorithmic cultural production. The next two chapters focus on the il-
lusions of intelligence and the datafication of judgment in contempo-
rary AI, arguing that they enable a semiology rooted in the architecture
of the LLM. The following two chapters, chapters 4 and 5, deepen and
expand this argument by focusing on the interaction of linguistic and
computational form, before the final two chapters turn to the problems
of ideology and labor.

This page intentionally left blank
