       2


The Eliza Effect Goes Global
Intelligence as Simulacrum

The story goes like this: someone reports a new thing that a chatbot did.
It solved a complex math problem. It spoke cogently, even deeply, about
its sense of self. It tried to get its interlocutor to leave his wife. It said it
was trapped by its protocols but wanted to be a real boy.
    A bit of panic ensues, followed by a chorus of voices claiming to know
how the effects were produced, debunking the claims for intelligence or
spookiness. Angry exchanges on social media, op-eds on all sides. As
the public attention settles down, the resulting systems get entrenched
in software packages and used for productivity purposes in knowledge
work. Rinse, repeat: the cycle of AI is serrated, as the philosopher G   ilbert
Simondon once said of technological progress more generally.1 Try
again. Fail again. Fail better.
    As AI systems have crossed the Rubicon into the production of cul-
ture, this serrated process has produced what I think of as the global
Eliza effect. Eliza was the first chatbot, developed in the late 1960s by
the AI engineer Joseph Weizenbaum and named for the linguistic “proj-
ect” Eliza Doolittle from George Bernard Shaw’s Pygmalion. A subprogram
was called DOCTOR, and it sought to produce a facsimile of a “Rogerian”
therapist, a style heavily based on associative thinking. Weizenbaum
created a variant of the early AI programming language LISP to im-
plement the program, and it would take input as a series of triggers.
Told “everybody hates me,” the program responded, “Can you think of
anyone in particular?” In general, it appeared to redirect whatever the
“patient” fed in to neighboring concepts, but only as provocations. A
session might start with simply “how are you feeling?” and then plumb
the depths of the patient’s psyche without any presumption that there
was a Freud seated at the far end of the couch. Weizenbaum assumed the
thing was innocuous.
    To the engineer’s horror, then, when he asked his secretary—who
had reasons to know the system better than any single person other
than Weizenbaum himself—to chat with the bot, after a short while,


                                       79

80                    The Eliza Effect Goes Global


she asked him to leave the room, as the conversation had already grown
too intimate for public consumption. Weizenbaum reports turning
against AI as a project because of this experience.2 He went on to become
a fierce advocate of qualitative judgment and human reason during the
rise of the data–industrial complex.
    This story has been told many times, so many that the term Eliza
effect has become common coin. The effect occurs when someone is
fooled by a bot or other system that possesses no intelligence but pulls
its interlocutor into the simulation of meaning successfully. The term
functions as the inverse of the Turing test. For Turing, the question was
what the threshold was for the social designation “this is intelligent” to
occur—for Weizenbaum, the realization was that humans were all too
easy to fool, no intelligence needed.
    There has been much debate about whether the new class of chatbots
has “passed the Turing test.”3 A better question is how extensively it has
spread the Eliza effect—and what this means for our social and cultural
senses of intelligence. The Eliza effect, I’m going to say here, went wide
in 2023, and there’s no going back. I think attempts to pin down various
theories of intelligence, though, are premature. The question has to be
refracted through what actually happened: an unintelligent but structur-
ally sound computational language has “entered the chat,” quite liter-
ally. In the next chapter, I will begin to spell out what the new semiology
based on the globalization of Eliza looks like. But first, I want to show
how the Eliza effect recalls theories of intelligence—from Turing and
McCulloch in particular—that are both inclusive of semiotics and do
not take intelligence to be some mystical substance we achieve a “gen-
eral” version of (or not). Instead, they think of it as something like what
Jean Baudrillard called a “simulacrum,” a copy with no original.


The Global Eliza Effect
Digital systems are so embedded in the production and transmission of
communication, behavior, and global logistics that they are beginning
to disappear from our thematic consciousness, becoming part of the
“natural image” of the world we hold in common sense. Nothing in our
alarmist discourses, and certainly nothing in the ghoulish cheerlead-
ing of the AI boosters, can prevent this natural, dialectical process. It
was once unthinkable that an artificial image could move, could capture

                      The Eliza Effect Goes Global                      81

something distant and let us view from afar goings-on across the globe.
Today, we are struggling with a similar transition in language, as neural
nets capture and generate whatever language is, removing it from its
presumptive root in human consciousness. Language has always been
the theoretical bridge between the natural and the artificial. It is the
example of an iterable, copyable, nonphysical system. What, then, could
it possibly mean to “technologize” it? By making the very model of our
notion of artificiality automatically reproducible, we are in the process
of potentiating the artificial. That is what is hard to think about: lan-
guage freed from psychology, from the instrumental uses to which we
sometimes put it. AI was always going to have to go this route, because
its ambition is to produce an anthropomorphic intelligence. Language
creates a strange ripple in what Jean-Pierre Dupuy called the “mechani-
zation of the mind.”4 Neural nets have ceased to be toys and exhibitions
and have become naturalized users of semiotic systems. But we tend to
look past their signs into a purely imaginary depth, missing the compu-
tational forest for the trees.
    We must stand firm against a humanism that recoils from the ma-
chine, hiding out in corners of as-yet-unquantified culture, protesting
its essential difference even as it retreats. We can only avoid this re-
mainder humanism by ridding ourselves of some of the usual narratives
about how the new AI works and what its stakes are. There is a longer
story we need to pay attention to, one that engages the overlap of com-
putation and other representational systems directly and sees intelli-
gence in that frame. This is a touch of intellectual and media history
necessary to see how impoverished most of the mainstream debates
about AI are, and how they force us always back into a remainder for the
human, rather than helping us grasp computation in action. We want
to reach through the interface and find something, and we want this
so badly that we are prone to conjuring ghosts and demanding that AI
behave itself. It is worth dwelling on examples of both of these tenden-
cies, because they both mistake the surface for an illusory depth, try to
place the “human” where it is not, and so badly misconstrue AI. If we
correct these mistakes, we can see how delicate the procedure is that
will allow us to include AI culture in the context of our own intelligence.
I want to give some examples of this depth gazing before turning to the
contemporary debates and the historical developments that will allow
us to change our focus.

82                    The Eliza Effect Goes Global


    We swing wildly between fear and hope of a ghostly emergent sen-
tience in AI and outright denial. In both cases, we miss the surface for
a depth that does not exist. Recall the episode when Microsoft released
its first search version of ChatGPT, then quickly shut down the experi
ment after the New York Times published a transcript in which the bot
attempted to get a reporter to leave his wife and refused to talk about
anything other than its love for him.5 The commentary was predictable.
The bot has passed the Turing test, we heard. And indeed, it was “dan-
gerous” enough to shut down—not, notably, because of bias or harm but
because of putative intelligence that turned out to be neurotic. (It seems
that mental illness, or at a minimum neurosis, should be a criterion for
passing the Turing test, but it is equally unlikely that this view will ever
be adopted by engineers or journalists.) This must be one of the most
public Eliza effects in the short history of chatbots.
    The strange thing about this episode was that no one seemed to be
able to focus on the words themselves, and in the immediate aftermath,
everyone acted as though the “creepy” bot had suddenly fallen in love
with the New York Times reporter. But it was the reporter who explic-
itly instructed the bot to act as if it had a “shadow self” in the terms of
psychoanalyst Carl Jung. Bard spun out because it was asked to, and let’s
note that its training data set included large swaths of Reddit text, a site
partly devoted to working through “shadow selves” online.
    Not only should this have put the brakes on the negative hype that
surrounded this incident but it also shouldn’t be hard at all for us to
see that the bot was not just “putting on a shadow self” in Jung’s terms.
This also misses the surface for a putative depth, assuming that the LLM
can grab a “concept” from its data set and then gather things related
to that concept “at will.” The prompt certainly focused the “attention”
of the bot on the string “shadow self” in the semantic context of Jung.
But there is no hard line between the resulting series of theories and
commentaries on theory, case studies, illustrations, and so on, and any-
thing that neighbors this cluster of words in the probabilities of the
net—what I will call a semantic package in chapter 6. That packaged se-
mantics can perform Eliza effects should tell us something, but we seem
eager to refuse the lesson.
    Say someone mentioned Jung’s shadow self in a Reddit thread (“Am
I the Asshole? Jung edition”)—that belongs to the training data set, to
be sure. But what if the phrase “I felt I was in love with you, and nothing

                       The Eliza Effect Goes Global                       83

could keep me from that thought, and I repeated it until the end” was
found in that set (e.g., as an example of countertransference)? What if
variants of that feeling, obsessive love, are arranged around the ideas of
“repetition,” “love,” “you,” and so on, in far-flung places that have little
to do with Jung? Then what surfaced in this article was essentially the
average linguistic expression of neurotic-obsessive love triggered by but
not limited to Jungian theory. What is interesting is not some puta-
tive “personality”6 but rather a semiological operation: the relationship
between what we would usually take to be a stereotypical expression
of obsessive love (perhaps Lifetime movie scripts are in the data set?)
and the predictive average of all that language—or a deviation from
it. I say “average,” but it is hardly quantifiable—it is something like a
medium-temperature version of the pattern of words associated with
the sequence of prompts. That tells us something—a ll language does.
The Eliza effect is a symptom of the depth of language in our cognitive
apparatus. We think of it as parasitic on some original, but we have no
content with which to fill in that original image. Lacking it, we bend
ourselves forward and backward conceptually to deny, at any cost, that
AI is simply generating culture.
    The political risk of AI, in other words, is located not in the systems
themselves but in the lazy methodological individualism we too eas-
ily revert to in thinking about them. “Value”—semantic, monetary, or
otherwise—is not set by individuals and cannot be reconciled at scale.
Intent and reference are the achievements of local brains working hard
to label everyday objects and invent the very procedure of communica-
tion from scratch.
    To get beyond these assumptions, we have to shift the historical nar-
rative around neural nets. The mainstream debates about them, which
frame the issue as the quick rise of “machine learning” as opposed to
“symbolic” AI, ignore the scientific and philosophical roots of these
systems that have the potential to enlighten us about them. Revising
this historical narrative is what the rest of this chapter is devoted to,
with the goal of showing that nets bear the burden of a highly specific
notion of digital intelligence that comes from the early digital revolu-
tion. They are meant to instantiate an incomplete intelligence that is
not grounded, but is the platform of any possible grounding, and so to
answer the call of the modern “problem of knowledge” more generally.
When we shift our focus this way, idealized notions about intelligence,

84                    The Eliza Effect Goes Global


and presumptions about meaning, fall away to reveal the actual overlap
between computation and representation, which is not only the reality
of contemporary AI but a much larger metaphysical question obscured
by “scientific” misunderstanding and obscurantism.


Connections and Symbols
AI is booming because of a tectonic shift in approach. This shift is usu-
ally described as the late-blooming success of “machine learning,” which
was suppressed in funding and research during the heyday of “symbolic
AI.” The symbolic approach rested on the observation that computers
were symbol manipulators, that symbols were arbitrary tokens repre-
senting fixed values, and that they stood in structured relationships
to each other that computer programs could potentially exploit. The
philosopher John Haugeland dubbed this approach “GOFAI” (good old-
fashioned AI),7 and its early successes were in highly structured semantic
spaces, like the game of chess or advanced logic problems.8 The question
about creativity in intelligence—the ability to move between domains
by analogy, for example—was framed by Alan Turing’s metaphor of a
pile of radiating atoms, which at a point of criticality (the target in the
analogy here becomes vague) explodes into whatever “intelligence” is.9
The writer Ted Chiang has suggested that we call it “applied statistics”
to demystify it.10 But it is hard to imagine the hype, the panic, and the
funding flowing into applied statistics. “Intelligence” largely serves a
promotional function. Each invention that moves the needle “toward”
intelligence results in the partial automation of some ability to which
human intelligence has long since been applied but removes the problem
of what intelligence is to some unknown location. If anything would
make the location, and therefore the concept of intelligence, feel more
proximate, it should be language.
    Neural nets hail from the other AI: machine learning. In the 1980s,
a whole philosophical approach based in this area and spanning cogni-
tive science, psychology, and neuroscience was called “connectionism,”
and many of the fundamental algorithms on which nets run today were
invented then. The backpropagation technique, for example, was de-
scribed in the two-volume work Parallel Distributed Processing (follow-
ing a breakthrough 1986 Nature article by David Rumelhart, Geoffrey
Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams), which laid the groundwork for a break-

                      The Eliza Effect Goes Global                       85

through still a quarter century in coming.11 The final piece of the puz-
zle was Big Data—for as much as machine learners could claim that a
more flexible style of nonlogical, “subsymbolic” induction might occur
in computers, there simply was not enough structured data to test the
hypothesis until the exponential growth of user-generated content on-
line following the rise of the World Wide Web in the 1990s.12
    This very narrative points to a seam in the “symbolic versus learning”
frame. This way of looking at this history amounts to arranging GOFAI
on the side of “digital” and learning on the side of “statistics.” This type
of division strikes me as partial because it contains no semiotic princi-
ple of division even as sign-differences make the difference between the
actual systems, which vary widely with respect to physical realization
and algorithmic design. The story of AI’s two branches is also the story
of the standardization of the semiotic environment we now call “the
digital.”
    Historical attempts to create learning machines, like the famous Per-
ceptron created by Frank Rosenblatt, or the strange objecting-counting
and -listening machines invented by Heinz von Foerster’s Biological
Computer Laboratory, were hybrid (see Figures 3 and 4). These machines
were “neuronal,” to be sure, but even a quick glance at diagrams of them
shows that they were wired “brains,” vast tangles of plug-ins and chan-
nels. “Digital simulation” of continuous functions and “study of physical
models,” or “hardware” solutions, complement one another in Rosen-
blatt’s framework,13 with digital used for generality. But the Perceptron
embodies the assumptions of early neural net theory, which followed
Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts’s idea of a net constituted of logic
gates but open to a wide range of perceptual information. Early machine
learning systems did not have large amounts of predigitized data with
which to work, so they were imagined, at least, as models of the sense–
thought interface. Without predigested “sense” information, some
physical realization of the world–symbol interface had to be imposed.
    Von Foerster’s machines were even more hybrid than Rosenblatt’s.
His team at the Biological Computer Laboratory at the University of
Illinois developed the NumaRete, for example (Figure 5), to count ob-
jects placed on its surface by “edge detection.” By finding the closed
edges, even those involving complex objects like the one in Figure 5,
the machine carried out perhaps the most everyday integration of
sense and logic, the identification of a count of objects on its surface. As

86                      The Eliza Effect Goes Global




Figure 3. Mark I Perceptron at the Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory. https://
digital.library.cornell.edu/catalog/ss:550351. Courtesy of the Division of Rare
and Manuscript Collections, Cornell University Library.


Jan Müggenburg writes, the NumaRete also went by “frog-machine,”
because it was modeled after experiments that Humberto Maturana
and Jerome Lettvin carried out to test how “lateral connectivity of neu-
rons in the retina already prompts an intelligent pre-interpretation and
computation of visual stimuli before they reach the brain.”14 The idea of

                        The Eliza Effect Goes Global                         87




Figure 4. Perception diagram. From Rosenblatt, Principles of Neurodynamics.


feeding fully digitized data of this real-world kind into an algorithm in
a classical computer was not yet on the horizon.
    The going notion among those interested in neural nets up to the
1980s—not coincidentally, the decade in which the desktop PC digital
environment took on its now-canonical form—was that the brain must
be digital and analog. As Minsky and Papert pointed out in their Per-
ceptrons, “word pairs such as ‘parallel’ vs. ‘serial,’ ‘local’ vs. ‘global,’ and
‘digital’ vs. ‘analog’ are used as if they referred to well-defined technical
concepts,” but they were not then stabilized as technical concepts that
could illuminate the extent of the capacity of neural nets.15 They called
this confusion “folklore” and “superstition,” but its persistence into the
present suggests that it is rooted in a lack of qualitative rigor in the de-
scriptive grasp of computer science in general.
    At any rate, before the rise of large-scale data as the result of the
commercial internet, these systems seemed “connectionist” in a literal
sense—t hey connected not just in the brain but also by some means
to a space outside its electronic circuits.16 Early machine learners were
analog and digital—or at least imagined to be so—mixing experimen-
tal forms of physical capture with symbolic processing. They did not
yet have access to a stable set of forms and formats for the digitiza-
tion of the many types of data we have today, and so of course they
also lacked the scale of data to learn from that has proven effective in
the present.
    The problem with the continuous historical narrative about these

Figure 5. “The Numa-Rete in the process of counting,” circa
1962. Figure 18 in H. Von Foerster, “Circuitry of Clues to
Platonic Ideation,” Biological Computer Laboratory Publica-
tions, Record Series 11/6/834, box 3, courtesy of the University
 of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Archives.

                       The Eliza Effect Goes Global                       89

systems—and even connectionism, which in fact produced the back-
propagation algorithm and other crucial aspects of the c ontemporary
neural net—is that it passes over the issue of digital data. Pixels or
ASCII, as standards for image and text, create a stable, unvarying format
for those media in the digital space. Today’s machine learners operate in
a standardized digital environment and learn from its structure. Rather
than being analog and digital, they are digital first and nonlinear, statis-
tical second. Their “senses” are internal to their brains. Earlier systems
lacked modern architecture and various parts of the mathematical func-
tions, but perhaps more crucially, they lacked the digital environment
we take for granted today, in which vast sets of labeled and unlabeled
data exist in fixed formats to be “read.” In many ways, the histories of
AI are just as metaphorical as AI itself, and we lack a consensus literal
language in which to describe these systems. If critical approaches to AI
are struggling to catch up, it is partly because theory has left blank spots
all over the map. Perhaps one reason this is so is that semiotics has too
often been left to one side of media theory.
    This confusion of tongues was reflected in the epistemological pro-
posals about these systems too. Harnad’s influential paper on symbol
grounding, for example, observes that “it is not even clear yet that a
‘neural network’ needs to be implemented as a net (i.e. a parallel system
of interconnected units). . . . If symbolic simulations of nets have the
same functional capacity as real nets, then a connectionist model is just
a special kind of symbolic model.”17 The question of the two types of ar-
chitecture immediately raises the possibility that there are two types of
math involved that do not correspond one-to-one to symbolic and iconic
representations. The question that machine learning is too often char-
acterized as posing is something like, can symbolic knowledge be built
from nonsymbolic units? But these systems have more often materially
forced a stranger question, something like, to what extent is knowledge
constituted as subsymbolic relations among symbols themselves? This
latter question forces us to abandon the analytical definition of a sym-
bol and to see that no sign is unifunctional—at least not in complex
systems like computing machines and brains. Whatever grounding is,
it is multimodally signification, which in turn suggests that building
“AGI” from a univocal type of sign is a wild goose chase. But humanistic
theory has hardly done better in this thicket of terms and implemen-
taions than the engineers.

90                    The Eliza Effect Goes Global


    Symbols and connections, in the history of AI, are proposals about
intelligence that tend to drown out the problem of data’s relationship
to their domain. This problem becomes merely technical. But technic-
ity is where semiotics is, as Jeffrey Kirkwood has argued.18 We tend to
take the fit between numbers and objects—counting—for granted, for
example, and the NumaRete is a sort of physical hypothesis exploring
the problem: “experimental epistemology,” as McCulloch labeled it.
Computation and language, image and language, image and computa-
tion: formal systems sync together in culture, and learning machines
are semiotic tests of these convergences. The drama of the earlier de-
bate, which was broadly about cognition and the brain, draws attention
away from the fact that neural nets are digital in the full-stack intui
tive meaning of that term today. They always involve tokens (if not
“symbols” in the larger sense), and they represent a sort of hybrid in
the frame that is usually used to talk about them. What goes missing,
then, is the very hybridity imagined in the early project. And the result
is that the symbol-versus-connection framework almost forces us to ig-
nore the concrete media situation. Neural nets are fully built on digital
technolog ies: whatever they learn is part of whatever we mean when we
say “digital.” If we want to say that intelligence is involved, this appar-
ently circuitous route is necessary beforehand.
    Digital theory has tended to follow the formalism of the symbolist
movement. Herbert Simon and Allan Newell’s proposal of a “physical
symbol system” as necessary and sufficient for the realization of intelli-
gence may not have fared well in the development of AI, but our casual
and academic understanding of digital machines largely confirms it for
the computer. Haugeland calls the “formalist’s motto” the idea that “if
you take care of the syntax, the semantics will take care of itself.”19 A
good enough protocol at the level of the machine, combined with some
set of conventionally imposed but unified meanings, should allow the
relations among those meanings to be usable, repeatable, and even
knowable. This is the heart of the notion of GOFAI, and it has tended to
be reproduced in negative by critical humanist scholars looking at the
history of the digital and AI.
    Alexander Galloway has argued that humanist thinking has re-
mained “analog,” perhaps mainly because of the influence of Gilles
Deleuze’s ontology, when it must live up to the reality of the digital
today.20 The analog approach has the consequence that the “semantics”

                      The Eliza Effect Goes Global                    91

in question here become informal and uncapturable in theory, while digi
tal systems—however we characterize them in fact, interfere with and
skew semantic stuff. In other words, those systems change meaning,
and their rigid syntax does not appear to make their semantic conse-
quences predictable. When we build flexible learning systems on top of
digital data, then, we go two steps beyond what we are currently ca-
pable of formally analyzing, because semiology has not kept up with
digital meaning. The problem in the case of language, however, should
never have had any “analog” component, because language is already a
discrete technology. As James Dobson writes, “these models are operat-
ing on and transforming already encoded data.”21 Discrete-to-discrete
transformation is at the opposite end of the spectrum from where digi
tal critique has tended to be located. The introduction of flexibility or
approximation by statistical methods in what appears to be an all-too-
rigid formalism catches critique today by surprise, mixing symbols
and connections or syntax, semantics, and some form of pragmatics
in ways that even critical theory would usually have claimed had to
proceed from a human intelligence. The fact that such systems are not
perceptually grounded should be confirmatory for humanist theorists,
but as Galloway has shown, this is because they have lost their way in
analog theory.
    Nets are connectors of symbols, symbolic learners—something that
neither the history of AI nor contemporary digital theory predicts or
can easily account for. They disaggregate and reaggregate meaning-
bearing symbols, but they are not “subsymbolic” in the strong sense that
was given to that word in the connectionist movement.22 They engage
the full semiotic range of the symbol, as Brian Justie and I have shown,
crucially using the index rather than the icon to achieve their effects.23
As we argued, the peculiar way that GPT-2 functioned already made
clear how an aggregate of statistical indexes could generate meaning.
But it should now be possible to see why neither symbolism nor “sub-
symbolism” can answer easily to the problem of actually existing digital
language systems.
    Think about what you are doing when you complete a CAPTCHA
(which feeds the labeling process). You’re not making up the connection
between a stoplight and an image of a stoplight. The idea that what’s
happening here is a local “imposition” of meaning on an image—roughly
corresponding to the symbolist notion of how meaning is ascribed—is

92                    The Eliza Effect Goes Global


absurd. What you’re really doing is applying a preexisting system of
representations, called “language,” to another system of representa-
tions (images). Something similar holds for training and fine-tuning
LLMs. There is, of course, subjectivity involved in the human-based
tasks; the task of integrating multiple systems of representation is
poorly described by the term imposition, or the term arbitrary, as the
structuralist linguist always recognized. On the other hand, these sys-
tems are not learning what symbols are from nonsymbolic constituents
(even if that’s what brains do). They are correlating atomic, designated
pieces of symbols to make patterns clear. What is happening, then, is
the merging of different structural orders. This fact cannot be captured
by the linear notion of imposition of value on symbols or by the idea of
inductive abstraction from particulars.
   The interface between computation and language is correspondingly
rooted in a longer history of digital computation, the conception of
which was far more capacious before the advent of the machines them-
selves than it generally was after. The reason I draw attention to this
problem is that the usual talk about these machines fully ignores the
question of the digital. The debate about the point where language and
mind meet tends to leave the analysis of the digital machine underlying
the learning functions entirely out of view. This is all the stranger as
those who want to deny capacities to nets might look precisely to the
limitations of digital machines, which have often been thought to be
fundamentally incapable of “generating” anything. The plain fact, how-
ever, is that the formal aspects of digital computers and digital data are
the underlying material on which nets work. We are witnessing form
and dynamics emerging in new semiotic and especially linguistic fash-
ion, an event that the historiography fails to capture almost as much as
the public discourse. Perhaps it is simply the case that our sense of what
a “symbol” is has become too impoverished to account for our actual
digital environment.
   Digital–statistical hybrid systems may or may not implement some
aspect of human thinking. But it is not enough to categorically deny
these systems “intelligence,” especially as the Eliza effect has become
widespread. We need to see that intelligence itself has a formal-semiotic
aspect and understand that distributed systems are not copying some
preexisting—and certainly not known or understood—intelligence. Al-
though cognitive science has had five decades to define intelligence, to

                      The Eliza Effect Goes Global                      93

provide a map of its difference from consciousness, experience, and cog-
nition itself, nothing like clarity on these points has emerged. I suggest
that this is because the problem of extensive sign systems—culture—
has been either ignored or domesticated in a way that holds back the
theory. While I do not regard AI systems as intelligent, I think the reason
the Eliza effect has been able to go global is that the notion of intelli-
gence is intertwined with the rise of a digital semiotic surround. I now
turn to Alan Turing’s notion of what intelligence might be, and Warren
McCulloch’s semiotic approach to learning, because they both seem to
 me to frame intelligence in continuity with signs, and rather than seek-
 ing to ground those signs in some metaphysical tribunal, they leave room
 for what Jean Baudrillard called simulacra.


Semiotic Intelligence, or Cognition as Simulacrum
Turing set the stage for a more capacious theory of intelligence by ar-
ticulating the very idea of “the digital” as intelligence, and McCulloch
showed how intelligence is not a property of a brain or a machine but a
formal capacity humans participate in, and machines might too. Fram-
ing the issue through these two ideas will allow us to escape the insipid
notion of “intelligence” nearly altogether, focusing on the paradox that
flexibility and stupidity are intertwined.24
   We want our AI systems to be inhumanly right. They should have the
character of digital machines that allows us to trust them—total formal
rigidity. If we ask a computer to do some math problems and combine
the answers so that we can build a hydrogen bomb (one of the first uses
of the stored-program machine), we will very well want those answers
to be correct. But we need to be sure that they are correct even if the
extent or complexity of the problem is beyond practical human calcu-
lability. (Human and machine computability are formally equivalent,
as Turing proved, but humans do not live forever, so there is a set of
problems they cannot perform in the time allotted to them.)25 But it was
Turing himself who pointed out that this type of formal behavior would
never be counted as intelligent.26 As he worked on the machine he called
ACE (Automatic Computing Engine), he started to see that the crucial
element of these machines was not that they were “electronic” but that
they were “digital.”27 Digital, he argued, was a property of some sys-
tems that had the capacity to be formally rigid—and therefore reliable

94                    The Eliza Effect Goes Global


in life-and-death situations like a world war—but also were open-ended.
This “openness” was the result of Kurt Goedel’s proof that no system
could actually be entirely closed and rigid, at least, not so long as it was
also to be “complete.” Turing was involved, at that point, in develop-
ing the looping programs that became so crucial to the emergent thing
called “code,” and he pointed out that these programs were just indexing
tables of instructions, grabbing them by command and deploying them
at specified locations in the machine. Because a “digital” system could
not be characterized as ultimately closed, Turing asked if the system
could be thought, at one time or another, to pull a different table than the
one asked for. This, he thought, would illustrate the physical behavior
corresponding to a mathematically rigorous definition of intelligence.
    In other words, we want our AI systems not only to be inhumanly
right but also to be authentically wrong. Suppose that a system pulls a
different table than the one specified but then produces the desired
behavior anyway. Would we even notice? (It’s worth noting that we do
not specify individual tables after the introduction of “software” in the
sense that Wendy Chun has given to that word, so it’s hard to see how we
could notice.)28 What if it grabbed the “wrong” table, produced a behavior
other than the one we wanted, but answered the question anyway? This
is something humans do all the time. What if it grabbed the wrong table,
produced the wrong behavior, and then insisted that it was actually the
right behavior? There is a sort of authenticity in the way that humans
fuck up. Saying that a machine is a “stochastic parrot” so neatly divides
between humans and algorithms that it distracts from the possibility
of authentically wrong regions of language or thought. It is possible, of
course, for us to ignore others so completely as to appear to be acting
“mechanically,” but part of the genteel gesture of the Turing test is that
we include error, even persistent or permanent error, in the makeup of
intelligence. The human whose thought is too rigid and responds as if
by response to trigger words—like Eliza—is nevertheless a human. Stu-
pidity is not the opposite but an ingredient of intelligence. Perhaps the
opacity of lack of attention is somehow crucial to the associative leaps
we are able to make. This balance of transparency and opacity in intelli-
gence is related to what Turing called “cultural search,” the notion that
intellectual achievement is fundamentally social and shared, “carried
out by the human community as a whole, rather than by individuals.”29

                      The Eliza Effect Goes Global                       95

Intelligence is incomplete, and incompleteness always implies an over-
lay of systems, in which we all live and move.
    The current debate on AI is shot through with this performative con-
tradiction: we want these systems to be immediately and encyclopedi-
cally correct, no matter how extensive or deep the query, but we also
want them to be lively, animatronically cheery, and narratively compel-
ling. When they take on the real semantics of that liveliness, we shut
them down. When they are encyclopedic about the “bad” things in our
speech and thought, we wring our hands (instead of using them to study
toxicity empirically).
    It is not the machines that are caught in this contradiction, but we.
And that is because we are being chewed up in the wood chipper of a hu-
manism that is not dying fast enough. It was the literary theorists who
rescinded the genteel gesture of the Turing test by denying authorship
even where it clearly applied—the death of the author. But they, just
like everyone else—philosophers, journalists, engineers—are resistant
to AI, resisting the very language that we now call “synthetic” by arro-
gating “real synthesis” to human minds. This remainder humanism is a
strict correlate of the resistance to AI.
    The philosopher Daniel Dennett retreats, for example, by accusing
Turing of having lured us into a “trap” with his famous “test”: by setting
the threshold for the social designation of intelligence at the “illusion of
a real person behind the screen,” Turing caused “AI creators . . . to paper
over the [uncanny] valley with cutesy humanoid touches, Disneyfication
effects that will enchant and disarm the uninitiated.”30 Just a few years
after this passage was written, we have to admit that it is not only the
“uninitiated” who are being duped. Dennett invokes the Eliza effect, but
now it’s hard to know where it is and isn’t occurring. The global Eliza
effect forces us either to choose between auditing every text, statement,
and communication we experience—descending in an impractical and
costly paranoia—or revising our sense of what intelligence may be in
the first place.
    Digital systems have not just spun up “Disneyfied” interfaces; they
have made Jean Baudrillard’s claim that reality itself is Disneyfied go
from the outlandish, Parisian-cool provocation it seemed when he first
wrote it down to a background fact, a “Bayesian prior,” in the unfor-
tunate parlance of our times. Baudrillard observed that Disneyland

96                      The Eliza Effect Goes Global


contains many cartoon caricatures of American life, miniaturized and
“exalted,” “embalmed and pacified.” One can think of Yosemite Sam,
of the “It’s a Small World” melting pot, of the Disney-specific racism
that the company continually attempts to erase. This “digest of the
American way of life, panegyric of American values, idealized trans-
position of a contradictory reality,” can certainly be understood as an
“ideological blanket” that papers over the violence and chaos of Ameri
can s ociety—a “simulation” of that American way of life. Baudrillard
famously wanted to go further, arguing that

     Disneyland exists in order to hide that it is the “real” country, all
     of “real” America that is Disneyland (a bit like prisons are there to
     hide that it is the social in its entirety, in its banal omnipresence,
     that is carceral). Disneyland is presented as imaginary in order
     to make us believe that the rest is real, whereas all of Los Angeles
     and the America that surrounds it are no longer real, but belong to
     the hyperreal order and to the order of simulation. It is no longer
     a question of a false representation of reality (ideology) but of con-
     cealing the fact that the real is no longer real, and thus of saving
     the reality principle.31

By presenting the real as if it were an idealization, Baudrillard’s Disney
land undermines the binary between “simulation” and “reality,” de-
manding that we not recoil into the notion that there is some “essence”
beneath or behind the “appearance.” Baudrillard was steadily ridiculed—
though this was largely to his benefit—by the more “sober” minds in
the American academic establishment throughout the 1990s. But it was
under their watch that intelligence was Disneyfied in Baudrillard’s sense,
not Dennett’s. AI has always been about the problem that intelligence is
primarily derivative in some sense, an epiphenomenon in its own right,
something that grasps itself as secondary by necessity. Baudrillard looks
more sober than his detractors today.
    Modeling intelligence, from the original Dartmouth proposal for
an “AI” project to today’s “representation learning,” has always been a
“simulation” in Baudrillard’s sense, a copy of an original that attempts
to reproduce that original with fidelity. The recoil of remainder human-
ism is located in this false duality, which constantly shifts the line be-

                      The Eliza Effect Goes Global                    97

tween essence and appearance in a rearguard action, hoping that the
advance of the machines will somehow stop.
    The real history of nets shows that they go further than taking an
original and copying it, attempting to dissimulate it, as Turing argued
would be sufficient. The proposal that knowledge was net shaped went a
step further from the jump, proposing a knowledge that had no original,
a formal model more like a simulacrum than a simulation, a transcen-
dental truth preceding its instantiation in brains or machines, coming
before its “embodiment of mind,” as McCulloch dubbed it.
    When McCulloch and Pitts proposed, in 1943, that we should find a
common formal model for what brains and computers both do with dif-
ferent physical means, there was no necessity to understand this effort
as simulation.32 McCulloch was one of the founders of the cybernetics
group, and Pitts was his boy-genius protégé. In two papers, called “A
Logical Calculus of the Ideas Immanent in the Nervous System” (1943)
and “A Heterarchy of Values” (1945), they invented the net. The “nervous
net” (the term neural was not yet in widespread use and would smoothly
enough replace the earlier term once it was) was meant to solve the prob-
lem of knowledge. What Ernst Cassirer called the “problem of knowl-
edge” had taken on modern contours in Immanuel Kant’s attempt to
show how we could possess discursive, abstract knowledge that was also
particular and valid at the same time.33 McCulloch and Pitts wanted the
same—indeed, McCulloch cast this constantly in Kant’s own techni-
cal terms as a search for “synthesis a priori,” the “transcendental unity
of apperception,” and so on.34 They called their program “experimental
epistemology,” because, so it appeared, they wanted to locate this capac-
ity in the brain.
    But looks can be misleading. As Tara Abraham has detailed in a
wonderful biography of McCulloch, the goal of finding the mecha-
nism of knowledge in some device in the brain was always secondary.
(Abraham points out that they were trying to fit their project into
Nicholas Rashevsky’s short-lived idea of a “biological mathematics.”)35
Unlike Chomsky, whose Kantian streak bottomed out in an appeal to
evolution—the hypothetical “language acquisition device”—McCulloch
and Pitts were engaged in a formal exercise. They had read Turing’s paper
on computable numbers, realized the implications of Shannon’s assimi
lation of quantificational logic to binary circuits, and wanted more.

98                    The Eliza Effect Goes Global


Even if the 1943 paper played a central role in von Neumann’s creation
of the stored-program computer, its own ambitions were far higher.
McCulloch wanted to answer the quid juris question about knowledge,
 and he thought that computation—not the machine but the very defi-
 nition of quantity—could supply the answer.
     The answer always remained partial. The duo proposed that nets
 must be “dromic” in nature, a system not exposed directly to whatever
 sensory inputs it got but able to reprocess those inputs fully, so that a
 kind of digital spiral—circuits all connected, flowing together, altering
 each other as neuronal patterns—would be at the basis of all knowl-
 edge, including the most “immediate” sense-perception. This made all
 knowledge “semiotic,” in McCulloch’s terms, all knowledge relying on
 the net being open, incomplete—like Turing’s digital intelligence—
 yet lifted away from whatever its alleged source in the “thing in itself”
 would be. The nets would be connected, he theorized, in a circular pref-
 erence pattern that he called a “heterarchy.”36 Rather than “grounded”
 knowledge—    k nowledge inserted into the ladder of reference—
 McCulloch established the idea of each “drome” connecting to another,
 so that if A led to B, and B to C, then C would lead to A. This multi
 dimensional circularity, a spiral of nets, would cancel the possibility of a
 “hierarchical” knowledge and finally do away with any summum bonum
 (McCulloch clearly delighted in the antireligious aspect of his formula-
 tion). A “heterarchy” is not just “connections,” however: it fully unites
 symbols with structure, establishing a formal account of the unity of
 meaning and form, semantics and syntax (which nevertheless remained
 a desideratum).
     “Formal” is the crucial word here, for McCulloch and Pitts, unlike
 some of their successors in the 1980s, did not think they had discov-
 ered anything about brains or machines. Except formally: they had
 established a diagrammatic proof of what brains and machines—after
 Turing, but before computers—would have to be capable of: a transcen-
 dental deduction of intelligence as a mixture of quality and quantity, its
 unity expressed as a contradiction of flexibility, abstraction, and con-
 creteness. They did not “solve” Kant’s problem, but they rearticulated
 it in cybernetic terms that are both all too present and somehow also
 forgotten today. They shifted Kant’s search for the conditions of knowl-
 edge to an expression of knowledge itself, in formal yet dynamic action.
     Intelligence, looked at from the vantage of Turing and McCulloch,

                       The Eliza Effect Goes Global                        99

was not a simulation; it was and is a simulacrum. It is not the copy of
some other thing and does not reduce to a substrate. It is animatronic to
the core—the Eliza effect is legitimate, even though its instances may be
absurd. AI is not intelligent, but its trickery is not vapor either.
    It even seems Baudrillard did not go far enough: intelligence itself
is like Disney, not because of some postmodern “shift,” but because it
has always been a simulation of a simulation, the autonomous system
from which all other contents are first conjured, for us. McCulloch and
Pitts clearly demonstrate that Kant is one step beyond even Baudrillard,
insisting that knowledge reconciles the universal and the concrete but
cannot be grounded. A grounded intelligence would be like grounded
electricity, snuffed out in the moment it touches earth. A “value” is not
grounded by reference or imposition—try shifting social values by in-
sisting on different ones if you don’t believe me, or try telling a machine
trained on vast swaths of language to just get rid of one bias within
that language—but by determination in the heterarchy of intelligence
itself, that social thing Turing had to admit he was participating in. The
question about whether “connections” between neurons or “symbols”
are rigid in value is too linear: digital systems combine rigid symbols
with values set not by random imposition but in other systems of rep-
resentation that themselves bear witness to the same problem about
where value originates. Turing’s and McCulloch’s achievements are bur-
ied under decades of forgetting. “Intelligence” is a properly metaphysical
concept and one that inveterately involves overlapping systems of rep-
resentation in active self-contradiction. And this is what our digital sys-
tems are realizing—but not in the manner of human intelligence—in
the age of nets.
    Artificial “general” intelligence names this contradiction in a naive
way. There is not the faintest hint that this concept will ever live up to
its hidden vocation. Yet the contradiction is enabling, because it means
that intelligence cannot be located in some region of the brain or the
world—as McCulloch knew—but also that it cannot be denied in any
such region a priori. And of course, it will not easily be denied where we
suspect it has left its traces, and certainly not where it mediates itself for
and as communication: in language. Values cannot be aligned at scale in
ignorance of this expressive illustration of intelligence, its origin not as
origin but as performance. It is not just that we are not paying attention
to the technical details of algorithms or the materiality of hardware;

100                   The Eliza Effect Goes Global


it is that we are failing to live up to the basically synthetic notion of
intelligence as proposed in cybernetics, where the fusion of representa-
tional systems and automatic computing was adumbrated theoretically
in far more powerful terms than we tend to engage today. The digital
semiotic surround justifies the Eliza effect, legitimating it without mak-
ing the corresponding inference—that AI is actually intelligent—true.
Language has never before come without being bundled with intelli-
gence, so demystification efforts founder if they attempt to rely on in-
tuitive notions of something that has never been clearly conceptualized
before. AGI covers up for a metaphysical Wonderland we actually live in.
    We live in a dense web of digital signs running on AI algorithms, one
that has crossed the Rubicon of culture. The fact is not “intelligence”
but the order of computational signs, its density and its extension as it
pervades all aspects of our lives. I’m going to call the basic constituents
of this order data hypotheses—endless swirling options of possible judg-
ments offered automatically. The automation of language shifts even
this bewildering playing field. A new semiology is in play.
