      3


The Semiological Surround,
or How Language Is the Medium
of Computation

Deep learning classifies and generates. Its history has involved the discov-
ery of just a handful of functions that iterate over large amounts of data
and isolate, or model, patterns in those data. From those patterns it may
answer a question of identification—“ is there a cat in this image?”—or
a question that requires a prediction of the sort “what is the next unit in
this sequence?” These functions are now a fundamental part of the digi-
tal surround. We live with constant classification—of handwritten num-
bers, of faces, of emotions—and now generation—of i mages, of choices
and strategies, and of language.
    I call this situation the semiological surround, retooling the term
invented by Saussure to describe a doctrine of social signification in
which language is primary. In both classification and generation, lan-
guage mediates computation. In classifying tasks, either images must
be labeled for “supervised learning” or we must later decide on a seman-
tic value, indexed to a threshold, for what the machine does without
labels (“unsuperv ised” learning). This is linguistic governance of the
process for the purposes of understanding or action. In generation,
something more directly linguistic is occurring. This is semiology in the
strong sense, in which rules of language as a sign-system filter other
types of signs, other data. In cases like image generators, which deploy
LLM-generated data sets of pairs of images and words, the point is per-
haps most obvious. When you see the astronaut riding on a unicorn on
the moon, you are looking at a text-generated image. But the same is true
whenever an LLM is used to predict who is a member of a gang, what
target to hit in a war, or how a protein folds.
    We have lived for some time with what the media theorist Friedrich
Kittler called a computational “grammatology”; now the fact that lan-
guage must ultimately mediate our cognition has come back to the fore.
This chapter argues that classifiers, which appear to give us information


                                    101

102                   The Semiological Surround


about the world, only frame hypotheses supervised by language, while
generation relies on the structure of language to produce culture. The
confusion of tongues in the digital order comes down to this structural
governance, the semiology of the artificial sign. Where classifiers merely
indicate possible objects, judgments, or patterns, generators make those
patterns. Their semiotic activity is iconic, so that the question becomes
what structure they draw that iconicity from.
    As we saw in chapter 1, Ferdinand de Saussure attempted to put
linguistics on a firm scientific basis by treating language as an autono-
mous system, neither psychology nor history nor physiology. To do so,
he needed to say what language was instead of mental content, philol-
ogy, or neural activity. He argued that language was made of signs and
that therefore linguistics would be part of a “science that studies the
life of signs within society,” to be called “semiology,” after the Greek
semeion, “sign.” Linguistics would be just one branch of this study, which
might include gesture, song, and in general “the mass of anthropological
facts.”1 The idea was to separate off the process of signification from
sciences that use that signification naively. But Saussure went one step
further, arguing that

   signs that are wholly arbitrary realize better than the others
   the ideal of the semiological process; that is why language, the
   most complex and universal of all systems of expression, is also
   the most characteristic; in this sense linguistics can become the
   master-pattern for all branches of semiology although language is
   only one particular semiological system.2

Here Saussure suggests something like a symbolic bias, a tendency for
the other systems of signs to find final expression, or the sense of their
meaning, through placement in an arbitrary system of signs. Language
is the “master-pattern” for semiology despite being a single branch of
the science, because the process of “valuation”—which we saw in chap-
ter 1 and which plays a crucial role in chapter 5—can only make sense
when signs are separated from their “origins.” So long as sensation, or
gesture, remains outside the filtration system of arbitrary signs, it re-
mains unvalued, underdetermined. This is not to devalue such systems,
but to point to the human tendency to express them in a more “final”

                       The Semiological Surround                        103

semantic form. Semiology is the study of this semantic end point, the
inclusion of all other values in the grid of language.
    If there is a bias for the “arbitrary” sign, we might look also to num-
bers, those other symbolic tokens. And indeed, in a larger sense, this
is what LLMs are forcing us to do now, as we shall see. Language is the
“end point” of meaning—capable of both generation and governance of
any and all meaning—precisely because it is arbitrary in this sense. But
this very arbitrariness, as structuralism always insisted, somehow also
creates an “all roads lead to Rome” situation. Language is not thought or
meaning as such, but I cannot convey this fact outside of language. Se-
miology is an ontological bear hug for the order of all things significant.3
    Structuralist semiology makes no pronouncements on the absolute
value of language, despite appearances. Rather, it takes very seriously
the plain fact that text is the dominant medium of human civiliza-
tion, the tracks on which government, market, and culture all run. We
owe the best elaboration of this relative evaluation to date to Roland
Barthes, who argued that “we are, . . . despite the spread of a pictorial
illustration, a civilization of the written word.”4 This claim can appear
outdated today, after decades of the creation and global spread of a pa-
tently computational civilization. Yet it is not so clear that what Barthes
calls the “reduplication” of iconic messages—such that “at least a part
of the iconic message is, in terms of structural relationship, either re-
dundant or taken up by the linguistic system”—has changed at the level
of mediation. He writes that “collections of objects (clothes, food), they
pass through the relay of language, which extracts their signifiers (in
the form of nomenclature) and names their signifieds (in the forms of
usages or reasons).”5 These words were written before the rise of digital
mediation, and it has been tempting in the interim to think that text is
fading in importance as computation and its new regime of images has
proliferated.
    There is a strong temptation to abandon the textual basis of semiol-
ogy today, as interface effects abound in image effects delivered at un-
precedented cultural speed. Yet I cannot agree with Anna Kornbluh’s
recent claim that the symbolic order has ceded primary ground to the
imaginary.6 The symbolic ability to create what she calls “immediacy”
in a too-fast circulatory system of goods and signs still largely relies
on the never-ending relay between numbers and words, in which the

104                    The Semiological Surround


relationship between the structure of language and the density of vec-
tors has become the most pressing question. Even as the “style” of plat-
form capitalism exacerbates the very tendencies that Kornbluh picks
out, the underlying generative core is text and computation, now in a
synthesis we could not suspect even during the spread of the commer-
cial internet and social media. As Beatrice Fazi has argued, generative AI
produces a synthesis of “unity without totality” as a structuralist “form”
of thought.7 While I make no conclusion about thinking in this book,
the promise of Fazi’s idea of form here is that it connects the computa-
tional regime of the signifier to cognition. LLMs present us with some-
thing like the pure symbolic order and are set to make other media and
their effects dependent on that order in an unprecedented manner. To
make sense of a semiology coconsituted as language and computation,
we need a semiotic interpretation of the two dominant types of neural
net, the classifier and the generator. In both cases, language is crucial, as
it supervises classification and forms the matrix of generation.


The Data Hypothesis
There is a long-standing philosopheme that asks if there can be a total
representational system that automatically captures all truth. The phi-
losopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz proposed a “rational calculus” in
the seventeenth century by which one could solve moral dilemmas as
though they were math problems. Carnap, whom we have already met,
dreamed of something similar, and his Vienna School compatriot Otto
Neurath even invented a visual language that was meant to be univer-
sally understood. Machine learning has given fresh life to this fantasy,
with claims of a “master algorithm” on the near horizon and the notion
that hypothesis itself could be automated, handing science entirely over
to the machines, back in the public eye.8 An interesting feature of the
new universal language fantasy that has sprouted from the success of
deep learning is that it no longer really imagines that we will have clar-
ity. For Leibniz as for Carnap, the whole point was that one would see
the truth because of the fit between ratiocination and world. Today, we
dream of getting answers we can be sure are true, but only vaguely that
we would possess that truth personally. Even dreams of divine knowl-
edge have been handed over to the algorithm.
    If, on the one hand, we have fantasies of total data transparency, on

                       The Semiological Surround                         105

the other, we have AI critique suggesting that data are wrong, violent,
and generally bad. The overall line of this critique stems from phenom-
enology, which offers bright lines between context-knowing, embodied
humans, and abstract machines that have no body, no context, and no
“situation” in which they are embedded.9 The problem with this frame-
work is that it tends to treat representation as “merely ideal” and so
is unable to deal with the material and concrete effects of computing
systems—a strange error to find in this particular theoretical location.
The result is a lot of dualistic noise, suggesting that computers and data
“slice up” and “abstract from” local, embodied realities. But whatever we
think embodiment is, it is tied up with abstraction. There is no absolute
singularity of life. Computing is something humans did and do, just as
other representation systems are. I tend in this respect to follow Justin
Joque, who says that rather than reject abstraction because it is alienat-
ing, we should use computation to produce “more alienation.”10 Dualism
is remainder humanism and does little to fight the nightmare of the
total data transparency fantasy. The answer is semiology.
    Two broad types of deep learning systems have gained major traction
over the last two decades. One is classifiers, worked out and elaborated
primarily as image classifiers, although they can be extended to other
media. The other is generators, as we have already seen. Classification
is a misnomer, I argue, because it suggests that these AI systems actu-
ally render judgments by means of induction from empirical data. They
do simulate those judgments, but what they first and foremost render
is hypotheses, possibilities based on a complex interaction of different
orders of signs. I therefore suggest that, to the extent that we live in a
machine-classified world, we contend with the “data hypothesis” as a
semiotic surround, a digital environment of semiological abstraction,
rife with error and bias but nonetheless all too real as a remediation of
our understanding of the world—because it is part of that world. Lan-
guage supervises this classification process and holds it out as possible,
but always only possible.
    But this is changing. Generative AI cannot be divided into the hypotheti
cal and the real, the factual and the counterfactual. Generation really
engages the media it generates, and it does this by flipping the data of
classification on its head. It makes icons out of symbols. The giant, in-
scrutable computation that classifies an image is the desired information
in a generator. A classifier says yes or no; a generator puts content on

106                     The Semiological Surround


the table. The classifier uses all that computation to get you a label, an
answer, a category. The generator gives you the computation, one piece
at a time, in whatever way you ask for it. Language is involved in both,
in essential ways. In a classifier, it is the labels. In a generator, it is the
engine. Language supervises classification, but it is the matrix of gen-
eration. Governance and expression are both semiological in the digital
surround.
    To think nets, and their absorption of language, we must have tech-
nical awareness on both sides of the interface. This chapter presents nets
as hypothesis creators and tries to show how language itself enables
them to generate anything, including language. This project involves a
certain amount of technical detail about how nets work, but it should
prove easy enough to follow—and, I hope, clarifying—even for those
not motivated primarily by the desire to understand digital media.
    Where classical AI focused on the notion of “physical symbol sys-
tems” and the logical manipulation of their symbols,11 machine learning
recalls instead the work of Jean Piaget, the idea of the emergence of
abstraction from perception in John Locke,12 and, perhaps above all,
the empirically grounded programs of American pragmatism—as the
philosopher Catherine Malabou has emphasized.13 What these figures
share is a focus on empiricism, learning, and emergence—as opposed
to logic, form, and stability. They are invoked because nets are said to
“learn,” in an open-ended process of scouring and reconfiguring train-
ing data until something like a generality is achieved. At first glance,
then, the shift seems to be from a symbolic deduction to observational
induction—the power of the net is that its semantic range is indetermi-
nate with respect to its inputs, where symbolic AI had to prestabilize
the value of its symbols, making them semantically rigid, in order to
function at all. When we attend not just to the “abstraction” but to the
overlay of representation systems that actually constitutes AI systems,
a slightly different picture emerges.
    Malabou has also argued that nets “renegotiate” the border between
the transcendental and the empirical.14 This is a formula that Gilbert
Simondon applied to the living and that has been influential in recent
 theory of technology.15 The idea goes back at least as far as Theodor
 Adorno and Max Horkheimer, who argued that film alters the “sche-
 matism” that Immanuel Kant had constructed to mesh concepts and
 intuitions into recognizable objects.16 The post-Simondon idea is that
 technology presents a “tertiary protention,” a synthetic, form-creating

                        The Semiological Surround                        107




Figure 6. Diagram of a neural net. Image from Yann LeCun, Y. Bengio, and
Geoffrey Hinton, “Deep Learning,” Nature 521 (May 28, 2015): 436–44,
 https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14539.


force where earlier philosophers had seen it only as a repository, a data
base, a tablet.17 One can see why nets give plausibility to this idea,
because “generation” might be taken as a plainer way of stating this
Simondonian tenet. But this does not sync easily with the invocation of
 induction, experience, and learning.
     Nets are mathematical functions that take a large number of individ-
 ual data points as inputs—these can range from hundreds to trillions,
 in the case of LLMs. They then multiply these data points through a
 matrix by initially randomized weights, at first leading to an obviously
 false answer.
     Say we want to train a net to recognize squirrels in digital images. We
 would create a data set of images, some of which contain squirrels and
 all of which are labeled “squirrel” or “no squirrel.” (Massive amounts of
 labeling efforts have been done by cheaply paid Mechanical Turk work-
 ers on Amazon’s platform.) We input data and ask for an answer. The net
 receives the image as pixels, laid out in vectors, so that the net is a ma-
 trix that multiplies the values of the images through a series of “layers,”
 at each of which a random weight is assigned. (There is also a nonlinear
 function that makes the function work, and added bias, for technical
 reasons.) So we put in an image of a squirrel and ask it to run the data
 through this weight matrix, which is just a very large series of vector
 multiplications (which is why these systems run on GPUs, driving the
 hardware capital push we have recently seen). The answer we first get is
 wildly wrong—and we want it to be. If it were right, the net would not
 be identifying “squirrel” but just this image of a squirrel. If we were to

108                    The Semiological Surround


reconstruct the data in the matrix as an image, it would be gibberish.
Nets have to be wrong before they can be right.
    The next step was invented in the 1980s. Following the “forward pass”
of the data, the result is “passed back” through the weights, one node at
a time, and the “backpropagation algorithm” (based on the chain rule
of calculus) finds local errors, assigning more and less “blame” for the
wrong answer to each cell.18 The process is repeated—full training cy-
cles are called “epochs”—until the loss is minimized, and the result, in
this case, is a squirrel-identifier.
    The most important thing to see is that no one is hand engineering
the computation of the data (although the overall function is designed,
its performance is only “steered” by shifting hyperparameters). It’s
worth emphasizing this point: as I learned about these functions, I
looked for years for the point at which someone was manually inter-
vening in this scheme to “understand” what was going on, to pick the
“concept” or “image” of the squirrel out of the data. Nothing of this kind
happens. One can tune these systems and watch the error fall away. One
can pick different known functions that work better, more or less, in
different contexts. But no one “sees” what’s going on. And not because
nets are black boxes but because they only work if the “answer” isn’t
given, either to the human or to the machine. If we know the concept
in advance, learning isn’t possible. This is why the net sits on the border
between induction and something more, the hypothetical. When it rec-
ognizes an image, that’s because we’ve “supervised” the images we’ve
fed it in the labeling process. But we’re asking it for something we don’t
already have: a quantitative formula of “squirrelness,” a function that
defines what it is to be a pixelated squirrel.
    The identifier has now stabilized a pattern that corresponds to the
concept “squirrel” and is more accurate than human eyes are at locating
them. A famous example shows that a trained net is better at distin-
guishing a Samoyed dog from a white wolf than humans are. This capac-
ity is significant in the case of radiography, for example, where shadows
and tumors are finely distinct. And it would indeed then appear that the
net has created an abstraction, performing induction on a large num-
ber of examples and producing some function f(x) that predicts—or
“is”—“squirrel.”
    This difference corresponds to a classical distinction made by the
American pragmatist Charles Sanders Peirce.19 Induction goes from
cases (answers) and results (data) to rules. The net does this because

                       The Semiological Surround                        109

the results are given to it in the training set (“these images contain
squirrels”). When we ask the net to classify once it has been trained,
we are demanding a deduction, in which rule (“squirrel = f(x)”) and data
(previously unseen images) are given, and the answer should be “this
image does (or does not) contain a squirrel.” Because we have already
seen that nets suffer from the “symbol grounding problem,” we can no-
tice already here that the induction is performed entirely within the
logic of the image. This fact is somehow both constantly emphasized and
completely trivialized in most frameworks for thinking about nets. The
going idea seems to be that the net’s alleged induction gets more “right”
as the number of images increases, with the underlying but unstated
assumption being that very large amounts of image data correspond
better to the world than smaller amounts. That is quite obviously cor-
rect, and yet it is not the truth we need. Where nets perform induction
within the logic of pixels, the also-internal reference that pixels make
to the world—whatever we take this to mean, images have a referen-
tial function—does not fall under the induction. The interface between
nets and whatever “world” we hold in common in our representations
is hypothetical—the join of the hypothesis to the “world” is the word,
the label and then the acceptance of that label as identity. Classification
makes the semiological surround a matter of hypotheticals.
     What is actually happening in a classifying net, then, is hypothesis
(or, in Peirce’s terms, “abduction”). Luciana Parisi has argued exten-
sively that this is the true function of the nets and that this function is
what allows it to be generative, “protentive,” more than just an applied
formalism.20 I follow Parisi here, with the goal of showing why the inter-
locking systems of representation of inferential rule and computational
design can be synthesized. All data are hypothetical; we live not in a
digital dream of transparency but in a data hypothesis.
     In the hypothesis, the rule and the result are combined to conclude
the case. The hypothesis says “what I see here must be a case of this rule”
or “this observation tends to make me think that the world conforms to
this rule.” A “weak” form of judgment, hypotheses are used where the
rule is clear but the relationship between rule and result is not given.
Peirce gives the example of fish fossils being found far inland—the
data (fossils) and the rule (fish are aquatic) are given, but their relation
is lacking, so we form the notion that the “sea once washed over the
land.”21 For Peirce, the hypothesis is far more common than we tend
to assume. For example, all historical judgments are hypothetical. No

110                    The Semiological Surround


one alive has ever seen the man “Napoleon,” for example, but the data
(images and documents of him) and the rule (that documents and im-
ages are of existing entities) suggest that he really existed (the case).
Perhaps we can go further and say that this hypothesis takes the form
“the world is as if Napoleon, with all we know of him, lived in it.” We rea-
son about his personal existence from documents, but we reason about
Napoleon the conqueror based on the geopolitical landscape he left in
his imperial wake. The “weakness” of the hypothesis is what allows our
cognition to exceed the binary between unfree induction and necessary
yet empty deductions spinning in a frictionless void. What we are ex-
tending in the net is what makes it so that every deduction has some
minimal purchase and every induction is imperfectly redundant. We
are engaging a shadow realm of the consistency of concepts themselves,
constituted as data signs.
    When we ask the net to classify, we are indeed seeking a determinate
result: this is (or is not) an image of a squirrel. But to describe the net
as trained inductively to classify deductively is to miss the data–world
relationship about which the net is actually proposing something. This
relationship underlies the obsessive question of the “intelligence” dis-
course, but that discourse never focuses on the semiotics of the judg-
ments actually being performed by these nets. The net actually gives us
a hypothetical (“this could be a case of squirrelness”). This is important
to bear in mind, because the net’s squirrel function is not equivalent to
the human concept “squirrel,” for two reasons.
    First, the function that the net produces, f(x), cannot be better at
recognizing squirrel-like pixels than humans if it is identical to our
procedure for squirrel recognition. Yet a function is a concept, as Frege
famously argued, only when it has a truth-value.22 The truth-value in
this case is supplied not by the net but by the relationship between the
net’s hypothesis and human judgment. That is, what produces the de-
terminate judgment “this is a squirrel” is a relationship between data
and judgment, between the human manner of engaging the represen-
tation system in question and its computational counterpart. Note that
I do not say “between data and the world”: the net hypothesizes a judg-
ment, and that judgment is about the world. Determination is extended
here, and it is crucial that we not collapse that extension in describing
the activity of the net. It hypothesizes not about the world but about
potential judgmental relationships that could describe the world. If we

                       The Semiological Surround                         111

accept its judgment (even automatically), we are integrating hypothe-
ses into our representation of the world. The data hypothesis alters the
structure of representation. When we say that the net “classifies,” we
are talking about an interpretation of the net’s hypothetical judgment
(“this would be a squirrel if squirrelness = f(x),” “this is a case of squir-
rel in a world in which f(x) is squirrelness,” “this image contains f(x)”)
as a determinate judgment. The net may even be programmed to print
the string “yes, this image contains a squirrel,” but the underlying judg-
ment is still hypothetical, not “this is a squirrel” but “this could be a
case of squirrelness.” This is important not because the net is “wrong”
about the squirrel in the image; nets are better than humans at detect-
ing minor pixel-level differences. It is important because the entirety
of neural net–based judgments is a hypothesis about the relationship
between the world (“squirrel”) and data (“f(x)”). We miss this when we
confuse the net’s actual semiotic activity with the language into which
we translate it (or program it to pretranslate for us). By spreading the
hypothetical capacity of the net through the already-constituted digital
semiology that pervades daily life, we have created a kind of sublunar
animatronic expectation, the anticipation that the world is computa-
tional and will react to our desires in demediated ways. But the truth
of that situation is a welter of moving signs, a map laid over the world
made up of text and vectors, a dialectic of judgment in which we cannot
see even provisional conceptual shapes.
    When we hypothesize, we posit that the world coheres in such a way
that a specific case exists. The world in which we live is one in which
Napoleon existed. The world in which we live is one that behaves as if we
landed on the moon. (It is this little wedge between determination and
possibility [“as if”] that allows us to reverse hypotheses like the moon
landing.) A more than hypothetical establishment of fact is impossible
in terms of science, so it is not to the detriment of the net’s capacities
that we notice this distinction. Induction, we might say, always rests
on hypothesis, even if it works in localized environments like that of
the pixel.
    The distinction allows us to see the interface between the net’s hy-
pothesis and our own judgment—the result of which can of course be, in
turn, anything from denial to affirmation to hypothesis itself. The point
is not that nets “can’t do x” but rather what nets actually do, and that
they actually do it in semiotic combination with our own judgments.

112                     The Semiological Surround


Inferences that make up empirical claims rest on a computational in-
duction presented as a hypothesis. But the hypothesis is usually smug-
gled in, glossed over, hidden from view. This is the actual black box
effect, and it has nothing to do with the net, the math, the hardware. To
pierce it, all that is required is attention to the surface of the interaction,
which is a semiotic overlay. The semiotics of nets are not equivalent to
the semantics that humans ask nets to produce. What nets mean is up
to us, because what they say is hypothetical. But “up to us” means in-
tegrated into preexisting grooves of meaning and recognition. When
“we” impose or recognize meaning, it is not as psychological individuals
randomly assigning qualitative value to signs. Nets give us options for
interpretation, but interpretation isn’t voluntary. Nets give us forceful
hypotheses not because we collectively accept them but because they
run on the collective systems of signs that already have the force of so-
cial value in them. The social system of judgment is mirrored and then
extended into uncanny statistical regions in the hypothetical activity
of the net.
    This is what I call the data hypothesis. It is both the hypothesis that
data can be used to represent and meaningfully engage the undatafied
world—a fact that is demonstrated as much by our fear of harm as it is
by cases of success—and the fact that data used for learning in this way
are always hypothetical (I propose the data hypothesis as an alternative
to the “cybernetic hypothesis,”23 which appears to me to take the digi
tal transparency dream too seriously). Data represent not “the world”
but instead sets of judgments about the world, a fact that is captured
elegantly in the name for the discipline in which nets were engineered:
representation learning. How much “world” is in a representation is per-
haps the metaphysical question of modern thought, and its silhouette is
visible throughout the discourse of deep learning. Yet data science tends
to use a simplified notion of “ground truth”—and critics have hardly re-
sisted the metaphor, as we have seen—that the data hypothesis in this
double sense undermines. “Ground truth” is not “fact” but a separate
representation of fact in another semiotic system (usually language as
expressive of concepts). The point is not that we cannot stabilize nets
around accepted notions of truthful statements but rather that when
we do, we are black-boxing the dialogue between computation and lan-
guage that underlies all nets (including in visual applications). When-
ever we think in dualisms about digital systems—body and abstraction,

                       The Semiological Surround                       113

online and offline, cyberspace and meatspace—we are forgetting the
data hypothesis and looking past the complex interpretive surface to a
depth that does not exist. All the ghosts of AI live in this depth, and all
the analysis we can achieve lives on the surface.
   My proposal for the “data hypothesis” is meant to sync with Orit
Halpern’s notion of “beautiful data,” which shows how the dream of the
net, long before its algorithmic implementation, already configured a
world in which data streams are mutually interoperable and translat-
able, one that mimics the notion of the brain as such a transfer station,
but then distributed into the world, forming an aesthetic condition.24
Many things follow from that condition, including Halpern’s notion of
“derivativeness” in what we have called “surplus data”25 and what she
further calls the “smartness mandate.”26 Work on data is “derivative”
in the sense that a result obtained not from first-order empirical ob-
servation but from a representation of those observations is fed back
into the world through logistical channels, rendering the very world we
encounter “derivative” of the data that were supposed to be a represen-
tation of that world. This feedback loop tends to render all judgment
hypothetical. Rather than a world of stable fact about which hypotheses
are made, the world of beautiful data looks more like a serial hypothesis
from which the “world” is first crystallized in its (usually overlooked)
semiotic transformation with human systems of representation. As
Ramon Amaro has shown, race is one such derivative. Using Frantz
Fanon’s notion of “sociogeny,” which Amaro brilliantly points out is
comparable to the machine learning production, he is able to extend
the “bias” discussion far beyond its usual limits.27 What Sylvia Wynter,
similarly invoking sociogeny, called “man 2,” the constant symbolic
feedback-based construction of race in the modern era,28 gains an au-
tomatic extension and therefore falls directly into the problematic of
net semiosis in the data-hypothetical surround. The common channel of
finance, race, and computation is language. The data hypothesis already
contains language as a governing function, the start and end points of
any series of signs in their purchase on the world. This is the platform in
which generation becomes powerful beyond any critique—cognitive or
political—about its lack of fidelity to human creativity or truth making.
Generation need only amplify the standing semiological order to gain
entry; once there, it retroactively forces the question of how signifying
orders merge and how linguistic and computational forms get along.

114                    The Semiological Surround


Language Supervises Classification;
Language Is the Matrix of Generation
A great deal of the confusion over LLMs boils down to the simple fact
that language is the medium through which humans communicate
with their computational machines. This has always been true. When
Friedrich Kittler infamously called an essay “There Is No Software,”
 what he actually argued was that “[software] would not exist if computer
 systems did not—at least until now—need to coexist with an environ-
 ment of everyday languages.”29 This phrasing makes it sound as though
 computing systems can take or leave language, but that is not the case.
 Language does not merely “coexist” with computational systems—one
 need look no further than the input/output unit included in the “First
 Draft of a Report on the Edvac” assembled by John von Neumann (and
 generally taken to be the first explicit architecture for a stored-program
 computer) to see that no digital system has ever been “computational”
 in the absence of the linguistic environment.30 It is all too easy to think
 of the edge of the diagram, which often reads “I/O” for “input/output,”
 as not really of the computer. But it is very hard to accept what would fol-
 low, namely, a “computer” that does not render its computations at all, a
 true black box that could just as well be a slab of granite as a calculating
 engine. The relationship between computation and language is essential
 to every digital machine, a fact that was never successfully mapped by
 the symbolist/GOFAI versus connectionism/machine learning debate.
 Language and number may not get along in concepts or intuitions, and
 they may even contradict one another in some essential way or ways.
 Kittler seems to suggest that they are forced into a relationship that
 obscures the computational core of the computer. But it is rather their
 internal relationship that allows for computing in the first place. They
 are not grafted onto each other using some third thing (the name of
 which K ittler leaves out anyway).31 Just in the way that mathematics is
 the explanation of (among other things) numerical reasoning, comput-
 ing is the rendering of linguistically meaningful results. Language is the
 medium of computation.
     As the medium of computation in general, in the case of neural nets,
 language supervises classification. This statement is true for non
 machine categories too, but it is too easily forgotten when computation
 distracts us from language. If it is hard to distinguish the simulation of

                       The Semiological Surround                       115

induction and deduction in nets from their hypothetical core, it is even
harder—and perhaps impossible—to separate their manipulation of
language from language itself. This is because the role that labeling plays
in classifying nets is taken over by language itself in LLMs. Linguistic
applications in nets abandon the operation of supervision (the labeling
of squirrels by hand in the training data set) to arrive at basic results,
instead using the learning function to generate language, one word at
a time. This inversion is crucial to thinking with AI, because it collapses
the computation and its “environment”—the results of the computa
tion are language itself. Where an image-c lassifying net produces a
function that obviously is not the same as our conceptual grasp of the
object at hand, a language-learning net learns to generate nothing other
than language. The computational reproducibility of language is para
sitic on language itself, a complication we will only fully confront at the
end of this book. But the complication is already active at this stage
of analysis: attempts to distinguish in some essential way between the
“real” language of humans and the merely “apparent” language of nets
make little sense on their face and have disastrous c onsequences—as
we shall see—for the analysis of these systems.
    Nets learn language. The data in the image-processing net comprise
disaggregated icons, pixels representing color and place values that
can be repainted but only categorized by labels. The data in an LLM are
language—words, strings, tokens. When the numbers are converted
back to those strings, they are language. When the inversion of the clas-
sification function was first deployed, it led to the “hallucinations” of
Google Dream and was constantly compared to psychedelic painting.
Nets that process language run on this inversion as such. This is because
the classification function would make no sense in the case of language.
Why would anyone train a net on a linguistic data set, then put in the
word “ideology” and ask the net “is this the word ideology?” The ab-
straction that nets achieve—whether by induction or hypothesis—is
baked into the data when the data are language. Type and token already
correspond in language and in fact do not need to be separated in the
first instance.
    Language supervises classification, and language is the matrix of gen-
eration; these are the facts of the media situation of the present. We
often hear that nets can work on any sets of data, creating robust, large-
scale correlations. And that is true, of course.32 But the transformer

116                    The Semiological Surround


architecture—which to date is the only really successful generative pro-
gram for language—must be applied to data that do not need their own
labeling. What it does, which I will describe later, could also be used on
any data sets with some internal structure. But what would the use be of
an unsupervised set of correlations at the scale of hundreds of billions
or trillions of units? And if it is labeled, then it will be supervised by
language. Manual labeling of this scale of data set is prohibitive, and
automatic labeling will almost certainly rely on LLMs of some sort. All
representation leads back to language in computational representation
systems. Representation systems that are prelabeled in or as language
can be roped into use c ases. The internal world of LLMs is semiological:
language comes first and last, supervises and generates.
    The breakthrough that led to the current explosion of generative AI
is called the “attention mechanism,” which underlies the transformer
architecture, the T in GPT. The basis of the breakthrough—and of the
following account—was the “attention mechanism.”33 The mechanism
is diagrammed in Figure 1 in the introduction. Attention overcomes a
problem that the net approach to AI had always had in linguistic ap-
plications, namely, the problem of memory. Humans do not memorize
language; they use it. I do not have a static store of all the sentences
I’ve heard or read in my mind. I use language in the sense that I generate
meaning from the combination of rules (grammar) and other meanings
(words in grammatical context). The relationship between meaning and
rules does not become explicit by that use. Meaning surfaces but does
not explain itself.
    Early net-based approaches to language relied on memorization
(storage) over a sequence, leading to problems of misapplication, mem-
ory overload, and irrelevance. The most general format was the recur-
rent neural net (RNN),34 in which the output of the net was fed back
in as input, allowing the net to capture some of the structure in the
linguistic strings. But this quickly maxed out the memory capacity of
the grid and led to spotty language use as the net “forgot” pieces and
rules of language that were distant from its current input. The creation
of variably ranging memory in LSTM (long short-term memory) solved
part of this problem but also hit barriers.35 The attention mechanism
solves this problem by allowing the net to encode a one-to-a ll matrix
for each word in the data set. By including the positions of the words in
the “embedding” process (in which words are indexed to numbers), the

                      The Semiological Surround                       117

problem of memory is solved by packaging the semantic relationships
and their grammatical layout in a single “pretraining.” Rather than jam-
ming rules and words into some location, the net is allowed to “attend”
to real possibilities to which to move from its current word.
    One can think of this like a set of patterns preprogrammed into a
grid of lights. Touch one light, and one shape turns on; touch another,
and some other shape lights up. “Attend” to one word, and the grid’s val-
ues shift to specify each other word’s likelihood to be next. If the word
to which I am attending is see and the word before it is I, then nouns of
all kinds and the word that will light up, meaning their value will range
high. This set of higher values given a word in a sequence will be pooled
by a “temperature” feature—turned too high, this will produce too pre-
dictable a text, and too low, nonsense. But the Goldilocks temperature
will produce the very “everyday language” that the computation would
otherwise have as its environment.36
    The larger grid is massive, approximately fifty thousand tokens
(not all words, so that particles like -ing can be placed correctly, and
all learned by the weights) in the case of GPT-3, which was trained on
about one trillion tokens scraped from the web.37 The attention mech-
anism itself operates by creating three separate vectors (keys, queries,
and values) over a fixed length of text, then narrowing the potential
output on the basis of that calculation. In the resulting compression, if
the word the occurs, virtually any noun is a candidate to follow. But the
attention mechanism isolates a context so that the value of the word
prediction (in this book, for example) remains above the threshold, while
the word strawberry is much less likely. But note that the word straw-
berry just did occur in this text—this is the problem that earlier models
could not solve and that LLMs seem to have. A discussion of computa-
tional language seems not to invite the word strawberry, but language
is not mechanically localized in this manner. Strawberry might occur
meaningfully in virtually any linguistic context, and one may note that
the first text on AI, Turing’s 1950 paper “Computing Machinery and In-
telligence,” posed the question whether a machine could perhaps enjoy
strawberries and cream. Context is a highly relative concept with no
fixed borders. What LLMs do is generate language by reference to the
whole with respect to the part. They more or less prove one of Claude
Shannon’s foundational assumptions about language as an informa-
tion system, which is that it is ergodic: a long enough string reproduces

118                    The Semiological Surround


the probabilities of the whole. But it is actually the relation of part and
whole that proves crucial.
   At the top of the attention diagram, one can see the function soft-
max. This simple tool separates the values assigned to tokens by raising
some close to 1 and leveling the others close to 0. Justie and I described
this function as “indexical,”38 because it isolates and points to the final
candidate pool, ultimately allowing a single word to be pushed into
the next spot in the sequence. The pretraining process, together with the
attention mechanism, produces the pool of next words. The so-called
fine-tuning process, which takes the balance between whole and part
and specifies some target text set and/or function to specify the net,
then allows this general capacity to be targeted. Fine-tuning on a cor-
pus of novels, for example, should make a novel-producer. In the case of
ChatGPT, as previously mentioned, the refinement was even expanded
by reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), with scores
for good and bad answers fed back in. Models abound with specific fine-
tuned features: to write novels, to make recipes, to write code.
   Up to the present, there is no “classifying” function in or for LLMs.
The net produces, but does not tell us rules about, language. It uses lan-
guage. The underlying mechanism is surely different in kind from the
human use of language, but the property of generating meaning from
the combination of rules and other meaning is the same. And here we
can see why Chomsky, Bender, and LeCun are missing something cru-
cial. The only way to separate the “human” and “machine” versions of
language is to assume that language is primarily something other than
meaningful strings of words—syntax, for example, or reference, or in-
tent. If language is not really language unless it grasps or communicates
truth, then LLMs can safely be seen as toys. But these proposals exclude
some massive portion of human-generated language. If I miss some-
one’s intent in responding, is that not language? If I make a ground-
ing error—this is not a birch tree but an aspen—is this not language?
Language is the margin in which the fantastic demand that AI be inhu-
manly right and authentically wrong flourishes—but the dream must
also find us waking in that very margin, where capture and generation
are synthesized, where language is words on a page, material configura-
tion, and intent, reference, and the rest of it. No theory of meaning can
afford to pick this synthesis apart and start from just one side. “Syn-
thetic text” is a tautology.

                       The Semiological Surround                        119

    What these definitions exclude is far more fundamental to language
than the admittedly excellent uses of language that they include. Per-
haps language can be used to find the true or the good—but surely
speech or text is not first language when it achieves some goal of this
kind. Each of these notions is teleological, and each is completely re-
futed by the very existence of LLMs (although certainly the case against
them did not need LLMs to be plausible). What these frameworks all no-
tice is that LLMs isolate meaning from reference. In doing so—what these
frameworks miss—they gain iconic power. If the start or end point of
any data chain is a semantic unit, then generation in that mixed order
of signs becomes meaningful form independent of grounding. This also
suggests why we should sweep away the ladder of reference—fiction,
for example, is “grounded” in a sense. Reference is one achievement of
language, not its primary function—a lthough versions of it attend all
linguistic expressions. The power of the LLM lies in the fact that it mod-
els the other functions too, without which it would not be a general semio
logical operator, as it is quickly becoming.
    What is now being called “prompt engineering” lends support to this
point. Take, for example, the notion of a “stochastic chain-of-thought,”39
in which “emergent” reasoning is teased out of the model by showing it
the procedure to follow. (Since the time of writing, so-called “reasoning
models” with architectures based on this idea have been developed. No
extensive analysis of them was possible given the time constraints of
publication.) For example, in doing word problems in math, LLMs have
been seen to confuse the various parts of the problem. But if a similar
problem is given with the answer and a short description of how the
answer was achieved, the net spikes in ability. A nthropic’s Claude model
seems particularly built to solve puzzles and reason through longer
problems, creating a kind of inference-driven model that channels lan-
guage into a useful pattern, so that if a particular result is the only cor-
rect one, the pattern is more likely to pick it out.
    At the time of writing, the bubble of the LLM appears to be popping,
as no solution to so-called hallucination that would make these systems
trustworthy rational agents has emerged. But what if, in this cluster of
prediction, weights, words, and pathways, we actually have a version
of how all reference works? When I say “strawberry,” the linguistic path
from word to image and reality is so completely predetermined that no
work is felt. But if I had to invent the word strawberry, to invest it with

120                   The Semiological Surround


its semantic fullness, perhaps the only way would be to work through
a generative matrix that does not primarily and locally refer to “the
world” but alters itself internally to make that reference possible, open
at the borders to dialogue and adjustment but made up of tensor-like
structure internally.40 Language as a human property has both exten-
sive pathways and creative force—a too-narrow focus on reference and
intentionality tends to obscure language.
    The generative matrix of language has proven shockingly able to
make convincing images. If labeling is language overseeing classifi
cation and, flipping the script, language is the medium of GPT’s G
(generativity), then a combination of these two factors can bring the
hallucinatory aspects of image generation under partial control. Adobe’s
“generative fill” was perhaps the first widely used tool of this mixed-
mode sort, and many multimodal systems now exist. DALL-E has been
the most popular of the toy versions of these algorithms, alongside Mid
journey and Stable Diffusion. I will not spend much time on these sys-
tems, but I want to note that language governs the generation in their
cases too—indeed, they are called “text-conditional image generation”
systems41 or “text-g uided generative diffusion models.” Labeling added
to the generative matrix of language itself can create monsters or art. It
seems that this type of system will lead the way to a new kind of filmic
creativity between humans and machines in the immediate future, as in
the case of Coca-Cola’s AI-generated 2024 Christmas ad (and since then,
many ads besides). Generative language is the bootstrap by which these
systems lift themselves above a sea of noise, the semiotic backbone of
the digital mediation of so many areas of life today.
    Classification classifies representation, not the world. And text can
be used to generate images. But in the language-generation algorithm,
there is no a priori difference to speak of between the net’s manipula-
tion of data and the world those data represent. The language that a
model of language (even an LLM) produces is language, as text, but with
the formal features that we expect text to have to line up with speech.
There can be no clear separation between hypothesis and deduction,
synthetic and “real” text, human and machine language, for if a net spits
out a series of words that cohere as natural language, the difference be-
tween what language is and what it means collapses, as it does when we
speak or write successfully. The concept of a language “model” here gets
blurry, as a model must be compared to its target by means of language,

                       The Semiological Surround                         121

so that an infinite regress threatens. But that threat simply points to the
success of LLMs, not in “representing” language, but in participating in
it. All models are wrong, but some of them are generative.
    Only once we have isolated the language that is genuinely caught up
in nets can we see the contours of the problem I laid out at the begin-
ning of this book. LLMs force us to confront the problem of language
not as reference or communication but as the interface between form
and meaning, culture and art, ideology and insight. They are the most
complete version of computational semiology to the present, and that
is precisely because they instantiate language to a good approximation
of its digital-cultural form. The datafication of everything stands to
become qualitative, to form a linguistic-computational hinge for other
forms of data processing and the extensive text-first yet multimedia
interface of our daily lives and global social processes. All of this starts
with text. The text-based cultural form of language—not reasoning, not
cognition in the first instance—has often gone under the name “liter-
ary language.” We can now suggest that the first L in LLM might as well
stand for “literary.”

This page intentionally left blank
