      4


Large Literary Machines

Everyone seems to agree that form is involved in neural nets, and in
computation more generally. But we are ill equipped at present to deal
with forms that involve both computation and culture, partly because
of the conversation that never happened between cognitive science and
literary theory (see chapter 1). Form means both the developmental root
of some individual (morphē) and the external appearance of that same
individual (eidos).1 Perhaps it even means the calibration of those two
things, the stability of an identity through change and the total appear-
ance of that identity at any moment. In aesthetic analysis, form is the
singular presentation of some concrete object—a painting, a novel, a
song—but it is that singularity insofar as it communicates with some-
thing else. Form may bear meaning by convention, by genre, or it may
be that form and social life are irrevocably intertwined, as Theodor W.
Adorno thought. Formal experimentation in art is celebrated, while for-
mal analysis repeatedly revives and is drowned again in claims about
historical or material specificity.
    Meanwhile, form has two meanings in computational discourse as
well. As John Haugeland put it, summarizing the entire project of sym-
bolic AI, the “formalist’s motto” is “if you take care of the syntax, the se-
mantics will take care of itself.”2 Form here is morphē, the root and law of
what appears. A symbol system like a computer has a strict set of rules,
having nothing direct to do with what we want its symbols to mean.
Shannon’s quip that the “semantic aspects [of messages] are irrelevant
to the engineering problem” is the machine equivalent of the symbolic
doctrine. Form is sheer syntax, rule without respect to content.
    The only problem in a purely syntactical system is a weak one, falling
below the level of either first-order predicate logic or arithmetic—not
to speak of natural language. This truth was articulated by Kurt Goedel,
who proved that systems of any real semantic strength are formal if and
only if they do not achieve complete syntactic closure. Computation, in
particular, is open—it must borrow some rule from another system each
time it discovers something new. Form, then, names the disjunction


                                    123

124                     Large Literary Machines


between syntax and semantics—Haugeland might have agreed—but as
a unity. A formal system is one in which syntax and semantics are not
reducible to one another but in which they are nevertheless locally uni-
fied at every point. Form is the calibration of law and expression, not
one or the other.
    “Formal” tends to be pejorative, both in literary analysis and in
some sectors of data science. The goal, it seems, is to capture something
informal, the way things really are. But the oppositions that form im-
mediately calls to mind—form and content, form and function, and so
on—w ill not do. Debates on aesthetic form and computational form
have always been related, even if few attempts to articulate their rela-
tionship exist. When AI crossed into patently cultural territory, it made
this problem urgent.
    Three strands of argument proceed from this chapter. First, I argue
that this lack of communication on the problem of form has prevented
us from seeing that LLMs are “large literary machines,” in which the prob-
lems of structure and redundancy produce, but do not explain, the cul-
tural capture in data systems. The next chapter, which completes the
theoretical argument of the book, argues that the ability of LLMs to
generate what Saussure called “values” is based on the interaction of
two (at least partly) formal systems, mathematics and language, charac-
terized by incompleteness in Goedel’s sense and semiological inclusion
in the case of language. This “inclusion” is effected by what I call the
“poetic heat map” of the LLM, based in a reading of Roman Jakobson’s
“poetic function.” The result is a hybrid formal language calling for a
“general poetics” of meaning production that explores the shape of lan-
guage and other sign-systems without any presumptive clear distinc-
tion between human and machine, cognition and culture. The following
chapter argues that this space is currently an ideology machine.
    Anthropic’s LLM, Claude (named for Shannon, not Lévi-Strauss), is
divided into three services by size of model: haiku, sonnet, and opus. The
names are not accidental, for NLP engineers have been in the practice of
asking their machines for poetry since 1959, when the philosopher Max
Bense instructed his student Theo Lutz to create what is usually thought
of as the first algorithmic poem. The paper that launched GPT-3, six de-
cades later, included an appendix of generated poetry in several styles,
including that of Wallace Stevens.3 Poetry sticks to automated text. The

                          Large Literary Machines                           125

simplest reason for this affinity is a sort of version of the Eliza effect.
Because formal experimentation in poetry has been partly a matter of
 divorcing words from their usual context and creating language-internal
 “contexts” that seek to create meaning where none previously existed,
 machines can play this game better than other language games. The
 sparsity of poetic language and its paratactical features mean that al-
 most anything can be a poem. As Jessica P    ressman has argued, the mod-
 ernist tradition influenced the very media that came to generate poetry
 in this way, setting the expectation that is then exploited by machine
 poetry.4 Somewhere in the space between Kurt Schwitters’s decohering
 of German grammar in “An Anna Blume” and the L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E
 poetry movement, the possibility that poetry is the underlying form of
 language bubbles to the surface, at least as an ambition—one not trivi-
 ally tied to the history of NLP.
     The poet Allison Parrish has taken this insight furthest, arguing that
 “large language models can only write poetry.”5 She cites William Carlos
 Williams’s definition of poetry as “new form dealt with as a reality in it-
 self,” not so much the “fact of an emotion” (which prose conveys) as “the
 dynamization of emotion into a separate form.”6 Parrish concludes that,
 because a language model cannot make a statement of fact, emotional
 or otherwise, their outputs—regardless of what they might look like on
 the surface—are poetry, not prose.7
     Nevertheless, LLMs cannot write poems. Poetry is, Parrish suggests,
 language in new forms, the palette from which any real statement is
 drawn. A poem “is an intentional arrangement resulting from some ac-
 tion,” something knit together and realized from the background of po-
 tential poetry in language: the poem “unites poetry with an intention.
 So yes, a language model can indeed (and can only) write poetry, but only
 a person can write a poem.”8 When Bense asked his student Lutz to use
 an early mainframe computer in Ulm outside Stuttgart to create what
 would become the first algorithmic poem, they used a subset of words
 from K afka’s The Castle and a stripped-down German grammar. The year
 was 1959, and the result was stark: “Not every look is near / No village is
 late. / A castle is free and every framer is distant.” As the selected poem
 cycles through its quantitative register—not every, no, one, every—it cre-
 ates a “stochastic” walk through German, filtered by Kafka’s vocabulary.
 (Incidentally, this theory of text is far closer to stochastic parrotry than is

126                      Large Literary Machines


what LLMs do, and intentionally so.) If we take the basic unit of the poem
as pairs of “elementary sentences,” as Lutz does, then the “poem” consists
of 4,174,304 possibilities.9 We might think of this larger backdrop as the
“poetry,” in Parrish’s terms, and any handmade selection, such as Lutz’s
own, as a “poem” rendered by a decision. Bense’s school was rather more
interested in poetry than in poems, theoretically speaking.
   In the next few chapters, I want to follow the poetry thread rather
than the poem thread. I agree profoundly with Parrish’s characteriza-
tion of the poetic nature of LLMs, and I will expand this into a more
general theory of linguistic meaning in the next chapter.
   Parrish writes that “the output of a language model can never on its
own constitute a felicitous performative speech act.”10 Here she refers to
the idea of the performative speech act as outlined by J. L. Austin, who
famously set off illocution—speech that realizes its content, like “I now
pronounce you man and wife”—from constative and imperative types
of speech. This language falls under a larger theory of pragmatics, lan-
guage as it is used. But some acts of speech do not perform even when
they seem to have the relevant structure (Austin notes that no one is
confused about the marriage pronouncement if one is watching a play).
He calls these types of language use “poetic”:

   A performative utterance will, for example, be in a peculiar way
   hollow or void if said by an actor on the stage, or if introduced in a
   poem, or spoken in soliloquy. This applies in a similar manner to
   any and every utterance—a sea-change in special circumstances.
   Language in such circumstances is in special ways—intelligibly—
   used not seriously, but in ways parasitic upon its normal use—
   ways which fall under the doctrine of the etiolations of language.
   All this we are excluding from consideration.11

A long debate about “felicity” has mushroomed from this definition,
starting with the bitter conflict between philosophers Jacques Derrida
and John Searle.12 What Parrish argues, and which I will expand below,
is that felicity—like reference, like a poem—is a special case of poetry. Or
in other words, the LLM is a culture machine that captures the essence
of language, its poetic function.
    The “Wallace Stevens” poem that GPT-3 produced runs as follows:

                         Large Literary Machines                       127

   I must have shadows on the way
   If I am to walk I must have
   Each step taken slowly and alone
   To have it ready made


   And I must think in lines of grey
   To have dim thoughts to be my guide
   Must look on blue and green
   And never let my eye forget
   That color is my friend
   And purple must surround me too


   The yellow of the sun is no more
   Intrusive than the bluish snow
   That falls on all of us. I must have
   Grey thoughts and blue thoughts walk with me
   If I am to go away at all.13


The poem is rather more like T. S. Eliot in tone, although the use of color
seems closer to Stevens, to me. The rhyme of the final beat of the first
line in each of the first two stanzas also recalls the way Stevens slides
in and out of rhyme in his distinctive modernism. The authors of the
paper write that they gave only the title “Shadows on the Way” (as well
as the “like Wallace Stevens” prompt) to the system. No further editing
was applied, but they then note that “completions were truncated when
the model began to write a new title and author heading, or broke into
prose commentary.”14 This is a typical task–output problem in LLMs,
which often stop producing the specific task and revert to a kind of gen-
eral “language” task as they run—in this case going from formal poetry
back to “prose commentary.” Gathering the entire history of modern-
ist form, NLP, and the corpus of electronic poetry (among the nearly
two million web pages on which GPT-3 pretrained), we get a separation
of a poem from prose. If we follow Parrish, that separation—which she
thinks cannot be successful—occurs on the backdrop of a general poetic
form of language. It is this generalized poetry for which I wish to provide
a poetics in this chapter and the next.
    LLM, then, should stand for “large literary machine.” LLMs prove a

128                      Large Literary Machines


broad platform that literary theory has long held about language, that
it is first generative and only second communicative and referential.
This is what justifies the question of “form”—not individual forms or
genres but the formal aspect of language itself—in these systems. In-
deed, this is why literary theory is conjured by the LLM, which seems
to isolate, capture, and generate from what has long been called the
“literary” aspect of language, the quality that language has before it is
turned to some external use. If these systems “hallucinate,” this points
us firmly away from the ladder of reference. Truth telling is a specifica-
tion from the general “poetry” of linguistic form. Literary theorists have
argued in various ways for at least a century that the internal form and
structure of language itself is “literariness.” LLMs have stepped in just
as that theory is being pronounced dead to prove the case empirically.
     The notion of form falls willy-nilly into the gap between hallucina-
tion and reference. Matthew Kirschenbaum, reading a novel written
by a recurrent neural net driven across the country by “author” Ross
Goodwin, who generated 1 the Road in the genre of Kerouac’s On The
 Road, finds that neural nets are literary because they are form genera-
 tors. Kirschenbaum chalks up the (in this case actually) hallucinatory
 effect of a net writing in a genre that requires extensive, searching ex-
 periential reflection on perception that nevertheless conforms to basic
 laws of physics and assumptions about society to a “kind of fully acti-
 vated formalism, form unconstrained by matter, form whose manifes-
 tations have no necessary base in a prior substance or substrate. This is
 the peculiar poetry of vector space.”15 Surely this “full activation” and
 this freedom from substrate name the flexibility of neural nets over and
 above their limited digital predecessors. But these predecessors were
 themselves constantly described as formal—too formal, landing more
 on the inhumanly right than the authentically wrong. The dream of a
 perfectly rigid formalism suffers another defeat with the rise of an ac-
 tivated “form” whose engine of generation, the “transactions that give
 rise to form,” are, “for all intents and purposes, inapproachable.”16 There
 is no “getting under the hood to probe mechanism or engine.”17 Mecha-
 nistic interpretability, or any other localized probing of models, might
 never result in understanding. But perhaps that is only because we do
 not in advance possess a theory of the two forms that here merge—or
 that “activate” each other, to use Kirschenbaum’s term.
     Jonathan Kramnick and Anahid Nersessian write, “The effort to de-

                         Large Literary Machines                        129

fine form as something over and above the explanation through which
it comes into view and whose ends it serves has led to some confusion.”18
Forms, for them, are not “shared” between disciplines. But this creates
the following problem: forms are really shared between different areas
that may not share a disciplinary vocabulary. Putting the brakes on the
too-quick analogies between forms is well taken. But semiotic systems
must be formal enough to allow communication embedded in biologi-
cal substrates and extended in computational machines. The question is
not whether those areas all share form but how that sharing is possible.
    LLMs might, then, be form generators whose “substrate” is not the
relevant factor. The “materiality” that Kirschenbaum is seeking is just
as slippery in brains, nonmachinic language, and literature as it is when
AI is in the picture. Form is local, yet indexes the connection between
fields, domains, disciplines, and tasks.19 It names the feature of lan-
guage in which both rule and object, condition and thing, value and
variable, can be merged with one another. LLMs have gained entry to
this Janus-faced fact of language.
    When we attend to the problem of form in literary artifacts, regard
less of what or who generates them, we can endlessly confront the problem
of lateral sensemaking across fields, across disciplines, and in histori-
cal circumstances. But we can just as easily lose sight of the problem of
form in language itself, which LLMs touch more directly. However they
write a novel or a poem must be downstream from the form generation
they possess with respect to language as such. Hallucination names this
formal matrix, where a mathematical function captures the ability to
generate, which enables the ability to capture something—value, object,
meaning—setting off once again the chain of interpretation.
    This chain is what should have occupied the leg of the triad that
Charles Morris called “pragmatics” (language in use). As we saw in the
introduction, Morris established a highly influential division of lan-
guage into semantics, syntax, and pragmatics. These were tied to
Charles Sanders Peirce’s three essential features of the sign: that it re-
fers to something, that it relates to other signs, and that it gives rise to
further signs. Peirce himself called the study of the final feature “pure
rhetoric,”20 because he saw that interpretation was only partly, even sec-
ondarily, psychological. We do not choose randomly which signs emerge
from our exposure to previous signs.
    Communication is not some chaos separate from the formal clarity

130                      Large Literary Machines


of syntax and semantics. But this is how Morris made it seem. He re-
duced the triadic schema of the framer Peirce to a dualism between form
and historical, psychological language that fit with Carnap’s fidelity to
Frege. This is how we can get a proxy war between a “scientific” concep-
tion of intelligence that takes perceptual grounding to be primary (ref-
erence) and a “social” conception that takes intent as the crucial feature
(communication). In the scientific conception championed by Morris,
poetry and metaphysics float as foam on the substance of reference, the
dual achievement of syntax and semantics. This leaves “pragmatics” to
solve all the problems left in the wake of this arbitrary arrogation of
meaning to reference. The “ladder of reference” fails because linguistic
functions are not hierarchical. We might say, with McCulloch, that they
are heterarchical.
   Whenever we hear that AI is “conditioned by humans,” as laborers,
language users, subjects, we need to hear more than a salutary confir-
mation of the indomitable yet fragile human spirit. “Meaning” falls into
the gap in the broken triad, the space between syntax and semantics on
one side, pragmatics on the other. Symbolist AI and computer science
in general have followed the “capture” line of language, while the rise
of nets has—partly because the transformer architecture has allowed
a kind of “pure pragmatics” to be input—suggested that semantics can
be approached from the bottom up. Somehow, when we apply these sys-
tems, we get syntax “for free.” As becomes immediately clear, the term
meaning shifts wildly between the different poles as different systems
are implemented (though nothing will displace the scientific and social
dogmas about what counts as language in the first place). “Form” names
the problem here, as would a revised notion of what syntax really is—
something like a “form-r ich semantics.”
   We might begin to pick apart this mess by reversing the value-sign of
Hayles’s idea that LLMs possess a “systemic fragility of reference.”21 Ref-
erence just is fragile. Fragility is not a fault of machines but a feature of
knowing. And this is why meaning cannot reside in a single function of
language. But it is the generative matrix—in both the medium and the
mathematical senses, both active in LLMs—where meaning emerges.
Neural nets have upended the way we think about rules with respect to
their domains of application. In the case of language, this means that we
should be in for a radical revision of the notion of syntax.
   What we are ultimately reconciling here is that the generation of

                        Large Literary Machines                        131

meaning does not ipso facto entail the understanding. In language as we
use it, there is a precarious but usually quite open balance between un-
derstanding and generation. I speak, I understand. I generate words to
make you understand. You speak to help me understand. Yes, there are
pitfalls, but we create meaning by speaking and understanding. Mean-
ing is both the positive sequence of language—letters, words arranged
on paper or as pixels—and the value we assign to it, the concepts we
capture in and out of it. Nets—and this has been the whole history of
objection to them, from Marvin Minsky to today—might produce but
will never capture meaning. Their meaning is “ungrounded” at the level
of reference and intent. But when they produce language, this problem
becomes massively complex, because language is the means by which
we communicate meaning. Capture or insight—the concepts we try to
transmit to each other—is not available intersubjectively, except by
means of sign-systems, language first by volume and habit.
     The point is not that nets cannot “understand” what they generate or
what we say to them but rather that they reveal unknown regions of our
representative apparatus. And in fact, they do so in just the way that
Turing set for arithmetic: they tell us banalities that are predictable
 because we have already “calculated” them (strung them together as
 meaning, as in clichés, genres, and so on), and they have the potential
 to widen the net to the outer reaches of statistically improbable yet se-
 mantically rich language. This spectrum—what I think of as going from
 ideology to poetry—is the positive aspect of language, an algorithmic
 basis for a kind of “linguistic empiricism” (rather than “logical empiri
 cism”). A linguistic empiricism would have to start with the notion of
 redundancy.
     Classical information theory possesses a concept of language that is
 not primarily referential. Indeed, the implicit account of language given
 by Claude Shannon in 1948 does not prioritize a function of language at
 all. It suggests that language generates meaning by compression, which
 is a relation between whole and part that changes as expression occurs.
 Redundancy is thus a surprising candidate for the surface engine that
 runs generation.
     Shannon observed that all messages are patterns, selected out of a
 maximum set of possible states in which their particles could exist. In
 the case of English, his privileged example, the states may be viewed as
 any arrangement of letters, summing to 27! (with a space in addition to

132                       Large Literary Machines


the twenty-six letters of the Roman alphabet).22 This is called the “en-
tropy” of the system, as it corresponds to the way Ludwig Boltzmann
formalized the entropy concept, measuring the real state against the
sum of all possible states of the particles in a system. But not all patterns
are equally likely, for after all, u is far more probable after q than is z. The
totality of such “restraints,” as Shannon called them, form the “relative
entropy” of English, which Shannon famously estimated at 50 percent.
This means that if you remove half the letters from an English sentence
at random, it is usually recognizable to a reader, a fact that allows the
engineer to construct a channel that will be perfectly secure in the com-
munication of a message. And it is this relationship—redundancy to
noise—that interested Shannon above all. Given a “source” and a chan-
nel, the question was how to make them fit so that nothing would be lost
in the transmission. The result is the notion of bandwidth, with all its
import for our technical world.
    But there are further consequences: relative entropy is itself a way
of understanding language, or the stuff of any communication what-
soever. Shannon thinks of the problem as the “measure of freedom” in
selecting a message. The lower the freedom is, the greater is the redun-
dancy; the greater the freedom is, the more entropy there is. If I begin a
sentence, without any stated context, with the word “the,” the next word
is extremely difficult to determine. If, to use Warren Weaver’s example
from his famous introduction to Shannon’s paper, if I begin a sentence
“in the event,” the likelihood that the next word will be “that” is much
higher than that it will be “elephant.”23 I like to joke with my students
that the phrase “in the event elephant” is not a zero-probability se-
quence, for perhaps a circus has a show elephant and a work elephant,
and some crucial but tasty object has gone missing. The joke is poor,
but the import is real: there is no zero-probability sequence. As Weaver
himself points out with the phrase “Constantinople fishing nasty pink,”
anything can be introduced into English and given some meaning. (The
“Constantinople” phrase stands for this very fact.) The result is a pecu-
liar way of looking at language.
    Relative entropy is “the maximum compression possible when we
encode into the same alphabet,” Shannon writes.24 But this number
ranges only between 1 and 0, meaning absolute necessity and complete
randomness. Yet neither of these actually exists: there is no communica-
tion in which the next letter or word is absolutely necessary and no con-

                        Large Literary Machines                        133

text in which zero probability can be given. Redundancy is the primary
fact of communication, but its limit cases are regulative. The usual view
is that Shannon strips out all meaning from the messages, following
his famous quip that the “semantics aspects are irrelevant to the engi-
neering problem.”25 But what if “semantics”—that is, the generation of
meaning—is not the content of messages but instead the structure that
redundancy captures? Because redundancy can never be 100 percent or
0 percent, every message is related not to the absolute rules of the sys-
tem but to the actual structure of the rest of language26—Shannon’s
technical word for this is ergodic, displaying the structure of the whole
in any sufficiently long partial sequence. So long as we look at the prob-
lem through the lens of isolated semantics, syntax, and pragmatics, it
appears that Shannon has desemanticized communication.
    But the notion of redundancy should be seen differently. With it,
Shannon undermines Morris’s triad, because he shows how meaning is a
relationship of density, in which structure comes before rules or content.
Redundancy is primary, yet lacks conceptual clarity—every message can
be analyzed into rules (seen from the fictional standpoint of necessity)
or reference (seen from the standpoint of a questionable contingency
attached to the “world” it designates), yet neither is load bearing. What
activates the bandwidth notion is not these fictional standpoints, not
syntax and semantics, but the very notion of the trajectory of language
as structure as such. Each message is internally doubled; it appears once
as meaning and once as tendency, as capture and generation.27 Rather
than reducing language to just “whatever is in the machine,” Shannon
elevated the internal structure of language to a principle of any possible
technical communication. Because digital machines are paradigmatic
for his framework (which is universal), we can once again confirm, as
we saw in chapter 1, that digital machines and language are inextricably
linked. This is not an anthropological fact; it is rooted in whatever layer
of language and computation might be explanatory of either.
    The consequences of this implicit theory of language in Shannon
are far-reaching. But I want to stay with Shannon for one more mo-
ment. The computation and engineering of communication rely on the
capture–generate dialectic, not on the syntax–semantics distinction.
The latter distinction can be made! But only after the work of genera-
tion is done. If one tries to generate based on arbitrary designation of
meaning alone, or on pure rules, the dead end comes fast. We will soon

134                     Large Literary Machines


see how LLMs deploy this crucial fact. But at the level of the theory of
language, it suggests that Shannon, and everything downstream from
him, operates on a nonreferential theory of language. For machines to
communicate, they need to use language as it is internally structured,
not as it achieves something outside itself. Once we see this, we can see
that “meaning” resides not in one or the other part but in the relation-
ship of part and whole.
    Recent attempts to think about neural nets and language tend to
confirm this structural point I have argued for in Shannon’s concep-
tion. I think of these attempts as shifting the theory of language away
from both the ladder of reference and the syntax view and toward an
extended version of Shannon’s argument that language is redundant
pattern. The historical sources they draw on tend to stand on the side
of structuralism or literary formalism, not on the side of syntax or
“semantics” in the technical sense Frege and his followers gave to that
term. Instead of these, they push for a cultural notion of language,
one that is dynamic, internally self-determined. For that reason, they
tend to reach to structuralism or one of its cousins in thinking through
the problem of language and machines. The family of theories I lay out
in the rest of this chapter puts emphasis on the malleability of meaning
and its relation to structure, form, and pattern. I broadly agree with the
direction of this research and have taken great inspiration from the two
main examples I discuss: Lydia Liu’s and Juan Luis Gastaldi’s work. But
as we will see, I think the distributed structure they find in language on
the basis of its encounter with machines is not yet the explanation but
rather the result of that encounter.
    Lydia Liu, whose own reading of Shannon’s notion of “printed En-
glish” points out the depth of the structure and the dominance of the
regional specificities of English as an alphabet, a structure, and an ide-
ology,28 has drawn attention to one origin point for NLP that supports
a different theory of meaning altogether. Where Shannon relied on the
putative universality of English, philosopher Margaret Masterman,
working with Ludwig Wittgenstein’s expansion of pragmatics to uni-
versality (language is language in use, everyday language), suggested
that a real doctrine of language should be based on Chinese, as the
ideographic system “operates on combinatory logic, not propositional
logic.”29 Where the linearity of propositional logic lines up with the
syntax–semantics distinction for English, in classical Chinese, “logical

                         Large Literary Machines                         135

connections are made by creating and by combining combinators,—and
nearly all these combinators, in their primary function as elements,
have demonstrative (i.e. indexical) significance.”30 This type of indexi-
cal combination suggests to Liu that language, on Masterman’s account,
is generative. Rather than mere “polysemy,” Liu finds in Masterman a
distributed theory of meaning in which semantics is not the “value of a
symbol” (reference) but instead the set of relationships of an “umbrella”
or “fan” term to all of its potential meanings and their potential rela-
tionships to other terms.
    Liu argues that “Masterman is the first modern philosopher to push
the critique of Western metaphysics beyond what is possible by the
measure of alphabetical writing, and, unlike deconstruction, her trans-
lingual philosophical innovation refuses to stay within the bounds
of self-critique.”31 The consequence is that poststructuralism is here
pushed into the inevitable consequence of potential automation. For
Masterman, this alternate framework is far more promising for ma-
chine language than is the framework of analytical philosophy, and
for Liu, Masterman is thus more promising for the analysis of machine
learning than is Derrida: “machine learning and AI technologies have
been part of a major philosophical breakthrough even if their practi-
tioners remain unaware of it.”32 I am suggesting something similar
about Shannon here. The practice of computational language, from its
infancy to today, reflects a structuralist account of language that is not
limited to any positive doctrine yet in existence but requires its own
accounting. Breaking the hegemony of the ladder of reference is only the
first step in establishing that other account.
    The next step has been taken by Juan Luis Gastaldi, who has convinc
ingly argued that deep learning proves the “structuralist hypothesis.”
Gastaldi works carefully to compare the distributional hypothesis, the
result of the linguistic work done in the paradigm of parallel distrib-
uted processing, with classical linguistic structuralism, the theory of
language—and much else—that originated with the work of Ferdinand
de Saussure, and continued through that of Louis Hjelmslev, Émile
Benveniste, and Roman Jakobson, among others. This framework is
based on the notion that linguistics studies language as a “system,” in
Saussure’s word. Linguistics is not metaphysics, physics, or neurosci-
 ence. And the fact of language is twofold: its signs are “arbitrary” with
 respect to their designates (there is a “signifier” and a “signified” but no

136                     Large Literary Machines


“object” beyond the concept designated by the sign), and their meaning
is differential, determined with respect to the other constituents of the
system. Structure before reference, before syntax, before any other ex-
planatory principle.
    Gastaldi suggests that neural nets prove the structuralist hypothesis
and proposes “the first elements of a theoretical framework renewing
the structuralist program in the wake of recent NLP advances.”33 The
“distributional hypothesis,” he writes, maintains that “the meaning of
a word is determined by, or at least strongly correlated with, the multi-
ple (linguistic) contexts in which that word occurs (called its ‘distribu-
tion’),”34 which contradicts Chomsky’s alternative structural framework
(based, as we have seen, on syntax). Distributionalism, as the core of
the statistics view, is “above all a statement about the nature of lan-
guage itself, rather than about the capacities of linguistic agents.”35 In
a sense, it is shocking that structuralism has disappeared to the extent
that such a reminder is necessary. But LLMs prove the thesis irrevoca-
bly, for G
          astaldi, because their way of dealing with language shows that
its internal structure and its semantics are coconstitutive, as we will
explore in the next chapter.
    The central idea of distributional structuralism is that “linguistic
units are not immediately given in experience, but are, instead, the
formal result of a system of oppositional relations that can be estab-
lished, through linguistic analysis, at the level of the multiple supports
in which language is manifested.”36 Among the oppositions is the idea
of the paradigm and the syntagm, a kind of graph in which word sig-
nification and sequence are where the y and x axes meet. Meaning must
emerge there, where language is made and understanding occurs.
    Liu’s and Gastaldi’s proposals shift the playing field of language the-
ory to the empirical terrain established by LLMs. Whatever disagree-
ments might arise after this point, it should be said that distribution
and structure are crucial starting points. The amount of surprise in this
shift will depend on one’s disciplinary vantage point. If the surprise is
great for those in the cultural humanities at large, however, this must
be the result of a break in attention and rigor in the investigation of
representation systems in their overlap with language.
    I began this book by saying that LLMs force us to reexamine the rela-
tionship of language and culture, art and language as such, the problem,
in other words, of structure—the preexisting channels and relation-

                         Large Literary Machines                          137

ships in language and other representational systems—and form. Form
is both development and product, the law and its expression. But in
linguistic use, form tends, unlike structure, to mean articulated form,
the generation or existence of something unusual measured against
some generic constraint. That is why Kramnick and Nersessian, I think,
call attention to its relationship to explanation. Structure, too, is sup-
posed to serve as explanatory, as least in structuralism itself, but from
the other end. Structure generates; form captures. Both terms name the
spectrum from the way things usually are in language to the way they
can break free, show us something new, surprise us.
    Form and structure are the playing field of the LLM. I would say
that rather than “fully activating” formalism (Kirschenbaum) or “prov-
ing” the structuralist hypothesis (Gastaldi), they instantiate or realize
those theoretical frameworks, but without explanation. The idea of an
“explanatory AI” corresponds strictly to the limits of formalism and
structuralism, to whether and how form is explanatory and what struc-
ture turns out to be. Perhaps it is no accident that, after literary theory
clashed with form and structure, then forgot them, the “post-theory”
moment would be forced to confront its own history, paraded in front
of it as a digitalization of the language it held so dear. In the face of this
problem, poststructuralism has tended to become a humanism,37 re-
treating into phenomenological and other remaining corners as yet un-
touched by computation. The humanities cannot afford to live in those
margins, the remainder of humanism on which we can insist but which
we can never validate.
    Jonathan Culler opined some years ago that “theory sought to treat
the objects and events of culture as elements of so many ‘languages,’ so
it was concerned above all with the nature of language; and literature
was what language was when it was most deliberately and most ludi-
cally, most freely and most self-reflectively, being language.”38 Culler’s
polemic against the empirical status of “the literary” might be broad-
ened in the light of digital language. The situation that Culler diagnosed
was one in which “theory,” which had originally been called “literary
theory” because it had placed all other objects under the banner of the
literary, which had analytical priority in the investigation of culture at
large, had slowly abandoned literature. Surely that is more true today
than it was then, but the rather odd part of it is that the investigation
of language, and its literary properties, seems to have been lost in the

138                      Large Literary Machines


split. The project that Jakobson and others had spelled out was one that
put a literary function—most obvious in literature, but not necessarily
even that, and certainly everywhere in language as such—in the heart
of linguistics. He argued that phonology and the literary were bound
together, in fact, that they were what bound together an otherwise ar-
bitrary set of signs in language in the first place. But a parallel project
appeared in outline: the project of studying language in use, expres-
sion, ideology—in short, culture, although that had been momentarily
banned—from the standpoint of its literary function. In other words,
the possibility of a literary study not of literature especially but of lan-
guage in its various uses and systemic guises came into view. That study
would be something like a general rhetoric—or a general poetics, as I call
it—in the sense Aristotle (and equally Peirce) used the term, but one
attuned to the problems of structure, synthesis, and ideology. But this
discipline never took root. There is no group of theorists who study lan-
guage from the perspective of the literary. That situation cannot con-
tinue in the era of LLMs.
    When we attend to their interface, we find that language and com-
putation “share form” in the sense that Kramnick and Nersessian deny
can be taken for granted. The argument here shows that language and
computation fit with each other, because they share a kind of basic re-
flexivity that comes not from syntax but from poetics, not from con-
ceptual second-order affairs but from the first order of language (and
computation) itself. To elaborate this argument, I make an analogy be-
tween Jakobson’s idea of the “poetic function” of language and Goedel’s
proof that formal systems are “incomplete.” Sharing form, these two
particular systems are “interoperative,” I argue—one is incomplete, the
other ravenously inclusive, even totalizing. The play of these two forms
is the semiology of the present.
