      5


Computational Meaning
For a General Poetics

When Walter Benjamin spoke of “language as such,” he certainly did
not have anything quantitative in mind.1 But LLMs present a break-
through of quantity into the formal aspects of language: algorithmic
reproducibility in the linguistic field. This chapter argues that the at-
tention mechanism has created the first general interface between these
two formal systems, that computation and language share form—not as
a matter of assumption but as a technical achievement that requires a
theoretical explanation. “Attention” produces linguistic values the way
that Saussure predicted for human language. For this reason, I think it
is more important to accept this situation and try to understand why
this might be so, rather than dividing between human and machine lan-
guage or “synthetic” and some putatively nonsynthetic text.
    The transformer architecture is surely just the signal that these two
systems can get along. Others will likely come. But even at this early
date, we can see that language is poetic above all, even when it is com-
putational rather than conceptual. LLMs set linguistic value as Saussure
conceived of it, and the attention mechanism realizes a computational
of what Roman Jakobson developed to account for that value setting:
the “poetic function” of language. AI generates linguistic meaning not
by sound or writing but by computation. Poetics in general—rather than
poetry, or any other genre or function of language—counterintuitively
emerges from the theoretical war that cultural AI has touched off.
    For Jakobson, poetics was not restricted to actual literature or poetry
but was instead the emergence of structure in the first-order sequence
of language in use. Jakobson famously claimed that the poetic function
was a “message about the message,” not about the code (grammar), the
world, or anything else. The internal structure of meaning generation
makes the system of language resemble Kurt Goedel’s description of
a formal system. Both representation systems have larger first-order
functions from which second-order functions derive—metalanguage



                                   139

140                      Computational Meaning


and metamathematics can always be recast as poetics and numerical re-
lations, respectively. But where Goedel found a system that must always
reach outside its own structure to ground some new rule, Jakobson found
a greedy formal system that internalizes whatever it appears to borrow
from elsewhere. Jakobson wanted linguistics to claim poetics; I reverse
this argument, calling for a general poetics to study culture machines and
all other meaning as a general doctrine of representation that includes
and interacts with linguistics, mathematics, and engineering.
    I said in the last chapter that in Shannon’s understanding of redun-
dancy, the message always appears internally doubled. Lest this seem
mystical, or a trick, I want to unpack this notion as we approach the
question of how redundancy is captured by neural nets. If redundancy is
pattern, then, as we saw, there are sets of likelihoods for the next letter,
not a random juxtaposition of any letter next to any other. This holds
for words too, but it gets very complex very quickly. When I send a text
message, typing out “see you,” my phone suggests “there” and “then” as
possibilities. These two words are overwhelmingly more likely than any
others, with “at” coming next. But we have suddenly opened up the cal-
culation of redundancy to a much larger field. These “2-grams” (pairs of
words) present us with something like 50,000 × 50,000 raw possibilities
for combination, with the redundancies like “see you then” limiting this
overall field. But of course, language isn’t made of pairs of words; there
are also 3-grams, which launch us orders of magnitude higher in compu-
tational extension.2 So redundancy has levels, but the levels are not well
defined.3 Character redundancy is easily distinguished from word-level
redundancy, but this tells us little about how the two interact. When
we add LLMs to the picture, the redundancy is expanded to the level
of paragraph, and even genre, exponentiating not just the computation
but the riddle. What is redundancy?
    Redundancy goes by many names—pattern and signal are popular
overlays—but nonidentity is its basic feature. This nonidentity is not
its most commonly thought feature. That feature is probably repetition:
if I put my turn signal on when in a turn-only lane, the redundancy
achieved is meant to ensure that other drivers will not misconstrue my
intention. But the predictive aspect of redundancy—what will happen
next, both in my driving and in the response of other drivers—means
that identity is never given as such. Even when redundancy is thought

                         Computational Meaning                          141

of as density, force, or vector (which is what allows it to be predictive),
its identity is always broken across instances. Another way to say this
is that redundancy can never equal 1, a state of things for a divinity but
not for us. Anything less than 1 gives more than one possibility, but not
any possibility. We generate meaning by carving pathways through
these possibilities, but underlying the possibilities is the strict exclu-
sion of next-word identity. Setting equivalences requires flexibility; it
requires the things equated to be non-identical, so that generation may
offer some new identity, the capture of some equivalence.
    Even extremely simple, restricted sets of signs show this property. As
the upper middle class in the United States has taken up the challenge
of running marathons, bumper stickers have appeared on cars bearing
the decimal number “26.2” in an oval. The statement can be taken as
referential: “I, the owner of this car, have/do run this distance in miles.”
And so a second statement has emerged: “13.1,” the half marathon. There
are other possible signs in this set, but they are excluded (for now) for
social reasons: no one wants to brag about running 6.2 miles (ten kilo
meters, the next common race length), and not enough people run ultra
marathons, starting around fifty kilometers, for the stickers to sell (nor
is this the most appropriate way to signify ultra status socially, again
for the moment).4 So far, so good: some irritating Subaru drivers are
bragging about their fitness. But the “brag” is telling: even the simple
statement of distance (which itself is inferred from the numeral) shows
that the pattern of this sign can give rise to many other signs. We have
considered two, but the only currently used third sign in the set is “0.0.”
Laying aside the question of why one would buy and affix this annihi-
lating rejoinder to one’s car, we may note that “not running” is not the
message of this sign. It engages the whole set of literal race signs and
rejects them summarily. Perhaps those with “0.0” bumper stickers don’t
run, but that is not really the message, which I read more as “please
shut up.” Something surprising emerges from an unlikely next-numeral
generation, namely, a reversal of the sense of the entire preceding set of
signs and the capture of a whole social milieu by negation. Redundancy
is an unspecific name for this capture–generate dialectic, which mani-
fests here as irony.5
    This play with the ostentation of language and its underdetermined
meaning has long been the work of poetry. Peter Handke’s “The Lineup

142                     Computational Meaning


of First Football Club Nuremberg on the 27th of January, 1968” is the
type of the class:

                          WABRA
                       LEUPOLD POPP
           LUDWIG MÜLLER WENAUER BLANKENBURG
         STAREK STREHL BRUNGS HEINZ MÜLLER VOLKERT

                               Spielbeginn:
                                  15 Uhr

These words function as a poem only because they are placed under the
name of a poet. Their referential function is stripped to the point of
indexicality, the lineup on a particular day. If this image appeared on
a television screen, its informational content would dominate. When
Handke presents it, it becomes a literal presentation of the language it-
self. The German term for “lineup” is Aufstellung, “setting forward” or
presentation, which becomes the double meaning of the title by means
of the designation “poem.” The expectations of poetry function here to
show that names (symbols)—indexicality and iconicity presented in the
diagram of the soccer pitch with those names in their positions—can be
resignified. Poetry is resignification of this kind, and Handke captures it
well. The poem might as well be called “the poetic function,” as we shall
shortly see.
    But the reverse is not true, as R. C. Collingwood’s attempt to iso-
late the narrative core of T. S. Eliot’s “Sweeney among the Nightingales”
shows.6 Recall the first stanza of this notorious poem:

         Apeneck Sweeney spread his knees
         Letting his arms hang down to laugh,
         The zebra stripes along his jaw
         Swelling to maculate giraffe.

    Collingwood reconstructs “Sweeney” as the scene of a man who has
fallen asleep in a restaurant across from a convent, puzzled by his own
memory, dreaming of Agamemnon’s betrayal by Clytemnestra, while a
prostitute comes to sit on his knees. Collingwood observes pointedly
that “I had known and enjoyed the poem for years before I saw that

                         Computational Meaning                          143

this was what it was all about; and nevertheless I understood enough to
value it highly.”7 Even if the scene described is “correct,” the “reference”
of the poem is not captured by this isolation. Denotation and meaning
part company in poetry, but then, perhaps they never kept such close
company as we often assume.
    The sense of poetry exceeds reference, but the sense of reference
is rooted in poetry. “Maculate giraffe” cannot be interpreted without
remainder using a dictionary, but “Leupold Popp” refuses to remain
restricted to designation. The poetic function of language is more basic
than any reference it can achieve, because anything can be made “po-
etic” by what appears to be fiat but is really just the turning of the lan-
guage from capture to generation. Handke illustrates this reversibility
by taking the least “poetic” set of signs possible and rendering them,
unaltered, into a poem. LLMs grab this poetic function, and that is why
they are so powerful.
    Let us return to Gastaldi’s notion that neural nets demonstrate the
structuralist hypothesis and that, specifically, the process known as
word embedding proves that the pair paradigm/syntagm is crucial for
understanding language. The paradigm is imagined as a vertical axis of
equivalent words that may be chosen for a location along a horizontal
axis (the syntagm).8 Gastaldi and Pelissier write that “the mere exis-
tence of more than one member in a paradigm is an indication of the
fact that the content of those members is not identical, as subtle as
the difference may be.”9 The choice of one word—“ boy” over “lad”—can
be seen as determinative of the meaning of the chosen word; that is,
its placement in the sequence is part of its semantic value, in combi-
nation with its paradigmatic array. This is a paraphrase of Saussure’s
notion that meaning in language is “differential,” determined by the
overall structure and not localized in reference to something outside of
language as such. And Gastaldi and Pelissier point out that Shannon’s
information theory syncs well with this point, as there “the information
conveyed by a term is completely determined by its choice among a class
of other possible terms.”10 This information-theoretical, structuralist
account of language is realized by the way language is datafied for use
in machine learning.
    What should a net learn about language? This question is far less sim-
ple than it seems. A major breakthrough came when, rather than asking
nets to learn given lengths of “context” and reinsert them into their

144                       Computational Meaning




Figure 7. Louis Hjelmslev’s diagram of the syntagmatic and paradigmatic
axes of language. From Gastaldi and Pelissier, “Calculus of Language,” 574.


input (recurrent neural nets) or to compare different contexts (using
long short-term memory) (for both, see chapter 2), Tomáš M      ikolov and
his team asked nets simply to lay out the relationships between words
as vectors. Vector semantics is a form of word embedding in which de-
pendencies in meaning are laid out in a “continuous” vector space (Fig-
ure 8). The generalization “capital city” is easy for me to impose and
search for, if necessary, conceptually. But what length of string would
allow a net to find the relationship China:Beijing::Portugal:x? It turned
out that not “context” but rather computational similarity was the issue
here. As Mikolov et al. explain, “somewhat surprisingly, it was found
that similarity of word representations goes beyond simple syntactic
regularities. Using a word offset technique wherein simple algebraic
operations are performed on the word vectors, it was shown for example
that vector(“King”) − vector(“Man”) + vector(“Woman”) results in a vec-
tor that is closest to the vector representation of the word Queen.”11 This
example has become famous, as it demonstrates the ability of vector
addition to find not formal regularity between variables (grammatical
functions) but meaningful relations between words.12 These vector-
words can have “multiple degrees of similarity,” including (in the case of
inflected languages) the intricacies of conjugation, cases, and so forth,
so that a single lexical entry can have dozens of forms.13 As the team ob-
served, there are many examples of phrases that are hard to learn if we
impose some representational assumptions on language. Their examples
include “Boston Globe,” “Air Canada,” and “Toronto Maple Leafs.”14 The
first example is “not a natural combination of the meanings of ‘Boston’
and ‘Globe,’ ” they write, but the vectors capture the fact of their associa

                         Computational Meaning                           145




Figure 8. Capital city analogies in vector-semantic space. From Tomas
Mikolov et al., “Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and Their
Compositionality,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26
(2013): 5, https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2013/hash/9aa42b31882ec039965f3c
4923ce901b-Abstract.html.


tion.15 It is worth pausing over this point for just a moment, to see the
intuitive picture of meaning that emerges from this apparent capture.
    Let’s say we have two learned vectors, and let’s take a toy example
that is easy to see. We have the word kid, which is valued as [0.2, −3,
445], and another, tot, which falls nearby on the plot. We look and see
that the first “dimension” in the vector is close, so it seems as though
perhaps the paradigm “kid, tot, youngster, . . . , n” is captured in that di-
mension.16 Now we see that there’s another vector, this one for goat, and
it’s also nearby, but along a different dimension. So it appears now that
“goat/kid, . . . , n” is captured by some other dimension—the angle plot-
ted is the result of these dimensions intersecting. The picture of mean-
ing that arises in vector semantics is one in which n dimensions form
a continuous space in which intersecting points, falling along curves,
represent meaning. Melanie Mitchell describes the intuition this way:

146                     Computational Meaning


“once all the words in the vocabulary are properly placed in the semantic
space, the meaning of a word can be represented by its location in this
space—that is, by the coordinates defining its word vector.” As we can
see in Figure 8, this is not restricted to semantics—syntactic informa-
tion may also be captured along such curves, with a dimension in the
vector potentially representing -ly for each verb that should be adverbi-
alized, and so on.
     This thought experiment is widespread, tempting, and unconfirmed.
Because we cannot think in high dimensions, the only way to test this
hypothesis is to break out pieces of the net in its trained state and at-
tempt to reconstruct which dimensions might capture which meanings
or features. This type of thing was done, with some success, through
the 2010s on deep convolutional neural nets.17 But the coordinate space
is cut into however many values are in each vector, meaning that we
cannot imagine it properly. The values that align do so in a smooth
“space” that is far beyond anything our three-dimensional vision can
“see.” Meaning is taken to be the confluence of these many dimensions,
shapes on a map with potentially hundreds, or thousands, of axes.
     Attempts to confirm this intuition have been halting, and it is easy
to understand why.18 Because vector semantics at best captures some
aspects of meaning, translating between high-dimensional vectors and
everyday semantics could seem like wasted effort, especially if newer
models capture more meaning, more fluidity. Yet the thought experi-
ment will not stay down: something about the idea of “dimensions of
meaning” seems important, in keeping with the statistical view of lan-
guage we saw in chapter 1. By opening up the function, literally placing
fewer hand-coded restrictions on how it construes its training data,
Mikolov and his team went against the strong intuition that a lan-
 guage algorithm needed to imitate some aspect of language formally.
     A great deal of progress has been made in NLP by removing assump-
 tions about what language is. Robert Mercer, an early practitioner of
 this type of datafication of language, famously quipped that “every time
 I fire a linguist, the performance of the speech recognizer goes up.”19
 The same spirit may be found in Andrej Karpathy’s article “The Unrea-
 sonable Effectiveness of Recurrent Neural Nets,” which details how
 data have overcome understanding and grammar in producing some-
 thing like natural language—a widely read version of the statistics view
 of language.

                        Computational Meaning                          147

    Word embedding—and the transformer architecture, as we are about
to see—takes this tendency even further, unraveling rules and recur-
sivity at every turn. But we can note immediately that the removals
are happening in the computational techniques, not in the language.
(In fact, it is unclear what it would mean to remove recursivity from
language.) When Mikolov et al. write that it is not “natural” to combine
“Boston” and “Globe,” and we hear of the “unreasonable effectiveness”
of the data processing of language, we should first and foremost note
what the assumption is.20 In fact, for an American English speaker,
“Boston Globe” is perfectly natural! I do not blink when I hear or pro-
duce this phrase. The underlying assumption that it is not natural is not
about language at all; it is about language when it is used narrowly to
represent the physical world. Recurrent neural nets were “unreason-
ably” effective only on the backdrop of the somewhat strange idea that
computation would have to mimic syntax rather than aggregating and
relating units within actual written language. This idea was a dual leg-
acy of the Chomskyan regime of language and the symbolist regime of
AI. Recursion is always possible in language, but it is not the point at
which computation and language touch.
    Gastaldi and Pelissier use the resulting vector space to show how
Saussure’s differential notion of language is proven. The probability of
the word boy in English (0.00010) tells us nothing about its meaning,
they write, even if compared to other syntagmatic words in a sequence,
like no (~0.00145) and down (~0.00067).21 But if we compare it to its para
digmatic array (including girl [~0.00013] and man [~0.00063]), “then the
resulting distribution becomes semantically relevant.”22 Rather than
the meaning of the term boy coming from an inductive process by which
we observe boys, assign a string of symbols to the resulting concept,
and then apply it where appropriate, the meaning is made up of the
structure. And that structure is computationally available as the place-
ment of the paradigm (its position in the syntagm) in its relationship
to the vector similarities in that very paradigm. Gastaldi and Pelissier
conclude that “through the derivation of paradigmatic relations, the
structuralist approach can capture both syntactic and semantic prop-
erties of language as the result of one and the same procedure.” This
is in strict analogy to word embedding, which also “exhibits this joint
treatment of syntax and semantics.”23 In other words, data science itself
has proved that syntax and semantics are not separate registers with

148                     Computational Meaning


different mathematics, nor are they different areas in language. They
are both partial expressions of the joint action of paradigm and syn-
tagm, a pairing that only fires together, not separately. But word2vec
and similar semantic nets neither prove Saussure’s differential hypothe
sis nor produce fluid language that can itself confer values or meanings
on words. The LLM does.
    LLMs exceed the realm of word embedding, injecting much higher
levels of redundancy and meaning into generated language. They gener-
ate “qualities” of language (icons, in Charles Sanders Peirce’s technical
sense), participating in “the literary aspect . . . of language where lan-
guage’s object domain is itself.”24 It is this literary aspect, the poetic
function of language, that literally creates the values of words in a lan-
guage model.
    The 2018 paper that touched off the GPT craze, “Attention Is All You
Need,” continued the trajectory we are following here. The attention
mechanism is there presented as containing “no recurrence and no con-
volution,”25 and its power derives in great part from this lack of com-
plications or from its presumptions about the best way to capture the
structure of language.26 “Attention” turns out to be a simple, but very
extensive, scanning process, and the result is language—or, let’s say,
language the way Saussure thought of it.
    Let’s take the case of GPT-3, because ChatGPT, at the point of its ex-
plosion into public consciousness, ran on that model. GPT-3 was trained
on roughly one trillion tokens, as we’ve seen, and when you prompt the
system, it generates the next word until it has responded to your query.
It lacks, as we have seen, symbolic throughput, intelligence, and much
else—but it goes far beyond the reach of vector semantics, and “at-
tention” is what allows this. The input data are fed into the system as
sequences—we saw some of those data in chapter 1—and we can think
of sequences mostly as sentences, although there are also lists, frag-
ments, and other strings. This input is first fed to a tokenizer that sets
the “vocabulary” of the system, the number of meaningful units it will
use. GPT-3 has approximately fifty thousand of these, and the tokenizer
essentially just sorts the input into terms. What happens next is what
allows the model to produce language.
    “Attention” is a metaphor for the following process.27 The input se-
quences are fed separately through three matrixes, which are called

                         Computational Meaning                          149

“queries,” “keys,” and “values” (QKV). Let’s say that, somewhere in the
pretraining process, we feed in a sequence that says “Ohne Anmeldung
Kostenlos Viele Browsergames. Jetzt online spielen. id name publisher
region languages group imagesize serial titleid imgcrc filename re-
leasename trimmedsize firmware type card; 2497:,” a real sequence of
ChatGPT training data taken from the paper that forced ChatGPT to spit
out some memorized training data by prompting the system to repeat
the word “poem” forever. (The German phrase translates as “play lots of
browser games for free without signing up” before the markup string
begins.) The string has some c urious features. It’s clearly copy from a
German website that promises to let you play games in your browser
without logging in, followed by markup language that is only partly
human-readable but is in the default pseudo-English of coding. Some
punctuation is irregular. This sentence is now used to update the model
weights—and so is every other string of input in the vast data set.
    “Ohne Anmeldung Kostlenlos” is treated as a query, a vector that is
multiplied by the “keys”—initially the same vector, updating as more
input pours in—a nd resulting in the “values” vector, which is now
weighted in such a way as to contain information about language that
can be used to predict the next word. The QKV idea comes from database
retrieval, and it is easiest to understand in that context. When you type
“romcom Isla fisher” into Netflix, your prompt is a query that is compared
to the keys—the metadata about every movie file in the database—to
produce the “values,” the results that surface in order of relevance (by de-
fault) to your query. The same happens if I put “Melville capitalism” into
a library search. But there are two differences in the case of a language
model: first, the QKV matrixes are learned, whereas in databases, the
keys are manually set by data entry; second, what the model is learning
is information about words, from words, to produce words.
    Cameron Buckner sums up this view of the attention mechanism
nicely when he says that “the goal is not to look up a value stored in
a database location, but rather to understand how each element in an
input sequence affects the ‘meaning’ of every other element in an input
sequence.”28 This is perhaps the clearest reason that the statistics ap-
proach to language meaning is ascendant, for this statement appears
to vindicate Firth’s dictum that “you shall know a word by the com-
pany it keeps!” The database metaphor—for that is, in the end, what

150                     Computational Meaning


it is—suggests that we understand language in terms of attention and
relevance. But the architecture is more fundamental than the metaphor,
and a major reason for not accepting the theoretical consequences of
this heuristic is that “attention” is simply not any kind of explanation
for the generation of meaning. What needs to be unpacked is what “rele
vance” means in the first place.
    When I prompt an LLM, the system indeed transforms my prompt
into a query (things may be added or transformed along the way), com-
pares that query to the learned weights of the model—the keys and
values—and then produces a candidate pool of next words as the speci-
fied values for response. Everything else that happens at this stage—the
type of search that is used to produce that pool, the probabilistic meth-
ods to get at those words, the RLHF-induced biases for some of those
words over others—is downstream from the core model, made up of the
vocabulary from the tokenizer and the weights. This means that when I
prompt the system, it can “attend” to the string I put in and compare it to
a larger, “attended to” matrix, effectively comparing my query to all the
values of all the queries it saw during pretraining. The output, then, is a
comparison of some specific language to what, for the model, is “all” of
language. But that “all” has been learned by this same attention mecha-
nism, and that is where the power of the system really resides.
    Let’s go back to our “ohne Anmeldung Kostenlos” string. If that string
is fed into word2vec, it will be placed in the continuous vector space that
Mikolov et al. described and that Gastaldi and Pellisier elegantly com-
pared to paradigms in structuralism. It seems clear that “next-word pre-
diction,” by contrast, is an attempt to create syntagms, chains of words
strung together in meaningful sequences. (The relevance—indeed, in
extreme cases, the existence—of such chains is what the syntax group
denies is productive of meaning.)
    When this string is fed into a transformer, something different hap-
pens. Suppose we are halfway through the pretraining so that the ap-
proximately fifty thousand tokens of the vocabulary are already set and
five hundred million tokens have been “attended to” before the system
sees “ohne Anmeldung Kostenlos.” As this string is fed in, it is treated as
a query vector and compared to the keys, where perhaps “ohne” (without)
has already occurred hundreds of times, setting its value. As each token
in this sequence is processed, the value matrix is updated along with
the keys. The query effectively asks which words, given the information

                         Computational Meaning                            151

about the words learned so far—the keys—are relevant to the query. A
block of such processes is called an attention head, and multihead atten-
tion is simply the parallel use of hundreds of such heads, which allows
for the processing of large data sets. The result is that if I print the high-
est value at this point, I should get “spielen” (play), with the comparison
containing the possibility that something will come before it—because
German grammar in this case demands that it come last in the sentence.
That general value can then be compared, after training, to a new query,
the prompt, that activates the other mechanisms—decoding and every-
thing downstream from there. The placement of a word in a meaningful
sequence is an interaction of the overall model and the specific context:
langue and parole.
   The result of the attention mechanism in setting the pretrained val-
ues is a process of taking all the words in the vocabulary and iteratively
extracting information about those words from random sequences of
words that do and do not contain them. For every word in the vocabu-
lary, the weights extract information, not from other individual words,
but instead from “sequences.” The term sequence houses every possible
generic distinction in language, however, from the mere “sentence” to
every mood, every grammatical turn, and even the distinctive markers
of which words belong to which genre, use-context, and more. The sys-
tem thus creates an each-to-all matrix for a vocabulary slightly larger
than all the words typically used in English that appears to contain a lot
of high-level structural information. Rather than simply adding syntag-
matic information to paradigmatic arrays, attention appears to process
and then produce language before the separation of synonyms and se-
quences. It is possible to grab the “next word” only because of the den-
sity of the information captured in this structure. Rather than building
language from the bottom up—whether we think of that floor as pho-
nemes, reference, or anything else—it seems, instead, that weighting
words by means of sequences is what is effective. One can indeed see
why this seems like confirmation of distributional semantics. After all,
the correct placement of words has been more or less learned from their
use in a very large corpus. But I would like to suggest that it is not “se-
mantics,” or at least not semantics alone, that the system has learned.
Instead, it is just what the engineers labeled it: values.
   Saussure—we can recall from chapter 1—thinks that meaning is
negative. Though each term in a chain of signifiers corresponds to some

152                         Computational Meaning




Figure 9. A re-creation of Saussure’s “Illustration of the System of Language
along Two Axes.” Originally from Saussure et al., Course in General Linguistics, 114.


signified, its designation—its referential aspect—does not exhaust, and
in fact does not determine, its value. He writes that “language is a sys-
tem of interdependent terms in which the value of each term results
solely from the simultaneous presence of the others, as in the diagram”
(Figure 9). We called this the differential hypothesis, marking it off from
the distributional hypothesis of the statistics approach. To the extent
that the distributional approach is rooted in a picture of semantics—
and we have seen that some of its advocates would like to extend it to
probabilistic syntax as well—it tends to imagine that statistical predic-
tion captures word meaning. Saussure suggests that word meaning is the
result of the total relationship of each word not only to every other word
but also to the very slow advance of the change in the language. And
change comes from words being strung together. “Value” is a singular
point made up of all these dimensions in their totality. There is little
precedent for thinking that this value could be computed, although as
we will see in a moment, Jakobson showed some interest in this idea.
    A version of this totality—and to be sure, it is not a copy of language,
whatever that would even mean—is produced in the attentional ma-
trix. Saussure calls language “in a manner of speaking . . . a type of
algebra consisting solely of complex terms. . . . Everywhere and always
there is the same complex equilibrium of terms that mutually condi-
tion each other. Putting it another way, language is a form and not a
substance.”29 Form, in this sense, is neither morphe or syntax nor mere
expression or statistics but instead the internal relation of each to all
and all to all along a separate dimension, time. The “freedom” of the
choice of the message that Shannon’s theory envisions is a function of
linguistic time, in this sense. (In the technical language of semiotics,
the mutual conditioning of language strung together in speech or text
as new language, and the established “corpus,” is the interpretant, the
sign that arises from a previous sign; see chapter 1.) For Saussure, this

                         Computational Meaning                           153

valuation process is internally contradictory, because a “value” must be
exchangeable for something like it as well as something unlike it. A euro,
for example, can be exchanged for 1.15 dollars (or 10 euro-cent pieces), or
it can be exchanged for a fixed quantity of bread, to use Saussure’s exam-
ple. Whatever a word signifies—its mental content, its semantics—“ its
content is really fixed only by the concurrence of everything that exists
outside it.”30 The result is that, in language—if not in our minds—“there
are only differences without positive terms.”31 Meaning is the placement
of a term in a system characterized by this split between like (concepts)
and unlike (sequences). As we saw in chapter 1, this mutual valuation
process without final-state positive terms is a hallmark of dialectical
thought.32
    We can also make a final remark on the bias problem here: removing
terms will have an effect on nearby values, which is why the “stochastic
parrots” paper found that the removal of slurs dampened the ability of
the model to refer in any way to the group pejoratively referred to by the
slurs. If language is systematic, the problem is not that what we get from
a numerical capture of the system is “not language” but that it accurately
captures a high-dimensional real bias. Such a tool seems highly useful
for an empirical study of bias and indeed quite risky to deploy in any
kind of setting where output is published without vetting.
    The attention mechanism performs a version of this valuation op-
eration quantitatively. By attending to larger structural features of se-
quences of language, it confers numerical values on words, setting these
words as a vocabulary in a systemic relationship to an unspecified set
of structural features that are “all complex terms,” as Saussure puts it.
This means that the outputs of LLMs are valuations of words in Saussure’s
sense. This, I think, is why LLMs cannot be said to be doing something
“other” than language in a strict sense. What they do might be limited
in other ways: it might be idiosyncratic to the current architectures in
use, for example, or there could be features of the “unfathomable” data
set that underspecify or overspecify some values in the output.33 But
we are already beginning to see downward pressure on language use
from these systems. One has to write now in such a way as to seem not
to sound like ChatGPT or Claude—this effort is a set of complex terms,
a “style” (or an ideology, as I shall shortly call it), altering word-choice
valuation acts that humans undertake. When we write now, we write in
a language system that includes LLM language. This is not a “delusion,”

154                          Computational Meaning


not just the Eliza effect; this is language in the age of its algorithmic
reproducibility.
    “Ohne Anmeldung Kostenlos . . . spielen” is hardly poetry. But com-
pare this phrase—markup language and all—to a new version of “Shad-
ows on the Way,” the Wallace Stevens poem that GPT-3 generated for
its creators. I prompted Claude (Sonnet) to reproduce that poem, and it
gave me this:

      In shimmering summer’s green-tided path,


      Where flickerings of sunlight dance revelries,
      Reality reposes in its silk pavilion, half
      Adorned by dreaming shadows of sycamore trees.


      Each murmuring rill utters the First Idea,
      An ancient whisper glimpsed between the rays.
      Profound is the parable of this verdant sphere—
      The poetry of being exists along these leafy ways.


Claude also automatically provided this explanation of the poem’s gen
eration, which I did not ask for: “I attempted to elevate the diction with
polysyllabic words, compound adjectives, and lexical inversions/
ambiguities in the Stevens tradition. There are more abstracted phil-
osophical musings, dense natural imagery, and mythological allusions
as well.” This version of the poem is, to my eye, far more successful
than the original (see the poem in chapter 4). Other than the largely
correct reasons given here by the system itself, the capitalized phrase
“First Idea” is taken directly from Stevens’s “Notes Towards a Supreme
Fiction,” where it describes an underived, primary sense of things—yet
using it in a derivative way also sneakily supports the Stevens-y voice.
Perhaps it is possible to puncture the impression, but that does not re-
ally concern me. One may decide that this is poetic language but not a
poem, following Parrish, or we may collectively begin to include gener-
ative work as part of the social art process. The crucial thing to realize
is that the attention matrix is responsible for this poem just as much as
it is for the ability of the system to produce gaming ads for Germans.
    Stevens is an interesting choice for such a paradigmatic role, to my
mind. His language is sparse and elevated, and it shifts back and forth
between rhyme and something closer to William Carlos Williams’s

                         Computational Meaning                            155

famous “variable foot,” something prosodic but without traditional
 scansion. The language is filled with warmth, with especially color play-
 ing a huge role. As we are about to see, that type of poetic language can
 be thought of as language about language itself.
     The attention mechanism is an entry point of computational lan-
 guage, not into poetry as art, but into the poetic function of language
 as such. That function, which Roman Jakobson famously brought to
 light, pervades language. It is the general form of the complex variable in
 Saussure’s sense, the structure that confers value. The attention mech-
  anism is probably just one way—we do not yet know of any others—to
  make this function computationally manipulable. In what follows, I
  argue that this general poetic function can be computational, and I call
  for a general poetics that studies language from this new vantage point.
     Once we have seen that reference is not before the other functions of
  language, we can ask how the functions converge to create meaning—
  and also to refer. Jakobson placed the problem of “value” in what he
  called the “poetic function,” and it is this poetic function that, I now
  argue, allows language to share form with computation.
     Jakobson famously divided language into six functions correspond-
  ing to six factors in communication. He based the layout of his diagrams
  on Shannon’s diagram of the universal communication situation. (The
  two diagrams cannot be overlaid, however, as Shannon’s diagram
  perches on the “contact/phatic” part of Jakobson’s diagrams.) Jakobson
  points to types of expression that express one or the other function. The
  epic address “O!” along with all uses of the vocative case emphasize the
  conative function—emphasizing the second person, the addressee—
  for example, and a common use of the phatic function is the telephonic
  “you’re breaking up; can you hear me?” But for our purposes, the referen-
  tial, metalingual, and poetic functions are the most important.
     Reference is imagined simply as “denotative,” the application of a
  signifier to a signified. It is general but not restricted to some “correct”
  set of messages about the “world,” in keeping with Jakobson’s dedica-
  tion to Saussure. Signification and reference should not be confused—
  when reference is imagined as fundamental, dualism ensues, as in the
  case when logical positivism opposed reference and “poetry.” Jakobson
  shows that the complementary function to poetry is not reference but
  metalanguage. Metalanguage is the set of messages about the code of
  language (“what did you mean by x?”; “are pugnacious and pugilistic syno
  nyms?”), and the poetic function is the set of messages “about the

Figure 10. Re-creations of Roman Jakobson’s diagrams of the factors and
functions of language, shown with Claude Shannon’s diagram of the general
situation for any communication. Originally from Shannon and Weaver,
Mathematical Theory of Communication, and Roman Jakobson, “Linguistics
and Poetics,” in Linguistics and Poetics (Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, 2010),
18–51, https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110802122.18.

                        Computational Meaning                          157

message” itself. I have tipped my hand by showing that all messages
have the ability to be about themselves, but we will follow Jakobson’s
track here, as far as it will take us, in the interest of deepening that
analysis.
    Metalanguage is that form of language in which “the sequence is
used to build an equation,” Jakobson writes,34 as in “mare is the female
of the horse.” Vector semantics can be taken as a giant metalinguistic
field in this sense, in resonance with the explanation above (“Paris is the
capital of France,” as an explanation of the value of the word “Paris”).
But as always, functions are slippery. Set in good sequence, metalinguis-
tic emphasis can take on other tasks.
    Metalanguage carries out a code-clarifying operation by establishing
an equivalence between two terms in a sequence. “ ‘Unicorn’ is a one-
horned horse” makes the predicate equal to the subject to explain the
semantics of that subject. The poetic function reverses this operation;
Jakobson says that the two functions are in “diametrical opposition.”35
Poetry uses an equation to build a sequence; it “projects the principle
of equivalence from the axis of selection into the axis of combination.
Equivalence is promoted to the constitutive device of the sequence.”36
Rather than explanation, we get equivalence based on rhyme, or place-
ment, or some other principle. The final rhyme pairs coupled with inter-
nal rhymes that allow the rhyme to move off their initial scheme creates
a pattern that is not explanatory but productive. Metalanguage is about
the code; poetry is about the message.
    Poetry illustrates this generative function in language, demonstrat
ing the peculiar play of making equations of terms that are not se-
mantically equivalent: “In poetry one syllable is equalized with any
other syllable of the same sequence; word stress is assumed to equal
word stress, as unstress equals unstress; prosodic long is matched with
long, and short with short; word boundary equals word boundary, no
boundary equals no boundary; syntactic pause equals syntactic pause,
no pause equals no pause.”37 Rhythm and sound create nonconceptual
equivalence.
    Jakobson often illustrates this point with the idea of “paronoma-
sia” (play on names or words, as in the pun). In Edgar Allan Poe’s “The
Raven,” for example, Jakobson shows the equivalence set by the rhym-
ing final words in the opening line: “While I nodded, nearly napping, /
suddenly there came a tapping, / As of someone gently rapping.”38 Not

158                      Computational Meaning


only are the three terms not semantically identical but they are acting
in different syntactical roles (participle, gerund, and back to participle).
The “equivalence” felt between them registers elsewhere, in the buildup
of the meaning of the horrific elegy. Poe chose the raven because it was
a beast not possessed of reason that could speak. Because ravens can
imitate human speech and other sounds just as parrots do, the gothic
creature’s croaking of what seems to be the word “nevermore” causes
the protagonist to ask if what he is hearing is language: “Then, upon the
velvet sinking, I betook myself to linking / Fancy unto fancy, thinking
what this ominous bird of yore—/ What this grim, ungainly, ghastly,
gaunt, and ominous bird of yore / Meant in croaking ‘Nevermore.’ ” To
link is to associate, to look into the set of possible arrays or paradigms,
to connect not by means of logic or concept but by proximity (“subsym-
bolically,” read “indexically”). What the raven meant allegorizes the sto-
chastic parrot—and even the Eliza effect—but takes the gray regions of
language and the psyche far more seriously than any AI critic does. The
singularly complex rhyme scheme allows for a very dense, accelerating
web of links to produce a quality, an icon, a feeling of horror and tragedy.
    This type of effect is today perhaps best illustrated in popular music,
where the “meaning” attached to a rhyme can become a whole icon,
an entire vibe, nostalgia—rage, yearning. “You want a hot body? You
want a Bugati? / You want a Maserati? You better work, bitch,” intones
Britney Spears—three rhyming equivalences followed by a nonrhyming
equivalent scansion on a final, determinative line.39 The accusation, the
aspiration, the punishment, from self and singer (she’s dressed as a
dominatrix in the music video) all resonate with this interrupted rhyme
scheme to deliver the core demand of Hustle Culture. Who can resist
exercising to this sublime song?
    If we were to stick to the ladder of reference, we would be able to
say, very well, a certain high-level effect of language is described here.
Once we have done the double business of referring to things as they
are (referential function) and straightening out the reference (meta
linguistic function), the playground of art is available to us. But that
play is not really tied up with the scientific uses of language. It is this
picture to which LLMs give the lie (and for which Jakobson seems to
have dug a grave anyway). Because the poetic function is not the “poetry
function.” It neither originates nor exhausts itself in language art. It is
everywhere, a principle that makes up meaning itself. For Jakobson,

                         Computational Meaning                          159

discovering how fundamental it was led to the inclusion of poetics
within linguistics, not just as the study of literature, but as the study of
generativity.
    Jakobson’s mantra for the poetic function’s ability to produce that
effect was that words similar in sound are drawn together in meaning. Poet-
ics was the arena in which Jakobson hoped to realize a truly structural-
ist phonology, one that operates by combination and recombination of
sound-level paradigms that are then extended into sequence to generate
meaning. Rather than crystallizing a concept, it uses sound to explore
the regions around given concepts. But the poetic function has long
since left adherence solely to sound behind. There is something like a
textual poetic function in which we all participate when we communi-
cate in the secondarily oral systems of social media and short message
service communication. And now there is, for the first time, a computa-
tional version of the poetic principle realized by LLMs. We could think
of it as matrix poetics, although it is almost certainly too early to char-
acterize it aesthetically with any surety.
    While the poetic function is most easily spotted in art, however, it is,
for Jakobson, everywhere. His famous example is Dwight Eisenhower’s
campaign slogan “I like Ike.” In its asymmetrical echo, it imparts a
“paranomastic image of a feeling which envelops its object.”40 The ef-
fect of such rhetorical gestures must be clear, if by negation: the advis-
ers to the senior Bush brother’s disastrous 2016 presidential campaign
might have thought better of the slogan “Jeb!” if they had known about
the poetic function’s distribution throughout culture. But it is not only
in advertising and rhetoric where Jakobson sees the function at play.
Without its “two dactylic” functions, Jakobson opines, the phrase “in-
nocent bystander” might have been swapped for a less sticky choice in
the paradigmatic array.41 Language as such takes structure from poetic
function. Because of this, poetics far exceeds “poetry,” which illustrates
the poetic function but does not exhaust it. Poetic in Jakobson’s hands
means something like “generative,” as the Greek poiesis suggests.
    Sticky is indeed a major effect of the poetic function (my term, not
Jakobson’s). It generates by remaining in mind, by holding its place in
 the high-dimensional matrix of language as such. Little rhythms with
 word combinations stick to us; we use them as chunks to navigate
 things; we sing-song our way through the day. A word or phrase can get
 stuck in your head just as much as a song. This is why the poetic function

160                      Computational Meaning


is good for advertising. Those dactyls are everywhere: “no one outpizzas
the Hut” (the final two shorts are implied). Equivalences emerge later-
ally and vertically and leap across apparent boundaries, failing to obey
representational or cognitive common sense but remaining (indeed,
defining) “natural” for speakers of the language. I don’t have informa-
tional knowledge laid out in referential terms and only then access to the
web of rhythm and phrase that makes up language. What gets domesti-
cated as “natural,” as meaning something, depends to a large extent on
this poetic function—whether it operates by sound, text, or matrix. If I
can learn to refer in more than a passing way to some state of affairs,
I must train this generative web in a direction. That is what learning is,
across the divide between human and machine.
    The poetic function, then, is not poetry but generation. The func-
tion itself is a kind of primitive reflexivity. Jakobson describes it as the
set or “positioning” (he puts the German Einstellung, meaning “stance
toward” but also used for “setting” in the context of machines) of the
message to the message itself.42 And this definition is a curious one.
What allows the message to be about the message? How can there be
a split between the message and itself if it is not reliant on the differ-
ence between message and code, message and person, or message and
content? The “stance” of the message toward its own material layout—
its sequence—must be what allows for meaning generation in the first
place: sequential generation. As I extend a message from one word to
the next, the interplay of equivalences shimmers under the “intended”
meaning. What could illustrate this fact better than the flickering ver-
tical bar in the interface as a chatbot composes its response?
    Sarah Pourciau argues for the privileged position of the poetic func-
tion in Jakobson by pointing out that the “sameness conundrum” (the
problem of what is equivalent, and how) is both linguistic and poetic
for Jakobson. She concludes that “poetic innovation . . . doubles . . . as
a temporally extended reflection on the deep-structural conditions of
comprehensible communication per se.”43 The only way for “sameness”
to straddle the boundary between reference, metalanguage, and lan-
guage as such is for the poetic function to govern the other two. Equiva
lence must be a first-order feature of words before it can be elevated to
the refined task of conceptual understanding of the world or of language
itself. The poetic function is at the middle of the diagram because it car-
ries the other functions. No generation, no meaning.

                        Computational Meaning                          161

    This deep notion of structure places a generative contradiction at the
heart of language. Chomsky’s notion that recursivity is a fundamental
syntactic feature of language is close to this but separates the contradic-
tion into I-language and E-language. To get the self-reference, we need
to step outside the immediacy of the phrase, to use one sentence in an-
other, something that can be “externalized” but never grasped or cap-
tured from that external form, for the syntax view. The poetic function
situates the recursion in the act of externalization, rather than before
it, which allows the “next word” to be “about” the previous one or any
other one—something the statistics view formalizes as “relevance.” The
very contradiction of “value” that Saussure seems to borrow from the
dialectical tradition is the point of generation and cannot be approached
by disaggregating the poetic “aboutness”—the basic sense in which a
message is about itself—and only then attempting to understand the
synthesis. LLMs perform this synthesis without logical recursion and so
create a poetic function freed from some forms of human cognition—a
cultural language that, because it is meaning making, stands to feed
back into our cognition.
    We can now call the value matrix in the model a poetic heat map. I
described the internal grid of the transformer in chapter 2 as a kind
of “light grid” in which different patterns light up when you touch a
node. The metaphor is not far from the way that these systems are often
visualized (see Figure 11). From the heat map comes the sequence. The
next word is drawn from a pool of words that show up hot, like on a
weather map. And where word embedding gave paradigms, the heat
map stores much more redundancy, effectively choosing the next word
based on semantics, intralinguistic context, and task specificity (set
by fine-tuning and particularized by the prompt). These internal rela-
tions of language—the model’s compression of the vocabulary as val-
ued by the attention heads—instantiate the poetic function, and this
enables sequential generation of meaning by means of probability. As
you put one word after the next, equivalences appear, drawing on and
remixing levels of redundancy of which Shannon never dreamed. The
attention scores given to the sequences as they are processed are desig-
nations of how much each word is about each other word in a given passage.
What was originally proposed as “attention” has become self-attention,
in which the word embeddings are updated solely by attention scores
internal to each sequence that is fed in (“ohne Anmeldung kostenlos”;

162                      Computational Meaning


see F igure 12). We can note that the tokens in German do not corre-
spond to words as directly as they often do in English, revealing model
bias. But we can also see how “mel” and “dun” are scored as highly “rele
vant” to each other in this layer, in this case indicating that they make
up part of the same word. By passing sequences through self-attention
in this fashion, LLMs learn how the message relates to itself. It is only
from this poetic basis—in which words similar in relevance are drawn
together in meaning—that other functions, like reference, precipitate.
The LLM grounds all other functions in the poetic.
    Sequence learning is what has broken through to allow a computa
tional principle to engage the poetic function, by disallowing any other
information—even, in that core moment of the training, other linguistic
information—to interfere with the capture of how the message relates
to itself. The transformer architecture gives us quantitative aboutness
in language, and generation is computational poetics as a foundational
principle for the creation of meaning.
    When things like Winograd schemas are “solved” by these systems,
the appearance of intelligence—“ its” refers to “demonstrators” as op-
posed to “councilmen,” in a famous example—is literally grounded in
the extensive potential set of values as they are actually realized across
something like all of language. With the addition of each word, that
system is extended. “Aboutness” is poetic or message recursive before
it is referential or metalinguistic. Meaning is not local in this process
but distributed across the entire high-dimensional model, in a formal-
dialectical manner without which no sign-system could signify at all.
The poetic heat map shows us what a textual-computational poetics
looks like stripped of all cognitive and sonic aspects. This might be closer
to language “as such” than any human use of language that we know of.
    The other functions can be ginned up, but this one is foundational.
And this is because the heat map combines all the redundancies. When
this happens, and we ask it to, the system follows highly frequented
roads to fetch facsimiles of poems, essays, information, or what you
will. But it always does this by generating a word that is “about” the
previous word. It is not symbolically about that word, but it is linked to
that word—in a dense indexical web that is nevertheless discrete and
made up of symbols. Metalanguage—and here we can add syntax—
comprises features internal to this dense web, even if their cognitive

Figure 11. Attention scores for the phrase “ohne Anmeldung kostenlos viele
 browser games jetzt online spielen,” including start and end tokens for the
sequences. Created using https://github.com/jessevig/bertviz?tab=readme
-ov-file; see Vig, “A Multiscale Visualization.”

164                      Computational Meaning




Figure 12. Stephen Wolfram’s visualization of the compressed model of words
in an LLM. From Wolfram, “What Is ChatGPT Doing?”

counterparts—logic, arithmetic, perception—are not. It must be be-
tween the words that this aboutness arises, in their very setting-into-
sequence. As we, or the algorithm, place the next word, the meaning
emerges: sequential generation is poetic. Whatever else we use language
for must ground in this function.
   It is the relations among words that LLMs capture and among which,
so long as we have the absolute relations, a length of context, and a
prompt, it finds “answers” to our queries, appearing to gaze outside its
grid. But this “outside” is really in. Just as we should not, I think, imag-
ine the process of insight and conceptual discovery as nonlinguistic but

                        Computational Meaning                          165

rather as the linguistic domestication of something not yet patterned as
language, so, too, we should think of the LLM as patterning up “things”
from a poetic-generative core. This self-indexing process is how lan-
guage generates meaning in the first place. This first-order sequential
generation is what allows computation and language to “share form.”
    The stickiness of the poetic function means that the “form” of lan-
guage is like a web. Whatever is introduced is valued, no matter its
origin, and gains that specific form. Language is certainly not all of cog-
nition, but its form is totalizing. Meaning is always potentially linguis-
tic, for humans. But because of the LLM, I think we should expand this
point and say that for any creature that can compute, language must be
the medium of that computation. Computational-linguistic form may
be far more extensive than we have yet realized.
    The many John Henrys in my field of vision claiming they will never
be “fooled” by an LLM should have the modesty to recognize that they
probably already have been so fooled. It is as though, when they use a
calculator, such skeptics would say, “Don’t worry, I will always know the
difference between the mere pixels and registers and the ‘actual math’
that is only simulated here.” But we ask our machines to do precisely
what we cannot. We are rapidly advancing toward asking our language
machines to give us redundancies we cannot or do not feel like fathom-
ing. The question is not whether we can maintain vigilance at the line of
actual control between real and fake language. It is, instead, why compu-
tation can operate language at all. Trying to distinguish between these
two things first obscures what they share. Computation and language
share form because both are discovery processes.
    Everyday cognition trivially involves both computation and lan-
guage. Simple acts of judgment, as Kant observed, involve unity that
must also be merged with counting and logic (and even the unity of
consciousness itself). When we analytically disaggregate these two sys-
tems, we can see that the numerical unity that underlies arithmetic de-
nies the possibility of a closed syntax, as Kurt Goedel showed, and that
language produces meaning in the last instance by including whatever
else is represented inside itself. The one system is incomplete; the other
is greedy.
    It is widely accepted that Jakobson took inspiration from cyber-
netics and the foundations of the computing revolution, and one can

166                      Computational Meaning


easily find references to information theory across his works after about
1950.44 He even suggests that graph theory and linguistic modeling run
close to structuralism in general, allowing us “to detach the diagram-
matic, iconic forms of relations from strictly conventional, symbolic
features of that system.”45 This remark suggests that Jakobson’s own
thought has been improperly assigned to a literary theory resistant to
quantification and reinforces the sense that iconicity in language has
a computational aspect that contradicts our logical-symbolic expecta-
tions. The question is why that is possible.
    The encounter between computation and language in LLMs reveals
an affinity to a deeper root of computation, namely, the logical discov-
ery of Goedel. The fact that we can always discover something new in
language or mathematics, but we can never know in advance what will
be a true statement in either system, is a crucial commonality that, I
will now suggest, provides the principle for interpreting noncognitive,
multisystem, representational expressions.
    Goedel showed that any formal system that was powerful enough to
generate arithmetic could not be complete and consistent at the same
time. Belonging as he did to the Vienna School, he followed the aspira-
tions of the group to establish a fully scientific philosophy, with its most
exaggerated form in Carnap’s extension of Frege to a theory of formal se-
mantics and eventually pure syntax. But Goedel took the foundations of
this project out from under it, using Bertrand Russell’s and Alfred North
Whitehead’s logical language in their Principia Mathematica to show that
logic could not contain arithmetic. If a formal system was, then, to be
lacking internal contradiction (“consistent”), it would have to be consti-
tutively incomplete, in the sense that some rule or statement within it
could not come from within at all. To do this, Goedel indexed all logi-
cal statements to numbers.46 By indexing numbers, operators, and logical
functions to the counting numbers, Goedel was able to create a system
that could process both mathematical and metamathematical state-
ments. He used that system to show that there was a special number—
the Goedel number, g = sub (n, 17, n)—that functions recursively to state
that this function is provable in the system but contains the content
“this function is not provable.” The paradox is then shown to attach to
any formal system with the power to generate arithmetic.
    I have no intention of going into a technical discourse on Goedel
at this point. But we should note what has happened here. To defeat

                          Computational Meaning                           167




Figure 13. Kurt Goedel’s indexing of logical formulas to integers. From Gödel,
“Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze.”


a notion of pure syntax, Goedel has generated metamathematics (and
logic) from the natural numbers. The first-order items are shown here
to contain the metaorder that supposedly describes them. The numbers
cannot be generated from logical rules—but they can be computed.
Indeed, this is the definition of computation that Turing would draw
from Goedel’s results, with Goedel’s eventual approval. Logical syn-
tax is “inside” the relationships between numbers we call arithmetic
and not the other way around. This demonstrates that syntax does not
exhaust the notion of a rule, that a system must in effect borrow from
another system to discover a new rule. Computation is therefore in prin-
ciple “incomplete,” in the sense that it must make discoveries beyond the
reach of its current rules (which is what makes syntax unclosable over a
strong enough system to do arithmetic at minimum). To the extent that
we think computation is one core function of thought, this means that
cognition must be able to reach outside whatever its current combina-
tion of rules and objects is. Language has almost the opposite quality but
shares the underlying form. Automated language results from Goedel
and Jakobson systems interacting together, without cognition. The in-
complete and the greedy combine to show us what language is in the
absence of cognition and present a strong attractor for meaning, which
tends to pool in language as its final station anyway.
    Let’s return to Chomsky’s famous toy sentence “colorless green
ideas sleep furiously”47 to get at this point. The sentence is indexed to
Chomsky’s notion of syntactic structure, to his sense of what counts to
be meaningful in language. Chomsky is, of course, correct that grammat-
ical sentences can be composed without local semantic value matching
our common sense. But “colorless green ideas sleep furiously” is anything

168                     Computational Meaning


but meaningless. It has become a major notion in linguistics. True, it re-
fers to something its words do not contain individually, but then, so do
countless sequences of words. This is because, although the individual
words do not have their usual meaning, the sentence is indexed to the
concept of the difference between grammar and local semantics. It illus-
trates that generation is not limited to the referential function, almost
the inverse of the point that Chomsky himself is making, which is that
syntax is independent of semantics. But a semantics not of reference
but in which “all terms are complex,” as Saussure would have it, need
not separate rule and signification—syntax and referential semantics—
first, only to attempt to “join” them later. Syntactic and semantic form
must evolve in, or as part of, the value matrix.
    Chomsky’s sentence is a performative contradiction: it both stands
for the idea of the independence of grammar and the meaning of syn-
tactic structure and undermines that very independence. For it to func-
tion as he wanted it to, he would need to have assigned it no function
in his larger argument. Once it has a function, it indexes a meaning—
“grammatical yet meaningless sentence”—never mind if that meaning
is “semantic” in the sense of being “actually” colorless or otherwise ad-
hering to local signifier–signified pairs. Words mean many things; “0.0,”
in Chomsky’s system, would “merely” indicate the structure at hand,
race distances arrayed by miles, and could be “merged” with a limited
number of other words. The semiotic irony that mocks the self-r ighteous
marathoner will be consigned to E-language, because metalanguage is
taken to be in operation before signs. Reifying the second-order effect
of syntax as an independent entity requires us to think of the message
“0.0” only as a knock-on effect of some mind, rather than as a genuine
part of this restricted system of signs. Invention can be grasped meta-
linguistically, but it cannot be generated without putting some signs in
a sequence and a context.
    Chomsky is saying something true about language too. We want lan-
guage to be meaningful, and “colorless green ideas” is initially not mean-
ingful. But it is not meaningless, either. One can imagine sequences of
“language” that are actually without meaning—characters out of order,
for example. But they either are involved in a bid to make sense of
language—or something else through language—or they are not. Even
the most brittle sense of syntax has to be indexed from the generation
of a sequence of words. Chomsky has unwittingly exploited the poetic

                         Computational Meaning                          169

function to isolate the very essence of metalanguage. He is worrying,
but unable to focalize, the line where language as discovery becomes
language as knowledge. We might hypothesize that cognition, rather
than guiding “surface structure” from a “deep” syntactic core, only joins
language to knowledge at the inclusion point at which meaning is made,
generated.
    Here we can see why Jakobson claimed that the poetic and meta-
linguistic functions were diametrically opposed. Our ability to move
around in language, to question assignation, value, and structure,
stands between the poetic function and metalanguage, between gen-
eration and capture. Assigning a new meaning—especially one so “dis-
tant” from the usual sense of the words at hand—can be performed
metalinguistically. But there can be no metalanguage without language.
Chomksy had to use a sentence to illustrate his point, and that means
he had to choose some words—in this case, using the principle of lack of
relation to their normal referents. This was sequential generation with
metalinguistic application. When Chomsky says that “colorless green
ideas” is pronounced naturally and in cadence by a speaker, this is the
poetic function in action. The order of words does not determine gram-
maticality alone, after all, but probably accounts for the stuttering over
the “colorless sleep” variant of the sentence. When we generate—or
even read—words, the stickiness of the poetic function and the knowl-
edge of syntax blur. I cannot parse “colorless green ideas” in any for-
mal scansion, but the poetic function is not equivalent to scansion or
rhyme. Neither sound nor text, nor matrix, is the principle here—we
have something like a syntactic or cognitive poetics. The “stickiness” of
this function corresponds to the “natural” way we read it, which then in-
cludes the metalinguistic designation—which is certainly not an exam-
ple of any typical grammar function. The poetic function may be what
makes the join of language and cognition possible.
    Generation is reflexive. No statements can be made that are not also
messages about the message itself, whether we feed them into LLMs
or not. This was the intent of my example about the bumper stickers:
“26.2” is referential, and then it is suddenly more (or less, “0.0”) because
it is in a sequence. If there were to be statements that excluded the in-
ternal relationship of language to itself, they would have to be outside
language. To think of such a statement, Chomsky had to designate its
meaning, thereby including it in language. In information-theoretical

170                      Computational Meaning


terms, a statement outside language would have to be either fully neces-
sary (redundancy of 1) or absolutely random (redundancy of 0). Perhaps
we could show that these modalities exist, but we would then have to do
so outside language, not including them in the exposition that shows
their existence. Meaning cannot be designated inside and outside lan-
guage all at once. And yet it constantly is. By realizing the value-setting
poetic function in a separate representation system, the LLM demon-
strates the dialectical core of structuralism. The generation of meaning
is contradictory in a dynamic sense. It is this primacy of generative con-
tradiction that allows computation and language to share form.
    The poetic function is simply the name for this “first order” of lan-
guage. Grammar, syntax, reference, metalanguage—a ll ways of naming
other orders. We pull ourselves up to those second-order functions in
language, but the rope is always words, placed one after another. Struc-
ture and form, in particular, have often been used in a way that does not
isolate them from the generated poetic first-order sequences that make
up language. But we should say even more: that form (along with its
synonyms) is “within” generation. Meaning is, in this sense, formal, not
as “independent” of the sequence of words, but as the sequence of words,
signs bearing meaning. To decode such signs for their referents may be
the prerogative of cognition, but to continue the chain of interpretants
is no longer restricted to humans, and our evolutionary niche may gain a
set of bewildering signals when our cognition is, in turn, conditioned by
this new chain of interpretants, this generalized poetic function.
    When Weaver coined “Constantinople fishing nasty pink” (cfnp), he
was not trying to split language into parts. He was trying to illustrate
how the density of redundancy is elastic. Phrases that are invented
in this way, as we saw with Chomsky’s “colorless green ideas,” index
something—t heir referent. The Constantinople sequence cfnp indexes
generation itself. It thus metalinguistically refers to the poetic func-
tion. And by showing that this, and no other, is the way in which lan-
guage changes, the way in which meaning emerges and adapts, Weaver
unwittingly wrote down a formal equivalent to the paradoxical num-
ber g, the paradoxical index in Goedel’s numbering system. Rather
than indexing the independence of meaning and form as Chomsky did
with “colorless green ideas,” Weaver assigned a sequence of words to
the fact that language is generated as a sequence of words. Language

                        Computational Meaning                          171

is sticky or greedy as a system, because whatever is invented—f rom
within or without—is reinserted into the each-to-a ll valuation of the
poetic heat map.
    This internalizing function is both what allows language to range gen-
erally over any content and what makes a last-instance semiology depend
on linguistic form. Goedel’s number forces us to realize that there is an
“outside” to any formal mathematical system. Because formal systems
are incomplete, they must go outside themselves for each new discovery.
Goedel’s later life was taken up with attempts to understand this relation-
ship; cfnp points us not at the outside of language—although certainly
it suggests there is one—but rather at the force exerted by the internal
makeup. Goedel’s own interpretation of his results suggests that math-
ematics must find and include external factors to keep going. Weaver
shows us how, even if the same is true of language, meaning arises equally
from internal combination. Anything that is generated can be captured,
can enter—and does enter—the statistical field, no matter how small its
relevance. Not only does it not need to come from “outside” but its mean-
ing cannot be parsed so long as it stays outside.
    Nothing in language falls outside this force field of internal redun-
dancy, the poetic heat map. This does not mean that nothing falls outside
this field—indeed, it would probably be possible to show that something
must, that language does not exhaust the field of representation. But
where openness to meaning is based on exteriority in mathematics, at
least in Goedel’s own understanding of his results, the same openness
in language is based on interiority.48 The poetic function houses the
contradiction of containing metalanguage in opposition to itself, and
this is what allows it to be “about” itself, to indicate itself rather than
something beyond its sequence. This contradiction opens language to
meaning and allows it to work with at least one other system of repre-
sentation successfully: computation.
    LLMs are the first extensive realization of this shared formal prin-
ciple, the first encounter between the generativity of computation and
the generativity of language. They form, for that reason, the basis of an
empirical study of the interaction of these forms of representation. To
study what will surely be a proliferation of automated culture of this
sort, the semiology of multimodal AI, we need a general poetics. A gen-
eral poetics will study language at this point of meaning generation

172                      Computational Meaning


across the difference between its origins—computational and neuro-
cognitive, in the only two examples we have so far. It will involve literary
scholars—the only professionals positioned to do this work properly—
but it will not take literature as its primary examples. Language as such,
in whatever variety it comes to us, will be its object, insofar as language
is the matrix of meaning generation.
    Jakobson wrote that “poetics deals with problems of verbal structure,
just as the analysis of painting is concerned with pictorial s tructure.
Since linguistics is the global science of verbal structure, poetics may
be regarded as an integral part of linguistics.”49 It is time to reverse this
sentiment. Linguistics, and language generation, must be contained
in a more general study of the poetic function. Interpretation (making
words into things) and rhetoric (making things into words) are both
based in linguistic poiesis. This generation is not in any way limited to
literary artifacts but is rather—especially in the age of AI—loose in
our informational wilds. Where rhetorical analysis tends to articulated
form, the “twists” of language or its tropes, poetics should attend to its
meaning-generative properties across the difference between human
and machine, cognitive and computational, divides. General poetics
should study all forms of capture with respect to generation—a ll forms
of reference, rhetoric, in short, meaning—in which language is involved.
LLMs have become the first industrial tool for such study. The varieties
of generation would be the topic of this general poetics.
    General poetics would attend to the whole spectrum of meaning
generation, and surely one of its first results—maybe even a prem-
ise, intuitively—would be that nearly no meaning is poetry. It would
be able to treat, as few if any systems have, the list of soccer players
that Handke made into a poem as a poetic generation in its original con-
text. The ticker tape messages that play across the bottom of the ESPN
screen, announcing injuries, scores, and other news items, are just as
much generation as William Carlos Williams’s poem about the plums.
There is rather more of the former type of generation than the latter.
Most meaning is “mean,” takes furtive shape in common alleys and tun-
nels of language. If art is the achievement of culture, general poetics
would take culture itself seriously. And it would find that language does
not regress naturally to a state of art but rather to an average poetics of
normal, banal generation, the usual name for which is ideology—and
this is the topic to which we now turn.
