      6


Poetic Ideology
The Packaged Semantics of Generative Culture

Large literary machines may make use of the poetic function, but their
default output is ideology. By this I do not mean that they reproduce
talking points of political platforms but that they generate syntagms
that are prepatterned—a lbeit in ways that we humans do not always
expect. Ideology is not a view or a proposition or some content but the
manner of expression of that content. It is another internal factor of
language production, to which LLMs give us perhaps the first glimpse
that does not feel autotelic and confusing. The theory of ideology tog-
gles between a transcendental pole and what I here call an “expres-
sive” pole, between rules and culture. The poetic function in its current
computational-linguistic state is what I think of as “poetic ideology,”
generative but restrained, packaged but (for us) unpredictable.
    We make meaning by putting words one after the other. But we usu-
ally do it in preparceled ways. Most of what is expressed is default chan-
nels of communication, surefire pathways for one or another purpose
that, as we have seen, nevertheless has to be generated out of the heat
map. This is why LLMs force us to confront the problem of the relation-
ship of art to culture, formal innovation to social form as such. Gen-
eration puts poetry on one end of a spectrum bookended on the other
by ideology.
    Avant-garde form and the hegemony of culture are typically opposed.
Clement Greenberg’s famous definition of kitsch as “predigested form”
influentially pitted culture against formal innovation in the historical
avant-garde. LLMs, as we have now seen, capture the whole spectrum at
issue in this distinction, parasitic as they are on culture and art indiffer-
ently. Hannes Bajohr has claimed that “whoever controls LLMs, controls
politics,” and this chapter demonstrates the mechanism of that control.1
I show how LLMs create semantic packages that range across local and
distal contexts within language, scanning the state of ideology as “pre-
digested form” or the most commonly traveled pathways within lan-
guage at scale. But it shows us this ideology extensively. Our theories of


                                    173

174                            Poetic Ideology


ideology tend to be about some baseline that governs speech, condi-
tions of possibility. The “economic base” in Marx and the unconscious
in Freudo-Marxism have typically served as conditions, making it hard
to see how what is actually said corresponds to the condition itself.
I think that LLMs should shift us out of this “transcendental” mode
in the theory of ideology. Because they open up ideology to a form of
empirical scanning, they can help shift our sense of ideology to include,
and even be based on, expression. An expressive theory of ideology can
make sense of the sequential generation we use to reproduce the least
enlightening aspects of language.
    This expressive notion of ideology fits with Theodor W. Adorno’s phi-
losophy of culture. Adorno must seem a strange ally here, given his
notorious disdain for computational culture. But Adorno’s dialectical
connection of art and social being as such has been rendered descriptive
by the emergence of LLMs. For the first time, we are able to surface ide-
ology quantitatively, to scan the ideological surround. This provides us
with a supracognitive mapping, launching us out of the postmodern era,
but not on our own terms. We have a brief window to use this visibility
to understand the empirical makeup of contemporary ideology, but it
is closing as LLMs suffer the fate of all AI inventions: the passage into
off-the-shelf, for-profit software.
    Adorno and Horkheimer famously argued that the result of the hand-
shake between technology and media was entertainment:

      Entertainment is the prolongation of work under late capitalism.
      It is sought by those who want to escape the mechanized labor
      process so that they can cope with it again. At the same time, how-
      ever, mechanization has such power over leisure and its happi-
      ness, determines so thoroughly the fabrication of entertainment
      commodities, that the off-duty worker can experience nothing
      but after-images of the work process itself. The ostensible content
      is merely a faded foreground; what is imprinted is the automated
      sequence of standardized tasks. The only escape from the work
      process in factory and office is through adaptation to it in leisure
      time. This is the incurable sickness of all entertainment.2

The after-images of the fully industrialized factory make up the signal of
entertainment, but the signal is noise, ein verblaßter Vordergrund, snow

                             Poetic Ideology                             175

drowning out color. The figure haunts cultural criticism, no matter how
many times we waver on Adorno, first accepting his idiosyncratic acidity,
then inevitably deciding that his “pessimism” is too much. Film—the
primary object of the essay on the “culture industry”—never fully oper-
ated as a global logistical network in the way that digital systems have
become, so the aesthetic integration Adorno speaks of here might pale in
comparison to a GPT-charged platform aesthetics, which would unite the
fade and the foreground far more than industrial protocols could.
    Actor, director, and screenwriter Justine Bateman reported during
the 2023 writers’ and actors’ strike that AI’s executive-led intrusion
into screenwriting arose partly because of the explicit demand that
TV be “second screen.”3 This phrase means that the television is sec-
ond to the smartphone, so that one can literally continue to engage, in
the same medium, with work—emails, Twitter, and so on—as narrative
takes the edge off in the background. Or maybe it’s the foreground, only
faded—the explicit demand, according to Bateman, is that this type of
visual work not pierce the veil of the scrolling. The merger of entertain-
ment and industrial knowledge work completes the dialectical cycle that
Adorno and Horkheimer saw in film in the 1930s.
    One cringes to think of Adorno listening to “Daddy’s Car,” widely
and misleadingly billed as the “first AI song.”4 It is Beatles-y mush, the
average of some data set involving the Beatles, to be sure, but also,
to my ear, the Beach Boys quite heavily. The neural net focuses on an
area—candidate notes, words (in this case, machinic in quality but ac-
tually human composed) with context, and in this case some manual
guidance—and gives you not really the signal or the noise but some-
thing between: faded foreground. This is not the average of the twelve-
tone scale or the common Western scale, and certainly not of all Western
music or any such thing. It’s quite specific, but it’s hard to think of it as
musical articulation in the way we think of compositions as aesthetic
objects. For classical information theory, a string of words or symbols,
including musical notation, is a signal against a possible set—that’s why
entropy was measured with a capital W for Wahrscheinlichkeit (German
for “probability”). These strings seem more like noise than signal, as if
the pointed edge of poetic utterance had receded into . . . what? Not
actual noise—this is music, after all. We don’t have a name for this other
 than “ideology.” It’s the quantitatively captured average over a given
 contextual domain, but it’s not singular. One could generate many,

176                          Poetic Ideology


many songs in this vein, covering the whole suddenly statistical object
“Beatles music.” Semantic packages are not limited to words, although
that is where they are taking up their first residence.
    The faded foreground and “second-screen” entertainment are forms
of ideology. I say this because they are a signal-become-noise that pro-
vides a background to dull the effects of form, which can sometimes
give us insight. This kind of “form” is instead a washed-out signal,
statistically varied so as to lull, horrify, amuse. But not to enlighten—
for these averaged-out forms to enlighten, we must provide the atten-
tion, the reading; in a sense, we must provide form to something that,
though it is signal, tries to fade out of form altogether.
    “Daddy’s Car” is ideology in just this sense. The washing out of the
foreground tends to make us think that the usual state of semantic af-
fairs is clear, somehow redemptively contoured content that leads us
somewhere good, or at least away from the locus of the extraction of sur-
plus value and the confrontation between the worker and the machine.
Yet it is hard to see how a more successful entertainment would live up
to the clear aspirations of this essay or do much of anything explana
tory or salutary for us. Adorno can’t possibly want to “correct” enter-
tainment. It is rather the fact of the continuity between the B   eatles and
Schönberg that Adorno so polemically underlines. I think we have to
extend that continuity into signifying machines.
    I am not going to offer an interpretation of Adorno here. I think with
him because he offers something rare, namely, an account of the ma-
chine, entertainment, art, and the social, as continuous. Perhaps this
sounds odd, but the dialectical approach Adorno takes to the problem
of critique works only if those four things are all fundamentally one
thing—perhaps we could say one matrix. Of course, in Adorno’s techni-
cal language, they are also “nonidentical,” but this negativity is internal.
If they were not all one in a larger sense, his account would make no
sense. In other words, rather than thinking of ideology only as deceit—
which it certainly is: the subtitle to “culture industry” is “ideology as
deception of the masses”—we might also think of it as a medium. And
that medium has its first automatic operator in the form of LLMs.
    We have seen the basics of how LLMs produce meaningful language.
If we think about the internal process, we can quickly appreciate how
this tends to confuse foreground and background. To use my light grid
metaphor once more, imagine you touch the word “dialectic” and the

                             Poetic Ideology                             177

algorithm gives you “of enlightenment.” According to what we have
seen, “of” and “enlightenment” belong to groups of words, candidate sets,
that might be next. The attention mechanism refines this group from a
larger, generally possible set—and whatever fine-tuning further nar-
rows down the set, with the prompt finally presenting what can be a
quite small group. So if I say “dialectic” without any context whatsoever,
“is” might be the next word, and over a range of generation of an answer
to a question—say two hundred to three hundred words—we might see
“Socrates,” “ancient,” “Barth,” and other things. But if the algorithm is
attending to a context, it might be able to reject those options and re-
place them with “Hegel,” “idealism,” and “antithesis.” Within the overall
set that floats to the statistical surface when “dialectic” is input in some
given context, these are all separate options, with blurry lines between
them. I think of them as semantic packages.
    Packaging meaning is the way that LLMs get at meaning at all. They
distill average-temperature areas by using the poetic function. But if we
think of the delivery mechanism that digital technologies possess—like
packet switching in internet protocols or streaming a film or TV show—
LLMs exceed this function. They don’t just “have” prepackaged seman-
tics; they do the packaging (strictly, we do the packaging when we perform
search functions within their deterministic states). So if “Socrates” is im-
portant to a discussion of Hegelian dialectics—or Barth’s dialectical the-
ology—he can go in the box too. Or Adorno, with his negative dialectics.
Or a tweet from a social scientist claiming that dialectics is unscientific
gibberish. Everything depends on the softmax function, which will send
the relevant possibilities close to 1, and the subsequent top-k search, for
example, that clusters those relevant tokens.
    Semantic packaging is the first mechanical operation we have ever
seen that can surface linguistic noise, bringing a flat but genuine language
to the fore. When we apply the metaphor “signal/noise” to language—an
infelicitous application in the first place—we get a strange cocktail. As
we saw in the previous chapter, language has an intensely internalizing
effect that seems to reject the pure notion of statistical noise. (Following
Shannon’s diagram, when I speak, “noise” is noise.) Language seems to
be articulatory first, so that noise is not language, in the metaphor. All
very well and good, but LLMs seem to float something that is not exactly
articulation to us: a spectrum of possibilities upends the relationship be-
tween foreground and background, a kind of noisy signal.5 The language

178                          Poetic Ideology


that surfaces this way is blanched, generated in perfect poetic operation
but from an actual consideration of lateral candidates, as if, in speaking,
I were to consider not just the entire paradigm at hand but also its con-
text, sifting through all the words possible and choosing by indication.
(This is not so very far from what it is to write, I suppose—more on this
in the conclusion.) The “gradual crystallization” of thought in speaking
Kleist spoke of does not scan linguistic regions in the way that the pack-
aging process does, although something like this process is suggested in
Edgar Allan Poe’s famous essay on his composition of “The Raven,” “The
Philosophy of Composition.” But poetry is not the result: the result is the
best-traveled pathways of language, the channels themselves presented
as content. That is what I propose to call “ideology.” What results is usu-
ally mush, tepid language that is nonetheless language—which, after all,
is usually neither boiling nor freezing. It is this tepid mush that makes
up the integument of machine, art, and social form. Let’s look at some
examples.
     On February 16, 2023, Vanderbilt University’s office for diversity,
equity, and inclusion (DEI) issued a statement on the shooting that had
 occurred shortly before at Michigan State University. The statement was
 boilerplate, suggesting that the university “come together as a commu-
 nity to reaffirm our commitment to caring for one another and pro-
 moting a culture of inclusivity on our campus” to “honor the victims
 of this tragedy.” The only remarkable thing about the message was that
 a footnote credited ChatGPT with producing its first draft.6 The office
 apologized one day later, after an outcry.
     The statement could not be more bloodless—we might think of this
 as the “thoughts and prayers” semantic package, touched up with the
 “DEI” semantic package. Language here is offered as a service, inten-
 tionally grabbed and used for liability screening purposes—a lthough
 in the early days of the bots, billing the source was an unforced error.
 Flattening the channel, giving the most tepid response possible, is lit-
 erally the task here. If a human had written those words, they might
 hardly differ at all. By the time of writing, never mind publication, this
 type of text must be quite general, although we probably do not know it.
 Semantic packaging finds a smooth fit with bureaucratic writing. If one
 is inclined to think that AI is incapable of meeting a certain standard of
 real creativity that humans possess, then we should think about how in-
 stitutional expression almost by definition can now be automated. The

                            Poetic Ideology                           179

office memo on productivity may or may not belong to the same seman-
tic package as the diversity email, and the constant stream of “wellness”
messages perches neatly between the two.7
    Content comes packaged. In early 2023, I asked ChatGPT to tell me
how the “enlightenment is dialectical,” without informing it that that
is the thesis of Theodor Adorno and Marx Horkheimer’s notoriously
difficult masterpiece (which also is a watershed in the theory of ideol-
ogy), and it gave me a detailed, complex response that, at least in casual
reading, really recapitulated the argument of the book. When I asked
it to summarize my colleague Matthew Handelman’s (coincidentally
of Michigan State University) book on Adorno and Horkheimer, the
Frankfurt School, and mathematics, The Mathematical Imagination, it
did something curious—and informative. This book is about how criti
cal theory—and especially Adorno and Horkheimer—excluded mathe
matics and computation from their framework but didn’t have to. It
reconstructs engagements with mathematics on the part of three satel
lite figures of the Frankfurt School: Siegfried Kracauer with his social
geometry, Franz Rosenzweig with a messianism based in calculus, and
Gershom Scholem’s reading of mathematical logic.8 Handelman argues
that there was a huge missed opportunity that we need to make good
today, in which critique and mathematics find a meeting point. This
book is very much downstream from that claim.
    ChatGPT competently summarized the book, to my eye reproducing
materials easily found on the web, like chapter summaries. But it kept
repeating throughout that “Handelman’s thesis is that mathematics is
a social construct.”9 This is a patent falsehood—there is no trace of a
position on the question of math’s objectivity in the book, but if there
is a tendency, it is to take math seriously, as mutually coconstituting
any possible critique of orders of representation. So what was going on?
    Dialectic of Enlightenment is a massively influential text—when you
type its title phrase into a generative interface, the pattern that lights
up in the poetic heat map is extensive, but also concentrated, around
accounts of it, debates about it, vehement disagreements, and so on.
This has the effect of making the predictive data set dense—and rela-
tively accurate. When I ask about Handelman’s book, the data set will
be correspondingly less concentrated. It will overlap heavily with the
data set for “dialectic of enlightenment,” because they are so close to
each other linguistically, in fact. But when I put in “mathematics,” it

180                          Poetic Ideology


alters the pattern that lights up. This is partly because radically fewer
words have been written on this overlap of topics. I would venture a
guess that “socially constructed” comes up in this context so doggedly
because when scholars who work in this area discuss mathematics,
they very often assert that it is socially constructed (even though that’s
not Handelman’s view). But there is another group that writes about
this overlap, namely, the Alt Right. Their anti-Semitic conspiracy the-
ory about “cultural Marxism,” which directly blames Adorno and his
group for “making America Communist,”10 will have a lot to say about
the “relativism” that “critical theory” represents, a case in point often
being the idea that mathematics is “socially constructed.” We are here
witnessing a corner of the “culture war” semantic package. Science,
communism, the far right, conspiracy theory, the Frankfurt School,
and mathematics—no machine could have collated these into coherent
sentences before 2019, it seems to me. This simple example shows how
LLMs can be forensic with respect to ideology.
    The effect I have just described is possibly the first quantitative mea-
sure of ideology. After all, the truth of what is in Handelman’s book
is not the only fact about that book. It actually exists in a linguistic
environment that has patterns in it, some more common and others
less. It is a sign of strength that a book is mischaracterized by this pro-
cedure, because we generally want well-researched academic books to
be something more than “ideology.” But the indication is an interesting
one: critical theory plus mathematics is a discursively important point
where the academic left and the global new right confront one another.
These systems could be used to expand our knowledge of various regions
of our own unknown thought. And that would be possible because they
“hallucinate.”
    In the semantic package, there is no object. A book, a person, a
thing—nothing stops the statistical slide along the curvature set, and
ever reset, by the prompt, the attention, and the heat map. This index-
ical flow, we tend to think, should be halted by ethical considerations,
the “responsibility” of having an object in view.11 To halt around objects,
and consider their context and value, is the essence of the moral use of
language that Chomsky wants to identify with language itself. But there
is epistemic gain in the automatic irresponsibility that cannot halt or
contextualize. LLMs strap whatever else they treat to language, illumi-

                             Poetic Ideology                            181

nating both, but not by capturing the truth. They expand the expressive
state of our ideologies.
    Ideology is not just political doctrine. When Marx wrote of the
“German Ideology,” he meant his fellow socialists’ implicit belief in
the power of ideas, to which he countered the power of material forces.
But Marxists slowly took up the problem of the power of discourse and
representation, acknowledging that what we are able to think, imagine,
and say is a crucial political issue. Antonio Gramsci called the domi-
nant set of ideas “hegemony,” arguing that these ideas conformed to the
dominance of the ruling class while not being about that dominance.12
This syncs with Bajohr’s phrase “whoever controls LLMs, controls poli-
tics.” But there’s more to the problem of ideology than discursive control.
    A wide variety of Marxists have also seen ideology as a form of kitsch.
First articulated by the Marxist art critic Clement Greenberg in 1937, the
notion of kitsch is “predigested form.” The avant-garde, for Greenberg
(perhaps above all his friend Jackson Pollock, although this association
came later), “tries in effect to imitate God by creating something valid
solely on its own terms, in the way nature itself is valid, in the way a
landscape—not its picture—is aesthetically valid; something given,
increate, independent of meanings, similars or originals. Content is to
be dissolved so completely into form that the work of art or literature
cannot be reduced in whole or in part to anything not itself.”13 This is
creation, not generation. But where Picasso paints “cause,” Greenberg
raises the kitsch of Repin to exemplary status, claiming that he paints
“effect.”14 Kitsch “predigests art for the spectator and spares him ef-
fort, provides him with a short cut to the pleasure of art that detours
what is necessarily difficult in genuine art. Repin, or kitsch, is synthetic
art.”15 Perhaps “synthetic” is not a coincidence here. We know when we
are on well-traveled paths. We can feel when a cliché has taken over
from the narrative or when the tune reverts to some mid-temperature
that sounds not like an imitation of some original but like an opened
statistical field, the neighboring regions of some signal we have once
enjoyed or admired. What could be more “predigested” than the fea-
ture Adobe has introduced into its media suite, “generative fill”? This
allows you to “zoom out” from a given image, like the Mona Lisa or a
scene from an Indiana Jones movie (both real examples). In the Mona
Lisa fill, we see both predigestion and something else (Figure 14). The

182                          Poetic Ideology


image is extrapolative, but not from the painting itself, in a strange way.
It fills in a grandiose mountainscape with a huge sky, as if this early
modern lady were transported to nineteenth-century Montana. The in-
timacy of Renaissance portraiture requires something else: Mona Lisa,
according to my (untrained) intuition, is inside. The method of capturing
the image—painstaking hours of sitting and painting—should be part
of the image, and is part of the original image. But in the objectless
slide from pixel to pixel, we get something in the “semantic package”
of the Mona Lisa, perhaps even in the “painting” package, but it expands
the statistical field in a “wrong” way. Like fan fiction, it imagines a dif-
ferent Mona Lisa, generating within yet laterally from da Vinci’s crea
tion. Form is predigested and then shot along a surprising statistical
axis. A colleague from art history argues, however, that the drama of
the original background is intentionally unrealistic, creating a tension
between the domestic setting and the “un-European” mountain range—
which allows him to arrive at the conclusion that the AI system, or its
prompter, has extended and illustrated da Vinci’s vision. I leave it to the
reader to decide between the positive and the negative view of the Mona
Lisa semantic package extension but would point out that both can be
sustained in the general poetics of the digital semiological surround.
Aesthetic judgment provides no torque for critique.
    In Roland Barthes’s classic essay “Rhetoric of the Image,” the struc-
turalist critic locates a “denotational” level in an advertisement for Pan-
zani pasta. Barthes notes that the advertisement, with its labels and its
imperative to buy, is a highly motivated representation. Yet even here,
there is in the image a “message without a code,” the physical presenta-
tion of tomatoes and pasta in a mesh grocery bag. It is this denotation that
“naturalizes” the image, thus harnessing the signifier to the overarching
structure of the signified (“buy Panzani!”). Barthes concludes, “The more
technology develops the diffusion of information (and notably of images),
the more it provides the means of masking the constructed meaning
under the appearance of the given meaning.”16 For Barthes, obscuring the
arbitrariness of the sign is ideology, and masking the difference between
signifier and signified becomes easier when images are subject to technol-
ogy. Generation expands the range of ideology’s capture of denotation.
    Denotation should not be confused with reference. The ladder of ref-
erence is active in our understanding of images just as much as in our
theories of language, and it is at least as dangerous here as there. In

                               Poetic Ideology                                183




Figure 14. The “Mona Lisa fill,” an image produced using LLM-based “filling-in”
operations that extend the scene of the iconic painting automatically.
From Placido.


the Mona Lisa fill, the “denotation” is not photographic and so is not
quite a message without a code. The fill is an interpretation of a cul-
tural object, one with enormous influence and symbolic prestige, so its
literal meaning is that symbolic status. We can see this with a more re-
cent image that has circulated, “thicc Descartes” (Figure 15). This fill is a
joke, obviously, and might be labeled “I ball, therefore I am,” because the
modern sage is here given basketball sneakers and thighs that suggest
a strong vertical jump. But there is a catch. At least to me—w riting in
mid-2024—this image comes off as a handcrafted imitation of AI genera-
tion. This genre is proliferating now and seems to indicate a disavowed
knowledge that we are immersed in generative content that we do not
notice—what I called the “global Eliza effect.” The denotation here is the
idea of a generated image that is incongruous because it is produced ac-
cording to the averaging effect of the ideology machine. The reversal, if I
am right that this is manually produced, is a parry of human creativity,
which is able to denote the idea of generation by means of the recursive
function called irony. But irony is slippery: objects of this sort bring a
momentary laughter followed by the uncanny sense that culture itself
has entered the mode of ideological generation, in which it is no longer
clear what is “predigested” and what is not.
    Greenberg was a vociferous advocate of the avant-garde, but prediges-
tion is important, perhaps more important than he could let on. Most

184                           Poetic Ideology




Figure 15. Another “fill” operation, performed on the portrait of the philoso-
pher Descartes.


language is predigested, and most culture is too. The search for the
purity of the avant-garde has failed. Medium specificity is a drive to
the analytically pure form of the medium. LLMs undermine that pu-
rity on their own terms, because language as such has no “pure form”
that we have been able to isolate (although I have been suggesting that
capture–generate is a foundational feature). And synthesis cannot be
so easily discarded anyway. Greenberg, it is sometimes forgotten, was
really a Marxist: he was tying the split between avant-garde and the rise
of kitsch to “technological innovation” that caused “inherited forms to
lose their relevance.”17 Even though kitsch is predigested, it was the in-
vention of a new set of norms on a new playing field. It is not yet clear if a
new set of norms is now arising or if it is merely that the consequence of
a continuous machine evolution since the nineteenth century is coming
to one stage of fulfillment. To be sure, commercial film is nearly pure
kitsch today—what could illustrate Greenberg’s point better than Thor:
Love and Thunder (2022)? Yet the output of early AI in film isn’t quite
like that. Kitsch is “ideology” on not just well-traveled but well-known

                             Poetic Ideology                           185

tracks. That’s what makes it pleasurable: the unburdening of cognition
by means of familiarity. Generative-fi ll Mona Lisa, thicc Descartes, and
other phenomena of this kind are weirder than that—they fade the
foreground into something that feels actually noisy, even uncanny. They
surprise us, and that’s not what ideology is supposed to do.
    The surprise comes from the statistical blur provided by the pack-
aging. No objects exist in these data sets, but means do.18 And the area
around a mean based on a task is genuinely surprising. The “measure
of surprise” that a message carries with it for Claude Shannon doesn’t
quite name this peculiar effect, which is everywhere as generative AI
quickly spread. A beer commercial in which everything blows up, a
trailer for a version of the classic Swiss Heidi that turns into a fascist
rally, and a deeply unsettling clip of Will Smith eating spaghetti belong
to the prominent visual examples at the time of writing. These will
surely be fond memories at the time of publication, as others will take
their place, and we will get aesthetic orientation in this weird world. In
one of the first cyberspace fictions, William Gibson wrote of “semiotic
ghosts,” traces of past visions of the future, and the need to turn them
off by tapping into the comforting entropy of bad television.19 This is the
opposite: a kind of noise within the signal that unsettles our very sense
of form and meaning.
    This aesthetic effect arises from “fine-t uning.”20 When the P in GPT
is complete, and the massive grid is established, the language remains
without a target. To produce that possibility, further training is needed,
but training that shapes answers and actions, not the grid itself. This is
called “tuning.” To take a simple but illustrative example—one you can
run on a simple Google collaboratory notebook—GPT-2 can be imported
and tuned on any text of your liking. The plainest version of the “task”
in this case is for the pretraining to be “tuned” to predict something like
the text fed to it. So if I feed the Communist Manifesto into the machine,
its goal becomes to write something “like” that text. The measure of
that mimesis is subjective, of course. But as I’ve tried this experiment
dozens of times, two things have become clear. One is that LLMs and
generative AI in general are first and foremost cultural objects. They
can’t be scientific ones first because they don’t do reproducibility na-
tively. Can we learn something about the object domain—in this case,
language—from them? Yes, but not quantitatively, at least at first. And
as I have been arguing, one reason for this is that language conditions

186                          Poetic Ideology


the algorithm just as much as the other way around. The second thing
we learn is that tuning resides between the grid of language and some-
thing like a purposive use of language. But when we add this second
thing, we train the net on some region of language like a camera. This is
what creates that uncanny effect.
   If you tell GPT-2 in this toy version to show you a sample of its gen-
erated text every ten steps through its tuning over fifty steps, you
generally see a progression. First output: a kind of historical text that
reads well, sometimes even accurately, but not like Marx. Second output:
sometimes, not always, this one is weird. In one run, the transformer
obsessively repeated the word “wheatmeal” throughout its response,
sometimes out of grammatical order. But it was interspersed with more
class-specific material. Third output: a definite move toward coherence
and tone, with either this or the fourth input typically picking up “bour-
geoisie” and “proletariat” as key terms. By the fifth output, it produces
something indeed quite “Marx-y” in tone and content, albeit imperfect,
with a small model and a very small text on which to tune. But we can
extrapolate from here to say that all of Marx, or all of classical political
economy, is a genre, a linguistic icon in the space of language. What
one gets is a quality of language, a set of ideas presented in the general
statistical field.
   Chatbots extend LLMs by further training using RLHF. This, too, cre-
ates a kind of expansion around a vibe, a statistical middling effect of
“chatting” that accounts for how boring it can be to talk to the machine.
Yet under that banality is the poetic function, as we have seen, and also
ideology, as the “thoughts and prayers” semantic package suggests.
   This type of ideology in extensive algorithmic use has genuinely con-
fused the line between human and machine language. Efforts to demar-
cate synthetic text are not going well, and they illustrate the point I am
making here. If it were just a question of the heat map being fine-tuned
and producing some smooth text, some statistical monsters, perhaps we
would not be in this panic cycle. When we have tried to “detect” which
texts are human and which are AI generated, we have so far ended up
in a very strange place. Note first of all that these attempts are done
using AI, meaning that the Turing test is weirdly automated. The metrics
used tend to rely on some version of the idea that human text is more
robust—a lso the cause of model collapse, as we saw earlier—and LLM
generation less so. The result, however, is that texts like the U.S. Con-

                              Poetic Ideology                             187

stitution and large swaths of the Bible score very highly for “probably
AI-generated.”21 This is because they weigh very heavily in the data set.
Cultural pressure in statistical form shows up as redundancy at the scale
of language as such. But see what has happened: ideology bubbles to
the surface, and the difference between the most likely thing to be said,
our common topoi, the shared locations where meaning moves fastest
through words, denies us the bright line between human and machine.
Ideology is the medium of language, generated by means of the poetic
function but continuous from one end of the spectrum to the other,
regardless of whether one uses the computational joystick or the gray
matter joystick to operate it.
    When the camera was invented, we saw distant chunks of the world
for the first time with our eyes. LLMs show us not the world but the way
we represent that world. Fine-tuning trains the “camera” on regions of
representation so close to us that they feel like our very world itself, but
then they flatten and expand the signal into the noise of that world.
Fine-tuning is a form of ideology scanning, an effect that will almost
certainly disappear from these systems as they are brought into rep-
resentational line and embedded in software.22 This field of ideology is
momentarily on display during the transition to generative culture.
    Like poetry, ideology seems as though it could be on empirical display
here, open to quantitative investigation for the first time. Yet our theo-
ries of ideology have long suggested that no such thing could ever occur.
    Ideology is not doctrine. Its colloquial use as “political beliefs held in
spite of evidence” doesn’t explain how we get those beliefs in the first
place. The question the concept “ideology” tries to answer is why any
given idea holds power at a given time. And the answers to this question
tend to point to governing conditions, like Marx’s “base” or Freud’s “un-
conscious.” These absolute references don’t stand in a linear relationship
to the mere “content” of any ideological statement or position. But we
can take this nonlinearity in two ways.
    When we focus on the cut between the content and the condition,
we get “transcendental” theories of ideology, as we draw attention to
the break between the rules and what is expressed within those rules.
“Hegemony” governs the sayable, just as the “unconscious” does for
Freud and the Freudo-Marxist tradition. A good example of this is Mark
Fisher’s idea of “capitalist realism,” which convincingly argues that capi-
tal shapes the very horizon of thought—an idea sometimes boiled down

188                          Poetic Ideology


to the slogan “it is easier to imagine the end of the world than the end of
capitalism.”23 When we propose a “condition of possibility” for what we
think or do, and then claim that this condition transcends the contents
that contingently crystallize below it, we gain insight into the formal
aspects of ideology. But we are then in danger of losing its expressive
aspects: ideology as actual speech, performed, spoken, written. The dif-
ference between why an idea is powerful and that idea itself is surely
of great importance, but their continuity is too. And LLMs unroll the
condition and the expression quasi-empirically, showing us the extent,
not just the origins, of our ideologies.
      Ideology might then be seen as the superficial yet lawful total state
of expression. Michel Foucault presciently says that ideology “scans the
domain of representations in general; it determines the necessary
sequences that appear there; it defines the links that provide its
connections; . . . it situates all knowledge in the space of representa-
 tions, and by scanning that space it formulates the knowledge of the
 laws that provide its organization. It is in a sense the knowledge of all
 knowledge.”24 The subconceptual totality of the rules synced with actual
 expression at any given time in the history of knowledge is what makes
 up ideology. By pointing to its linking, scanning, and compositional
 functions, F oucault points the way to ideology as captured in a model,
 long before it ever was. In doing so, he overcomes a tendency in the work
 of his teacher Louis Althusser.
      The most influential transcendental notion of ideology today is that
 of Althusser. In his famous essay on the “ideological state apparatuses”—
 a touchstone for research into the prison, the asylum, the school, and
 other identity-forming institutions (largely because of the work of
 Michel Foucault, who studied with Althusser)—he defines ideology as
  “a ‘representation’ of the imaginary relationship of individuals to their
  real conditions of existence.”25 This definition draws on psychoanalyst
  Jacques Lacan’s “three registers,” as we saw in the introduction to this
  volume. The “Imaginary” is what we hold privately, in an image, to be our
  world, our understanding of self and reality. The “Real” is, for Lacan, the
  completely unrepresentable, the confluence of Freud’s id and the kernel
  of resistance that the world presents us with, completely unknown and
  unknowable yet determinative in ways that psychoanalysis must con-
  front. The third register, which Fredric Jameson once noted is conspic-

                              Poetic Ideology                            189

uously missing from this definition,26 is the “Symbolic,” typified by
language and meant to capture all systems of representation that carry
transmissible values.27 Ideology, for Althusser, means the stance that we
take toward an unknowable Real, our apparently private images of how
the world really works. But these images are generated by a complex of
control and constitution of identity in the ideological state apparatuses
(those nonviolent institutions that shape belief, behavior, and self). And
in fact, we can note that the symbolic is not missing here; it is located in
the apparently redundant, scare-quoted “representation” of the imagi-
nary relations in question. In other words, ideology is symbolic first and
foremost, and it is through that symbolic register that the imaginary
(ego) effects occur. This is why Althusser can (famously) write that when
a policeman says “hey you!” the right person always turns around. The
symbolic is the joystick of ideology, its extensive expression, so long as
it is constituted of the right internal set of relations to interpolate you.
    This definition of ideology is crucial to Wendy Chun’s claim that soft-
ware and ideology are a perfect fit. Software and hardware together—
computers—“are ideology machines,” she writes, because they “fulfill
almost every formal definition of ideology we have.”28 Software is an
imaginary relationship to hardware, imitating the hard, unrepresent-
able kernel that governs the real state of expression in the system—
just as Marx’s “base” is supposed to do. Software thus “interpellates a
‘user’ ” (or youser, in Chun’s pun), offering it “a name or image with which
to identify.”29 This allows the “immaterial” to “emerge as a commodity,
as something in its own right.”30 The power of this type of abstraction
shows us that ideology is deceit, but also actual.31
    Chun argues that this analog of ideology in general in the software
environment “pleasurably mimics ideology,”32 but also contains the ker-
nel of ideology critique, because it allows us to make reference, if not
actually influence, the alleged cause of the images themselves, the oper-
ating system from which we are walled off: “rather than lack cognitive
maps, we produce them all the time through a medium that simulates
ideology and . . . its critique.”33 For Althusser, we are trapped in a series
of institutions that exploit our inability to know the Real. For Chun,
a second world is simulated within that world that exploits the same
psychological feature. Thicc Descartes calls me into this loop, for I am
asked there to accept that AI fills are paltry and silly objects even as I can

190                           Poetic Ideology


only do so by acknowledging their cultural importance. But the theory
of ideology here only grasps this as a condition of my subjectivity, not as
a factor in the totality of culture.
    In this version of the theory of ideology, its essence is deceit. Ideology
enforces a regime of real abstraction, things we know to be false but
that have discursive power that makes them have substance, normative
force. But which abstraction, which “immateriality,” takes on this nor-
mative force: imaginary relations or their symbolic representation? In
this cluster of theories, there has been much confusion on this point. If
we take the imaginary to be the ideology, we end up in a very difficult
place theoretically, where the only option is to empirically witness the
formation of identity in schooling, therapy, and prison. But one cannot
witness learning precisely because, as Lacan always insisted, “learning”
is partly a matter of induction into the symbolic order. For that rea-
son, ideology must be symbolic, the “representation” of the imaginary,
not the imaginary itself. It is the integument of symbolic relations, in
their actual (and now statistically viewable) internal redundancy, that
is “ideology.”
    We should prefer this definition intuitively, because it suggests that
ideology is not a matter of personal preference and cannot be “over-
come” by sheer force of will. (This is, of course, the neoliberal theoretical
version of ideology, and we should reject the impossible task it places
on us.) Ideology is objective: it invades and maybe even makes up the
imaginary, but it also isn’t just me. It gets at me, you, the youser, from
outside. It gets at us from the heat map.
    Note that Chun points out that software allows us to generate end-
less cognitive maps. She is here pointing out that software fills in a
broken mapping function that Jameson had included as a key aspect
of his definition of postmodernism. For Jameson, postmodernism was
characterized by “cool affect” offset from modernist fervor and the
rise of pastiche over parody. But it was also an aesthetic regime of a
“global,” technological phase of capitalism. If modernism, starting in
the early modern period, had mapped the world—think of the Mercator
projection—Jameson pointed out that now a “third dimension of car-
tography” had emerged, “which at once involves what we would today
call the nature of representational codes, the intrinsic structures of the
various media, the intervention, into more naive mimetic conceptions
of mapping, of the whole new fundamental question of the languages of

                              Poetic Ideology                            191

representation Itself.” This new form of cognitive mapping forestalls the
very possibility of a “true map,” because it requires “the coordination of
existential data (the empirical position of the subject) with unlived, ab-
stract conceptions of the geographic totality.”34 Chun is suggesting that
software in general pullulates such maps, not making them more true
but fractally exponentiating the ideological surface of postmodern cul-
ture. These maps take all their values from the interaction of the imagi
nary and the symbolic, which, in its autonomy, expands the realm of
“ideology” past the point where we can follow it visually, intuit it, see it.
   Jameson closed his 1984 essay on postmodernism with the claim that
a “political postmodernism” would “have as its vocation the invention
and projection of a global cognitive mapping, on a social as well as a spa-
tial scale.”35 Welcome to the desert of generative AI, which fulfills exactly
this function, but as ideology, not by politicizing the mapping problem
but by making it statistically available. We might think of this as supra-
cognitive mapping, the extension beyond the known forms of predigested
content and the surprise that generation prepares for us, its uncanny
effects and its banalities all in one. What is extended beyond cognition,
as we have seen, is culture—computational-linguistic culture.
   The automation of language is the hinge that extends culture beyond
cognitive mapping but reintroduces mapping function we cannot see.
Conspiracy theory takes root in this precise junction, which is both an
opportunity and a danger. The opportunity resides in being able to scan
the ideological surround and see how it is made up empirically. The dan-
ger is in the knitting together of a new totalizing system out of that
ideology that becomes immediately invisible. This book has been an at-
tempt to capture the opportunity in the knowledge that the risk is al-
ready well on its way to fruition. LLMs launch us out of postmodernism
with this supracognitive mapping, but the extent to which this happens
on terms that we make any sense of is wide open for the moment. For us
to cope, we need to move beyond the idea of ideology as a “condition” (a
transcendental notion) and to see that it is expression, ideology in exten-
sion (and in development). This makes an “unmappable” region into a
partly empirical object, as representation systems capture and generate
representation as such.
   If ideology is deceit, LLMs capture that deceit, because they map it
in its rough totality. They thus realize a function of ideology critique
of which Chun saw the kernel in software as such, but at a much larger

192                          Poetic Ideology


scale. Recall that Baudrillard told us that the truth was on the surface,
not at depth. Disneyland is the truth, not a veil that “ideology critique”
can simply pierce. Baudrillard agrees, at least on this local point, with
Adorno, who famously wanted to capture the truth of the falsity that is
ideology. The worker subjected to the culture industry cannot somehow
“realize” that he is watching the very machine protocols that trap him
in his job, and break free of those bounds. We cannot flex and bust out
of ideology, which is not a negative condition we might understand but
a semiotic surround in which we live, move, and have our being.
    Adorno famously thought of ideology as the “truth and the untruth”
of the “totally administered world.”36 It revealed as much as it hid and
provided—despite Adorno’s personal taste for high art—a point of entry
through which we see social functions as conditioning us. LLMs have
revealed this two-way street, manifesting Adorno’s commitment to the
consubstantiality of ideology, art, and social form in the computational
totalization of language as such. They thus offer an unprecedented view
into the linguistic makeup of ideology. There has never before been a
system that allows us to generate and then examine “what is near what”
in political semantics. But they do not, on their own, generate any such
insights. They only pinpoint pressurized areas of the symbolic register.
    Adorno writes that we can speak of ideology only when “something
spiritual [Geistiges, “mental”] stands out from the social process with its
own claim to truth, independent and substantial.”37 This fits with Chun’s
notion that something “immaterial” asserts itself with respect to its al-
leged origin in the economic base or the hardware of the system. The
“untruth” of this ideology, Adorno points out, can only be gained at
the price of the “disavowal of the social ground” from which it comes.38
In other words, to say that something is false because it is ideology is to
explain away the very power that it patently possesses. The equally valid
“truth moment” of that self-asserting spirit is the very independence it
actually has, the mysterious power that attaches to the stickiest parts
of our social-representational systems. “Today,” Adorno writes, the “sig-
nature of ideologies is more the absence of this independence” than it is
the deceit that the claim to that independence creates.39 What Adorno
is saying is that ideology, deceitful in its essential makeup, has shed
“trickery” as its most prominent feature and freed itself from the need
to deceive in order to function.40 If this can be true only because the

                            Poetic Ideology                           193

world is “totally administered,” then we might think of Adorno’s claim
as a symbolization claim: draped upon our very sense of reality is a cloak
of words so thick that truth and untruth cannot be distinguished. No
cognitive map is possible.
    For Adorno, at least one answer lies in art, as redemption lay in the
avant-garde for Greenberg. For Adorno, this is because art “seeks to aid
the nonidentical,” so it compels us to recognize the form of ideology.
Culture more generally falls on the side of identity, covering up the
seams.41 Art therefore includes historical articulation in itself “dialec-
tically,” making up an “aesthetic force of production” that receives the
sediment or “imprintings of the social relations of production.”42 Art
does not “lie,” whereas industry, cultural or otherwise, does. They thus
take on self-asserted reality, but not as ideology.
    As lovely as this account of the revelatory capacities of art—which I
would hardly want to deny—is, I do not think it answers to the purpose
to which Adorno sets it. This is because the access point to some holis-
tic sense of what does and does not work, function smoothly, run on
machinic lines, convince us of already-powerful truths, may come from
art, for me or you. But this insight—Enlightenment without deception,
in Adorno’s jargon—cannot scale.
    LLM systems put the cognitive map back in play, but not for us. They
make the dialectic of social form, machine, and aesthetics computa-
tional, expressing what is held in transcendence in our theories, and
what Adorno and Greenberg hope to transcend in aesthetic experience.
In doing so, they certainly push toward “identity” as they run, but then
they also disidentify, as in generative fills and semantic packages, which
can surprise us in their proximity to the self-understood. But it is the
nonidentity of redundancy that they reproduce at scale, the propor-
tion between the whole and the part, language as such and the articu
lation of some set of messages. What if an updated dialectics is not
exactly negative, not exactly aesthetic, but the conceptual development
of the computation–language interface? Without Adorno’s insistence
on the identity (and nonidentity) of the machine, culture, art, and the
social, we cannot see what ideology is, as deceit, “falsehood as the index
of truth and falsehood,” in Adorno’s playful reversal of Spinoza.43 But
there is no redemption in artistic form here. The thin line of insight
depends on how much we make of AI. Rather than competing with it,

194                          Poetic Ideology


attempting to “outdo” it in our creations or our remaindered humanism,
our only choice is to use its ideological capture to our advantage.
    Language has entered the phase of its computational reproducibility,
and this gives us tools to access regions of representation both banal and
fantastical. There is no question that industry will not use these tools
for exploration of these regions, but if we can let slip the transcendental
models of ideology and see generative AI as an expressive totality of
ideology, we can perhaps gain insight—capture the generated. That un-
derstanding must accompany us as we enter a world in which language
is a service.
