Conclusion
Language as a Service, or the Return of Rhetoric

AI will not kill us all. The thought experiments that suggest otherwise
have so far proven so much unimaginative science fiction, sheep
in wolf’s mathematics. But there is a threat, as the media historian
Matthew Kirschenbaum has argued. He writes, “What if, in the end, we
 are done in not by intercontinental ballistic missiles or climate change,
 not by microscopic pathogens or a mountain-size meteor, but by . . .
 text?”1 Global civilizations have run on writing as bureaucracy, skill,
 and content for millennia. The “textpocalypse” would deliver a “crisis of
 never-ending spam” in which every text would have to be verified some-
 how, exponentially increasing compute demand and/or sending each
 citizen into an abyss of uncertainty. Complaints of the “pollution of the
 internet” and “enshittification” (in critic Cory Doctorow’s coinage) now
 abound, suggesting that Kirschenbaum was on the right track.
     Misinformation does not begin to capture the depths to which such
 a scenario could sink, which resembles something like K’s situation in
 Kafka’s The Castle, wherein a wall of files prevents him not just from
 reaching the castle but from knowing if there is any authority in it at all.
 When he finally arrives in the file room, fighting for his life, he despair-
 ingly asks the clerk if there are specific offices devoted to verifying the
 files, to which the clerk responds, “There are only verification offices!”
 The information society threatens to become a hall of mirrors.
     I close this book by arguing that language, as both poetic and ideo-
 logical generation, is on offer “as a service.” I do not go quite so far as
 Kirschenbaum, because I think our textual future is banal, not apoca-
 lyptic. But the effects of generation might well be civilizational nonethe-
 less, as writing suffers the same fate as computation, separated between
 material labor—w riting—and discovery, further divorcing language as
 a cultural system from any cognitive core we would want it to reflect.
 The result, I argue, is the return of rhetoric as a system of training, a
 cognitive-cultural technique, just as it was for nearly two millennia.


                                    195

196                            Conclusion


Only now it is also computational, requiring not just a general poet-
ics but a new kind of humanistic training. The media condition of the
present is now firmly past remainder humanism, even if our theories
have not kept pace. All that remains beyond this end, then, is the open
question of a real humanism in the overlap between platform capitalism
and computational culture generation.


Language as a Service and the Labor of Writing
We do not yet possess a vocabulary that isolates the “labor” of writing
from its “management.” The industrial metaphor for mathematics origi-
nated in the French Revolution and gained a foothold because of Charles
Babbage, who imagined “computing” for the first time as the “manual”
labor within the intellectual work of mathematical reasoning. There are,
of course, local contexts—legal drafting, script writing with its “treat-
ments” and “scriptments”—in which language for this separation ex-
ists.2 But this vocabulary is not yet widely naturalized. For that reason,
language “as a service” describes a feature of platform capitalism that
feels like a reversal. Where Nick Srnicek has shown how platforms and
their data monopolies have made industrial products like jet engines
into “services,” LLMs dematerialize the already immaterial. Suddenly
the very synthesis of meaning as such comes in packages, instantly de-
livered not just for bureaucracy but also for financial decisions, the flow
of information, and global logistics. As LLMs ingest nonlinguistic data,
they will do so by means of the language I have described in the preceding
chapters. We have long thought in the theoretical humanities that the
“symbolic order” is “autonomous.” But when it becomes computational,
we tend to retract this commitment. We must actually accept its com-
putational autonomy at the level of theory if we are to understand and
critique its extensive, indeed ubiquitous, use in the age of the new AI.
    The API feels deceptive at the moment of writing. When I say
“ChatGPT,” for most people, the little flickering line appears before
the mind’s eye, “typing” out each next word. Maybe the web is already
flooded with text generated by this system—and mostly, for now, ed-
ited by humans. The deep panic that ChatGPT has touched off among
university administrators suggests that texts never meant for publica-
tion may be “artificial” in great quantity now and going forward. The
fear that students will forget how to write, and not learn to write, is a

                                Conclusion                               197

fear of deskilling, not dissimilar from the worry that children would
forget how or never learn to write by hand in the oncoming digital age.
AI is always described as the only possible solution for the problems
that AI causes, perhaps because the only way to navigate our increas-
ingly computational culture is what I called supracognitive mapping in the
last chapter. AI is not a solution, but it is a reality, and we cannot afford
to remain in a resistance stance to it as it becomes a general-purpose
technology (the other “GPT”) for global capitalism today.
    As the models get more flexible, and perhaps smaller, one can imag-
ine a world in which they are embedded in our software such that I can
draft with them easily. I should have many, not one. The email LLM will
adopt my professional tone. My research LLM will be trained on papers
I select as desirable to imitate and on my own writing (mixed mode as
it will become). My grant applications, book proposals, memos in of-
fices, legalese around all things bureaucratic, can already come mostly
off the shelf from the API. But if personalization has been a trend, and
embedding in software another, we should see the rise of generative
services widely, along with their disappearance into the seamlessness
of smooth, banal presentation. My one worry about Kirschenbaum’s
“textpocalypse” is that it will disappear faster than we can notice it.
The anomalies will cause trouble, but we will press on, failing to read
the text before us.
    Deskilling always means automation, but we imagine automation
wrongly when we think of it as replacing humans. LLMs are finally ful-
filling the prophecy of cybernetics: where the Industrial Revolution au-
tomated the work of the arm, the digital revolution would automate the
tasks of the brain. But automation is never complete. It spits new, lesser
work out the sides of the machine, contributing to a general devaluation
of labor and making the shape of capital and society unsustainable.3
As Marx pointed out, the steam engine put two new kinds of work in
the factory: Handlanger, boys who shoveled coal into the engine’s fur-
nace for twelve and fourteen hours a day, and attendants, women who
once sewed or operated a loom and who now roamed about the factory
floor checking that the army of looms did not stop the machine. It is not
accidental that these roles upended social identities—neither women
nor children were acceptable “workers”—until regulation came.4 The
women on the floor here resemble nothing so much as the employees at
the automatic checkout line at the pharmacy or the grocery store today.

198                             Conclusion


What should alleviate drudgery is given in too great a volume, so that
this figure must phrenetically tend to dozens of customers at once, key-
ing in codes to override machine misunderstandings. Work gets worse,
and more intense, when automation occurs. This attending function—
tending to the attention mechanism—probably describes the future of
the paralegal, the script writer, and others who toil in the factory
of writing. But it also describes what it will be to “code.” LLMs are good
enough at coding already to do away with the lowest level, but not with
the attendant. A skeleton crew of intellectual labor will soon oversee a
faster conveyor belt of production, realizing in the most literal terms
what Adorno called the “aesthetic mode of production.”
    The provisioning of written language in this way can be thought of as
“language as a service” (and “code as a service”). We often hear now of the
“as-a-service-ification” of the economy, as seemingly everything comes
unbundled as independent software packages. Srnicek points, for exam-
ple, to the platform economy model that Boeing uses to sell jet engines
“as a service,” converting the commodity from engine to digital system.
The engine itself is more or less rented, in this case, while what is actually
sold is the proprietary software, including service and repairs. Renting
protects the code and the data of the selling company, while significantly
altering the landscape of what counts as a commodity in heavy industry.5
This trend inverts the sense of what is going on in commodity exchange,
suggesting that one buys not the material worked up but the imprint
on that material, the design, the intellectual property, the “immaterial”
aspect of the commodity that “asserts its independence.” This inversion
literalizes what Marx called the “fetishism of the commodity,” the attri-
bution of independent value and agency to the things that move through
the economy. This is, of course, ideology—the belief in the power of ideas
beyond their social origins. That these “ideas” are now commodities only
brings the two Marxian insights, ideology and fetishism, concretely to-
gether. LLMs offer ideology as a service.
    As we saw, Adorno predicted that ideology would stop masquerad-
ing as the truth, admit its dialectical deception, and continue along
smoothly in technicized capitalism. It is hard to see any fault lines
in this analysis. LLMs make utterly patent that commodities are just
as much “ideas” as they are physical objects and extend the point to
cover the commodification of ideas. They do this because, rather than
working the idea into a material—the dream of the 3-D printer—they

                                  Conclusion                                  199




Figure 16. “The Shop Floor of a Textile Factory Running on Steam,” from
Andrew Ure’s The Philosophy of Manufacture. Image from Andrew Ure, The
Philosophy of Manufactures; or, An Exposition of the Scientific, Moral, and Com-
mercial Economy of the Factory System of Great Britain /Andrew Ure, Reprints
of Economic Classics (New York: A. M. Kelley, 1967).


work up the idea itself in its own medium. They thus reveal the essence of
“intellectual labor” in a previously unheard-of way.
    The apostate Frankfurt School member Alfred Sohn-Rethel stretched
the idea of the fetishism of commodities over the whole of thought, ar-
guing that the portion of labor touched by the intellect infected the
intellect itself. Exchange, he tried to show, was the transcendental gov-
ernor of thinking.6 This provocation resulted in his famous notion of
“real abstraction,” a way of thinking of the staying power of ideology,
its ability to maintain force despite its “deceitful” origins. The point
of the separation between manual and intellectual labor ceases, in
this framework, to be about the inequality of work—which certainly
persists—and becomes a matter of seeing how the intellect is within,
not without, the process of capital. Again, we see a perhaps exaggerated
critical point made utterly literal by the advent of culturally generative
AI. We need not search for points at which to find the abstraction in
its reality, the commodity’s control of its own narrative. Abstraction is
generated, narrative is produced, and both—just like the jet engine—
are sold as services.
    We do not have language yet for this twist in our plot. When I
write, I am writing. The first word that comes to mind when I think
about what an LLM might do for me in writing is “draft.” After all, we

200                             Conclusion


“generate” a draft of something. But when I draft, I am writing. Even
if my first draft is just notes cobbled together, the cobbling is putting
one word after the other, making words that represent ideas only to me
into sequences of communicable language. But this process involves
my whole spiritual apparatus—t he “blank page” problem, wherein one
struggles to begin to write, can be overcome only by writing. It is a full-
body, full-mind process. It requires the full extent of the mind’s ca-
pacity for synthesis. Writing engages me; I write by absorption in the
generative matrix.
    If we split the labor from the management of writing, we will need
language for that. Some candidates exist, but it is unclear if they will
take the throne as the terms for this transition. In legal jargon, drafting
is not a full-body/full-mind engagement; it is the lining up of the cor-
rect items of precedent in the highly constrained performative speech
of the law. This model of separating the personnel of drafting from the
boss who sets the goal, the strategy, and the formula exists without hav-
ing any fixed terminology in C-suites everywhere. Another candidate is
ghostwriting, in which the labor is split from the “writer,” often also the
subject of the writing, like a Warhol in the Factory. Perhaps the most in-
tricate version of this separation is the idea of a “treatment” of a movie
idea in Hollywood. A treatment is presented in the manner of a short
story, with the narrative on scene cards (in the present tense), so that
not only the idea but also the beginning of the breakdown of the nar-
rative arc become clear, which begins to give an idea of the production.
Following the treatment, a successful idea gets a “scriptment,” which
translates the story into the formal status of the script. These formali
zations probably exist elsewhere too, but I doubt that we will soon talk
about “scriptments” when we use our LLMs. Maybe drafting, with its
manual-labor metaphorical origins, will win out while shifting seman-
tically. To draft is to pull, as in to make a straight line, creating tension
in a yoke or a rope. I can draft words into this sentence, perhaps.
    Even if the language is unclear, there is one dominant precedent for
this process: computation itself. To compute, the word Alan Turing chose
to use for his thought experiment about universal machines, means
the laborious part of doing math. It has meant this since the French
Revolution, when the new government divided the work of mathemat-
ics between three offices. As Charles Babbage, the designer of the first

                               Conclusion                              201

general-purpose computer (which remained in blueprint), recounts,
“In the midst of that excitement which accompanied the Revolution of
France . . . the French government was desirous of producing a series of
mathematical tables, which should facilitate the extension of the deci
mal system they had so recently adopted.”7 Their “most distinguished
philosophers . . . invented new methods for this laborious task.”8 They
divided the work between three sections. The first section was “to in-
vestigate, amongst the various analytical expressions which could be
found for the same function, that which was most readily adapted to
simple numerical calculation by many individuals employed at the same
time. This section had little or nothing to do with the actual numerical
work.”9 The second section was possessed of “considerable acquaintance
with mathematics: and their duty was to convert into numbers the for-
mulae put into their hands by the first section”10—creating mathemat-
ical middle management before the rise of middle management itself!11
The third section “received certain numbers from the second section,
and, using nothing more than simple addition and subtraction, they re-
turned to that section the finished tables.”12 Babbage notes that “it is
remarkable that nine-tenths of this class had no knowledge of arithme-
tic beyond its two first rules.”13 Where Adam Smith’s division of labor
initially fell into the organizers and the performers of that labor, bosses
and workers, Babbage cribbed a tripartite structure from the French
Revolution—a structure meant to spread the decimal system—and con-
verted it into the notion of a “computer.”
    As historians of computing have widely documented, these “comput-
ers” came to be women, and the “labor” of mathematics was feminized.14
This is why the first coders were women, as has become well known in
recent years, before the prestige of computing was grabbed back by a
male labor force. It was the “manual” labor of mathematics that was au-
tomated after the Second World War, the part of mathematics in which
numbers are added and subtracted, in which the answer to the problem
7 + 5 becomes 12. This work came to be called “computing” over time, and
Turing’s use of that verb (over his adviser Alonzo Church’s “calculate”)
was determinative. Babbage explicitly designed his analytical engine to
do this type of work—and it was work, labor, divided. As his protégé
and designer of the first algorithm meant to run on a computing ma-
chine, Ada Lovelace, described it, the automation allowed the machine

202                            Conclusion


to “weave algebraical patterns.”15 It took about a century for this notion
of labor to become naturalized as “computing.”
    Downstream from computation and computers as terms that capture the
labor end of mathematical reasoning is the noun compute. This relatively
strange noun probably elides computing power, but it is an instructive mor-
pheme. We hear now, in a world where terabytes fly back and forth and
the scale of data rises to unfathomable levels, of “how much compute” is
available, a necessary calculation for tasks like training LLMs.
    Compute is the amount of computation needed or supplied, how much
processing stands to be done. When we face down a day of writing emails,
research, memos, and so on, perhaps we would do well to think of write
as a finite amount of generation we can take on in a given time. Cer-
tainly LLMs first and foremost function to extend that power. And if
that extension comes primarily because banal emails and memos can
be automated, leaving me with time to write sentences and paragraphs
like the ones you are reading, then Babbage’s vision will come to a cer-
tain fruition. For here, rather than overseeing a research assistant, I
would externalize the “manual” forms of writing while internalizing
an algorithmic procedure for carrying out the act of writing. Language
as a service does this double work. The write for the day is potentially
extended quantitatively without the intensity rising. So soon as the ab-
solute amount of write accrues to the mental laborer’s advantage, how-
ever, a great deal more writing will be foisted on each worker, leading
to precisely that “intensification of the working day” that Marx saw as
one of the few strategies capital could use to gain relatively more surplus
value given fixed hours of work.16 But of course, writers do not work
fixed hours—and this fight is coming, for the balance of mental labor
in a world of writing to which one attends, as the machine attends to
the relationship of the next word to context. Predictions of the “prole-
tarianization” of knowledge workers only now are threatening truly to
be fulfilled.
    We might say that intellectual labor is here really subsumed under
capital, where it was only formally subsumed previously. Marx made
this important distinction between the imposition of the wage and the
centralization of work in the factory, which “formally” subjects labor to
capital but does not yet allow capital to dictate how labor is really per-
formed. The machine factory, building on the division of labor, “really”
subsumed labor under capital, because it removed the worker’s relation-

                               Conclusion                              203

ship to work itself. This is now happening not to the arm but to the
brain, to culture.
    Another way to put this is that one point is about the internalization
of the algorithm in the spiritual process of writing and thinking, what
Kleist had in mind in his dialogic model of the generation of thinking.
The other point is about the externalization of the order of abstrac-
tion from the human and the internalization of manual and intellec-
tual labor in the process of capital in the platform era. These inversions
are only possible because of the implementation of LLMs, because the
capture–generate dialectic is open to computational activation.
    In Gramophone Film Typewriter, Kittler argues that the analog media
externalized the three registers of Lacan, as we saw in the introduction
to this book.17 The gramophone, setting needle to wax and reproducing
waves of sound, invaded the realm of Real, sending subterranean sig-
nals upward that we nevertheless fail to know. The film began with the
partition of images and reality and produced a false sense of continuity,
tricking the eye into scanning a bit of world that seemed transported to
it and, for the first time, alive, registered.18 This revolution in imaging
changed the very sense of self that Lacan called the “Imaginary,” the
way in which self fits into world, the feeling of reality. The typewriter
got short shrift, literally. The section on the typewriter moves rather
quickly to the rise of the computer, which Kittler polemically sees as
an extension of the humble writing machine. The passage is important,
though, because it underscores the problem of computing in general.
Where the automation of sound felt like the loosening of fundamen-
tal reality, and the film electrified minds and built “new subjects,” the
typewriter “externalized” something that was never internal in the first
place. Writing is the essence of the external; it is that language that
cannot be “excluded” from language but that is not “ours.”19 Automat-
ing it cannot possibly be as simple as “externalizing” some previously
“human” thing.
    The typewriter laid out the symbolic order for English in the form of
QWERTY. Up to the invention of the printing press, the alphabet ex-
isted primarily as a socially held web, an order written down on pages
but somehow held in common, a social valuation. The press external-
ized the alphabet in a standardized form. The typewriter—and this
is Kittler’s point—made writing a deployment of the alphabet rather
than retrieval through imagination and memory.20 When the atoms

204                             Conclusion


of language, its stoichea, were plunked down on the keyboard, the al-
ready social symbolic order was fused with a mechanism. For Kittler,
the computer rendered the “writing” no longer a matter of meaning
whatsoever. As Kittler himself puts it, “the symbolic now encompasses
linguistic signs in their materiality and technicity. That is to say, letters
and ciphers form a finite set without taking into account philosophi-
cal dreams of infinity.”21 His famous “antihermeneutic” stance suggests
that the media had their own protocols, and the cashout was the com-
puter, which neither knew nor cared what the content it carried along
its channels meant.
    Generation remediates computation as language. In the general out
cry we are currently hearing about how LLMs do not “understand” what
they generate, we should perhaps pause to note that computers don’t
“understand” computation either. But they do it, as Turing proved.
And generation does language, severing the relationship between un-
derstanding and generation, but also reintroducing language to the
problem of computation. Perhaps both processes were always in play:
generation and language are not ipso facto understood. Capture is a
potential mode of generation but not its necessary consequence in any
given location. The essence of language is not understanding. But on the
other hand, language has always accompanied computation, as I have al-
ready argued. The relative isolation of computation in the first phase of
the digital might seem a curiosity in a matter of a decade or two. The
fusion of language and computation houses a much longer history in
which the new AI is a crucial, but still only one, chapter. It is a chapter
that will shift the way civilization runs on textual rails, something that
became gradually truer and truer over millennia but now threatens to
become independent. We got ourselves there, of course, but we should not
overestimate our ability to exit the situation or the extent to which our
contribution—a ll that written language, at a minimum—g ives us say
over the direction of history.
    LLMs have at least two separate features that all previous writing
did not. First, they have access to a near-total extensive set of token-
combinations, what I have been calling the n = all function of language
as such. This expands the “externalized” symbolic system far beyond
the low dimensionality of the QWERTY keyboard. But the keyboard is
fixed and only becomes dynamic when I plunk the keys. When the al-
gorithm internalizes this separate function—the poetic function—it

                               Conclusion                              205

externalizes a form of writerly synthesis, only to turn around and offer
it to me as a draft, a possible text. As personalization proceeds, this
externalization will feel like internalization. The remediated computer
is not “the misuse of military equipment,” as Kittler puts it.22 It is the
dialectical revenge of language itself on its alleged masters, humans.
    A final point: computationally reproducible language is “generative”
in the sense that the reproduction can never be a copy. This capacity fits
seamlessly into the semiotic platform economy.
    It has long felt as though Western Marxism was correct to attend
to the role of ideology in our market societies. But it has also felt as
though this notion of ideology could not be firmly attached to the eco-
nomic processes that Marx called the “base” and marked as themselves
autonomously patterned and determinative. In the previous chapter, I
argued that a “transcendental” theory of ideology that sees it as govern-
ing discourse can never succeed. But it is not just the theory that should
be changed in a world where language is a service. It is rather that LLMs
and their ilk transform the expression of ideology, not just its syntax
but also its semantics.
    The connection between base and superstructure is materialized in
logistical systems implemented on the data platforms. “Platform” means
data + machine learning. Generative AI completes the first stage of the
platform economy, because it realizes a fusion that Amazon—for exam-
ple, but above all—set out to perform in the 1990s, that is, the fusion of
meaning and logistics in the process of capitalization. The consequences
are at once obvious and mysterious as we struggle to make sense of our
economic world in terms patently unfit for that understanding. Bench-
marks of growth and inflation become garbled in an economy that is
closing in on running on capture and generation.
    The so-c alled Solow paradox states that the digital era is visible
everywhere except the productivity statistics. That is because the digi-
tal is a representational environment, and even information economics
lacks a real sense of the “aesthetic mode of production.” Language and
computation are not growth industries; they can reassign and shuffle
values, with massive consequences, but they are not values themselves.
Economically, we are living in a system in which valuation is system-
atically mistaken for value. Generative AI will make this “paradox”
infrastructural, and we will eventually get used to it. An externalized
write function reinternalized as part of capitalization will do nothing

206                             Conclusion


to change that. But it will literalize the alternative vision of the relation
between meaning and value that critical theory has done the most to
put on the map over the last century. That vision isn’t a solution; it’s
a concept that is really in development and that LLMs bring to a new
stage of concreteness, momentarily visible but—as all such processes—
quickly receding into the background.
    Language as a service will be a crucial aspect of the platform economy
going forward, and it should push the problem of platform semiotics
into the—faded—foreground. The button icons that allow us to com-
mand labor, the clicks and the reading that are quickly being converted
into the consumption of “artificial” text, will make a static system even
faster. The big tech platforms, operating data centers of breathtaking ex-
tent in unprecedented ways, whirl data around in the widening gyre, but
they don’t do much else. When language is a service, capital must run
on data-semiotic pathways. Those pathways will always be partly visible,
but the momentary visibility of the poetry-to-ideology spectrum that is
being seeded in this crucial moment in our economic-cultural process
will surely disappear. This book has been an attempt to fight the coming
obscurity of the synthesis of language and computation.


Computation and the Return of Rhetoric
Mathematics and language are basics of our education. They are skills
we learn, both informally and in the classroom. But they are also media,
the most human of all the media. One thrust of my argument here has
been to try to put them on relatively even ground. I have sought to avoid
privileging math as hard, complex, and powerful over a language that is
democratic and known. But equally, I have tried to argue that language
is as alien as it is intimate—perhaps Jacques Lacan’s portmanteau exti-
mate could be invoked. Language is not “human” where computation is
not. The way we view computation today is the achievement of the pe-
riod since the Industrial Revolution, which is united in one way around
the axis of the production of data and the devising of techniques, social
and technological, for processing those data. The writing-based civi-
lization of Europe gave way to a computationally enabled society. The
spread of capitalism by way of colonial and neocolonial methods was en-
abled by this computation, and contemporary geopolitics is unthinkable

                                 Conclusion                                207

without it. In this sense, the “division of mental labor” should be seen as
part and parcel of the industrial phase of society.
    But it is not enough to think of the globalization of industry with its
divided labor—intellectual and manual—as computational. The picture
that we saw at the beginning of this book of this computational society,
and have periodically visited throughout in Kittler’s idea of a “gramma-
tology” of computing in the present, is insufficient to understand the
twenty-first century. The question of “everyday” or natural language has
always dogged digital theory, as we have seen. But with deep learning,
a general challenge to the fundamentality of “computing” in Kittler’s
sense has emerged. In reality, this challenge was there all along. But
now, it is on the surface and in the algorithm. It is the rise of a truly
cultural technology, AI. I have argued in this book that we need a general
poetics to make sense of the meaning that this technology makes by
engaging systems of representation. We will also have to make sense of
its reintroduction of rhetoric.
    The discipline and practice of rhetoric was, as John Guillory has re-
cently put it, a “total program of cognitive-linguistic training, whose parts,
though conceptually distinct, were thoroughly interconnected in the
actual rhetorical practice of the premodern world.”23 For about a mil-
lennium, from the Carolingian Empire to the Enlightenment, the
Latin language was the channel through which bureaucracy and power
flowed. And access to Latin, which no one spoke natively, was a matter
of induction into the rhetorical regime. To learn rhetoric was to learn
composition and communication, memory and writing. And to produce
writing, one needed the “common places”—often literal topoi or fixed
phrases, options for communication. As literary critic Yohei Igarashi
has observed, LLMs seem to be producing a new set of such topoi, an
idea that runs close to my notion of semantic packages from the pre-
vious chapter.24 To learn a set of semifixed phrases for recombination
with the dual goal of producing clear communication for sacred and
mundane power of creating poetry sounds very much like the function
that LLMs perform. To combine these with the intensive memory tech-
niques that came down from ancient Greece was the goal of rhetoric.
But this cognitive training, as Guillory notes, has become defunct. The
written civilization of rhetoric slowly died over the period of industri-
alization from the eighteenth century to the present. If a new culture

208                           Conclusion


of machine-generated topoi emerges, it will be supracognitive, an ex-
tension of cultural techniques with a point of origin murkily divided
between human-produced data and their remixing in machine output.
It will be a rhetorical–computational complex.25
    As Igarashi notes, the common places were divided between analyti
cal topoi—argumentative shorthand, more or less—and “cumulative”
topoi, “prefabricated” phrases we use in common speech. He gives “it
was a dark and stormy night” and “once upon a time,” and we might
think of the recent controversy about the overuse of the word delve by
ChatGPT, or human versions of fixed phrases like “he got that dog in him”
(sports), or the popularity of certain jargon words in humanities writing
(“indexes,” “imbricates”). Such sequences are what Saussure originally
had in mind in his notion of the “syntagm,” a chunk of linear language
laid out and redeployable as a whole. Guillory argues that rhetor ic in
this form “depended on the binding together of its compositional and
performative functions.”26 Competence and performance were concen-
trated in the “total” cognitive training of the rhetorical regime.
    Rhetoric as it came down from ancient Greece was a technē, a formal
skill. Guillory proposes that it has been replaced with information. He
here joins a large group of speculators on the causes and consequences
of the end of the “old rhetoric.” Walter Ong influentially argues that the
Enlightenment encyclopedia augured the end of the need for cultural-
cognitive rhetoric, because information could be looked up, rather
than stored in the mind.27 The techniques of memory associated with
rhetoric in the ancient and medieval worlds indeed have become curios
with the steady production of ever-larger amounts of data of all kinds
over the last three hundred years.28 Ong’s notion of a “secondary oral-
ity,” in which features of spoken language are recorded in writing, is
separately premised on transmission technologies for language, from
the telegraph and the postcard to the text message and social media.
It seems likely that LLMs would have far less pragmatic ability if these
transformations had not taken place. A sort of casual rhetorical regime
has arisen with increasing speed over the last half century, populated by
Internet-specific transformations in language and paralinguistic signs,
like emojis and memes.29 The rhetorical–computational civilization we
face is an LLM-enabled extension or repackaging of the entire media
history of the postrhetorical era.

                                Conclusion                                209

    Ernst Robert Curtius, the great literary critic, presented the rhetori-
cal system as the object for literary studies in his influential European Lit-
erature and the Latin Middle Ages in 1948, that fateful year of information
theory. Perhaps Curtius was nostalgic, in the immediate aftermath of
the Second World War, for a Europe united in some common culture. (He
had previously mainly studied modern French literature.) He called the
“technical epoch” of modernism since the eighteenth century a period of
“progress” that had actually led to the unleashing of “forces of destruc-
tion.”30 But to the extent that the computing data enabled the creation
of those forces, and the modern computer came from that very nexus of
science and global war, those forces of destruction would, over the course
of the next century, reactivate rhetoric on computational rails.
    Three trajectories crash together in the LLM: the data-gathering
“information society,” which relies on statistics above all to make plain
sense of its social circumstances—what Ian Hacking calls the “avalanche
of numbers” starting in the 1830s; the automation of computation, also
with primitive origins in the 1830s and 1840s, in Charles Babbage’s and
Ada Lovelace’s creation of the universal computer and the modern al-
gorithm, but industrially unrealized until Turing’s discovery of the
“machine” that underlies all computation and von Neumann’s implemen-
tation of a version of that machine—the only one to date—in physical
components; and the passage of rhetoric from cognitive training to an
open-ended and ill-defined “culture” of communication, including its
technical devices. If “rhetoric” was the name for training in the Middle
Ages, it, like “culture” and “literature,” became a name for the stuff out
there in the world—words on pages or on screens, books made of words,
genres in the modern period. The LLM is an inverted world of rhetoric
in which the rules of composition are not an elegant, five-step process
going from discovery of an idea to the performance of the text but a stan-
dardized reflection of the Babel that “culture” was after rhetoric, the vast
extent of human language production in concreto. When language is mod-
eled, this rhetorical culture is its face. The language machine presents us
with a truly “new” rhetoric, a computational one.
    The twentieth century saw intermittent attempts to make art “ex-
perimental,” from Dada to surrealism to L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E poetry
to computer-aided literary production. But it is not the rarefied world of
the avant-garde that is now algorithmically reproducible. It is language

210                             Conclusion


as a total cultural form, yet devoid of human cognition. This extensive
version of culture, which of course will now feed back into our cognition,
is, for the first time in history, experimentally available to us.
    Two senses of experimentation are active in these systems going for-
ward. We may use them to create new definitions, formal and otherwise,
of culture, literature, images, just as scientists hope to use them to know
proteins, genetics, and the cosmic background radiation better than
they have. They are also unintentional social experiments, risks that we
have accidentally taken.
    Aristotle’s definition of rhetoric is heuresis (Latin inventio), from heu-
risko, “I find, discover.” AI is the large-scale process of fucking around
and finding out, mixing contingency and generation. For Aristotle,
that which could be known with certainty fell under the discipline of
dialectics—the second branch of the trivium. But when we think about
“what might be or not be,” we combine generation and probability in a
way that produces whatever actually happens, history. As Barthes puts
it, rhetoric is a “deliberately diminished logic, one adapted to the level
of the ‘public,’ i.e. of common sense, or ordinary opinion. . . . It would
be well-suited to our so-called mass culture, in which an Aristotelian
probability prevails.”31 Barthes extends this to literature—“ how many
films, pulp novels, commercial articles might take as their motto the
Aristotelian rule: ‘better an impossible probability than an improbable
possibility’ ”—but we are forced to extend it to society itself, which re-
veals the dialectic of language and the social in the surfacing of a quan-
titative rhetoric that cares little for common sense or public opinion.
The probabilistic society, or the heuristic society, is founded on the dia-
lectics of social and linguistic form, which are dependent on the conver-
gence of computation and language. The study of this new rhetoric will
require merging literary and computational paradigms in education,
mixing the trivium and the quadrivium just as they have been mixed in
reality today. The resulting discipline is what I have in this book called
a general poetics, which would have no truck with nonsense buzzwords
like “misinformation” or the “pollution of the Internet.” Too much of our
reaction to technology is based on the ladder of reference—we suddenly
want inhumanly right systems where we have created an unfathomably
large, polythematically sublime culture both rhetorical and computa-
tional at once.

                               Conclusion                                 211

   I have insisted throughout this book that intelligence and cognition
can be addressed only once we have secure semiotic ground on which
to walk. So I close with a note on where I think we might begin to build
the bridge.
   Barthes points out that Aristotle’s dialectics is based on

   a division of unity according to natural articulations, according to
   its types, down to indivisible species. This “descent” proceeds in
   steps: at each stage, on each step, there are two terms; one must
   be chosen over the other in order to take the next step down and
   accede to a new binary opposition, from which the descent will
   continue. This divisional rhetoric—as opposed to Aristotle’s syl-
   logistic rhetoric—closely resembles a cybernetic, digital program:
   each choice determines the next alternative; or again, it resembles
   the paradigmatic structure of language, whose binary oppositions
   involve a marked and an unmarked term: here the marked sets up
   a new alternation.32

As I have tried to argue throughout this book, the opening of this
dialectical-c ybernetic system to a probabilistic interpretation has more
fully realized structuralist ideas than Barthes could possibly have an-
ticipated. What he sees as “paradigmatic” has become a denser web that
includes syntagms, deriving a quasi-natural language from the poetic
function and spreading it out into ideology, making up a new rhetoric.
The “dichotomous” aspect of structuralism tended to drown out the
problem of the totality in Saussure’s differential hypothesis.
    Hito Steyerl has recently written that deep learning systems “im-
personate fake totalities, based on the average mass of trawled data.”33
But what is a “fake” totality? The locally incorrect, immoral, or other-
wise suspicious elements of AI outputs do not respond to this subdia
lectical theory. There is no “real totality” except by a supposition we
cannot avoid. (I believe this is what Lacan means by the “Real.”) Mathe
matics and language do not get along without both invoking that real
totality, and data add to the totality itself—becoming a factor in the
world, rather than “just” a representation—even as they refer to it. “In-
telligence” must have the feature of being able to isolate both symbolic
systems and the sense of value that leads to the affective rejection of

212                              Conclusion


“wrong” conclusions (which, when made into a theory, is what I have
called remainder humanism). To unite both of those is to have a cultural
ability, as Maniglier puts it, that is general. Call it general culture and its
machine counterpart GCI.
    As rhetoric arises again in machine form, we will surely have to train
our citizens to understand how to use language in computational set-
tings in new ways. Cultural production in general may point to this new
training, which—just like medieval rhetoric—sits at the intersection
of education, literature, and clerical work. General poetics would be the
critical study of these interlocking systems as they proliferate, backed
by a theory that tends to the semiotic forms of all of them. If we wish
to extend such a study of culture to the problem of cognition, I project
that this will require an update to dialectics as the immanent theory of
extensive cognition. That is a project for another day, not least because
so much meaning today generates without cognition in the loop, pooling
in the last instance only into human language.
