Notes


Introduction
      1. Here I agree with Laura McGrath and her coauthors, who write, “Language
models like GPT-3 have attracted attention by mastering an immense repertoire
of forms, voices, and genres that they remix as requested. In truth, these models
encode not just language but culture.” McGrath et al., “Culture, Theory, Data,” 528.
      2. Throughout this book, I focus my interpretive efforts on the trained
model. This means that I have relatively little to say about reinforcement learning
with human feedback (RLHF) or on the qualitative nature of the training data set
(in chapter 6, there is a short reflection on this issue). This is because RLHF alone
does not produce the “fluidity” or the basic linguistic competence that I think is
most important about these systems. Their ability to model language as a code,
rather than as particular types of human speech, was clearly demonstrated by
systems like GPT-2 before any RLHF was added. I have more to say later about the
data than I do about fine-tuning of any kind, but this is for a different reason. I
do not think it is easy—or perhaps even possible—to characterize data sets with
billions or trillions of data points qualitatively. Two arguments about the data
seem insufficient to me because of this unsurveyability. The idea that whatever
the models does is “contaminated” by memorization of data does not really go
to my point here, because that question is almost entirely about “reasoning” and
“intelligence,” features I do not think LLMs possess. The notion that the data set
is skewed in some fundamental way that does not reflect human values might be
true for a sentimental view of those values on the part of some social scientists or
their counterparts in the AI wings of large platform companies but has no bearing
on the important question of how such a skew relates to social bias in language
more generally. Indeed, the fit between those “biases” might be taken as evidence
that these systems really capture our culture.
      3. I am not alone in thinking that structuralism is relevant in a new way in
the present. Ted Underwood has claimed that LLMs present us with the “empiri
cal triumph of theory.” Underwood, “Empirical Triumph of Theory.” Alexander
Galloway has argued in various places that structuralism in particular makes
sense of the way digital systems handle data; Juan Luis Gastaldi and Patrice
Maniglier have both claimed the relevance of this theory for learning systems.
Galloway, “Golden Age of Analog,” 211–32; Gastaldi, “Why Can Computers Un-
derstand Natural Language?,” 149–214; Maniglier, “Processing Cultures,” 145–72.
See also Tenen, who argues that structuralism helps to explain the “template
culture” that the long history of language modeling has created. The history of



                                        213

214                          Notes to Introduction

structuralism is also known to be tied to the history of cybernetics. Tenen, Liter-
ary Theory for Robots; see also Geoghegan, “From Information Theory to French
Theory,” 96–126; and Campolo and Schwerzmann, “From Rules to Examples.”
Lydia Liu’s claim that Derrida’s philosophy makes sense of Claude Shannon’s
work, and her excavation of Lacan, which I cite later, runs close to my concerns
here too. See Liu, Freudian Robot.
       4. OpenAI, “Better Language Models and Their Implications.”
       5. Guardian, “A Robot Wrote This Entire Article”; Weinberg, “Philosophers on
GPT-3.”
       6. Bubeck et al., “Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence.”
       7. A very helpful account of this difference can be found in Mackenzie,
Machine Learners, 21–51.
       8. Fodor, Language of Thought. Fodor’s critique of connectionism, the pre-
 decessor to deep learning, remains valid on several points, especially on what he
 calls “systematicity” and “compositionality.” But the medium of computation in
 LLMs is precisely language without thought. See Fodor and McLaughlin, “Connec-
 tionism and the Problem of Systematicity,” 183–204.
       9. It appears that unsemantic tokenization is more common in non-English
 languages, which reinforces the sense that these systems have a bias for English
 due to the disproportionate amount of that language on the internet.
     10. Harnad, “Symbol Grounding Problem,” 340.
     11. Harnad, 335–46.
     12. Browning and LeCun, “AI and the Limits of Language.”
     13. Piantadosi and Hill, in “Meaning without Reference,” argue that reference
 is only one kind of meaning, leveling a series of cases of such meaning against
 Bender’s and Koller’s arguments.
     14. Putnam, “Meaning of ‘Meaning.’ ”
     15. Mandelkern and Linzen, “Do Language Models’ Words Refer?”
     16. Mollo and Millière, “Vector Grounding Problem,” 19–20.
     17. Mollo and Millière, 21.
     18. Pavlick, “Symbols and Grounding.”
     19. Pavlick argues that LLMs in fact capture some features of formal seman-
 tics that are necessary for grounding.
     20. Frege and Beaney, Frege Reader.
     21. Neurath, “Scientific Conception of the World,” 306.
     22. Pavlick, “Semantic Structure in Deep Learning,” 447–71.
     23. Morris, Foundations of the Theory of Signs, 2.
     24. Levinson, Pragmatics.
     25. Levinson, 4, points out that this restriction is due to Carnap’s disciple and
 major figure in early natural language processing Yoshua Bar-Hillel. Levinson says
 that this usage has “little to offer linguists” because “all natural languages have
 deictic terms,” and the exclusion of semantics from deictics essentially denies all
 meaning to languages. One need look no further than Jakobson’s famous notion
 of a “shifter”—which derives, as it happens, from the idea of a “symbolic index” in
 early computing, in the terms of Arthur Burks—to find a literary-theoretical par-
 allel attempt to deal with deixis without reaching outside the formal features of
 language. It is hardly a coincidence that we find in Jakobson, and in Burks before

                             Notes to Introduction                                 215

him, if not in Bar-Hillel, acute attention to Peirce’s semiotics in a linguistic vein.
See Burks, “Icon, Index, and Symbol,” 673–89.
    26. Silverstein, “Cognitive Implications of a Referential Hierarchy,” 129.
    27. Silverstein, 159.
    28. I’m going to focus on the transformer and its underlying “attention”
mechanism in what follows, but the culmination of the argument in chapter 5 is
meant to demonstrate why the computation–language interaction it realizes is
possible in the first place. I regard these mechanisms as the first to realize what
must be a larger class of potential interactions between language and mathemat-
ics. So although the book takes this departure seriously, it ultimately seeks not
to diagnose the present condition but to understand its theoretical implications,
which already have both cultural and scientific consequences, all of which are
poorly understood.
    29. Piantadosi and Hill, “Meaning without Reference.”
    30. Pavlick, “Symbols and Grounding.”
    31. Millière and Buckner, “A Philosophical Introduction to Language Models.”
    32. Lake and Murphy, “Word Meaning in Minds and Machines,” 401–31.
    33. A field of “interpretability” has emerged, although some of its major
proponents seem to be motivated by the ideology of “AI risk.” See Anthropic,
“Decomposing Language Models into Understandable Components.” Earlier
efforts include “BERTology,” based on the bidirectional transformer model that
immediately preceded GPTs. See Rogers et al., “A Primer in BERTology.” BERT
was open source, and mechanistic interpretation faces the problem of corpo-
rate secrets now, complicating its efforts. This type of interpretability has been
proposed for virtually every architecture over the last fifteen years and has some
overlap with humanistic digital humanities work in this space. See Dobson, “On
Reading and Interpreting Black Box Deep Neural Networks.”
    34. Lake and Murphy, “Word Meaning in Minds and Machines.”
    35. Yiu et al., “Transmission versus Truth.”
    36. Yiu et al. One may remark that cognitive science has belatedly rein-
vented the very term that media theory has possessed for decades, perhaps most
famously in Bernhard Siegert’s idea of the Kulturtechnik, technology seen as that
which cultivates by means of creating distinctions by means of material divisions,
marks, or processes. The convergence of literary theory and evolutionary and
cognitive psychology would ideally be shifted from implicit agreement to active
debate and collaboration.
    37. Donald, Origins of the Modern Mind, 42.
    38. Williams, Marxism and Literature, 11–21. “ ‘Culture,’ or more specifically
‘art’ and ‘literature’ (themselves newly generalized and abstracted), were seen as
the deepest record, the deepest impulse, and the deepest resource of the ‘human
spirit.’ ‘Culture’ was then at once the secularization and the liberalization of
earlier metaphysical forms. Its agencies and processes were distinctively human,
and were generalized as subjective, but certain quasi-metaphysical forms—‘the
imagination,’ ‘creativity,’ ‘inspiration,’ ‘the aesthetic,’ and the new positive sense
of ‘myth’—were in effect composed into a new pantheon” (15). Culture is the
main discursive competitor with cognition for the distinctively human generali
zation of metaphysical problems, understood profanely.

216                          Notes to Introduction

     39. Hayles, “Can Computers Create Meanings?,” 32–55; Hayles, Unthought.
     40. Deacon, Incomplete Nature.
     41. Hayles has gone further, claiming that bots have “personae.” See Hayles,
“Inside the Mind of an AI,” 635–66.
     42. Tomlinson, Machines of Evolution; see also Tomlinson, Culture and the Course
of Human Evolution. A species creates a “niche” by changing its environment—
usually through some kind of tool use, like beavers making dams—so that survival
pressures are altered, thereby indirectly affecting natural selection. The theory is
associated with the dialectical biologist Richard Lewontin, and Deacon argues that
humans have “biased” their own evolution to favor a symbol-using linguistic brain.
Tomlinson is attempting a broader-spectrum semiotic theory of evolution in which
 the interpretant is the crucial figure for human culture and therefore meaning.
     43. Deacon, “Shannon–Boltzmann–Darwin,” 169–96; Weatherby and Justie,
 “Indexical AI,” 381–415.
     44. Tomlinson, Machines of Evolution, 59–60.
     45. Two books appear to agree on this point, neither of which it was possible
 to integrate more fully into this project owing to the timing of their publication.
 See Gunkel, AI for Communication, and Kockelman, Last Words. Kockelman’s
 extensive use of Peirce fits directly in the line of semiotic explorations of meaning
 I have been reviewing here, and both books are excellent on the topic of commu-
 nication, which I largely leave aside in favor of questions of structure and system.
     46. Tomlinson, Machines of Evolution, 284.
     47. Lacan, Ego in Freud’s Theory, 18. See Lydia Liu’s excellent reading of the
 interaction with Riguet. Liu, “Cybernetic Unconscious,” 288–320.
     48. The best account to date is Liu, Freudian Robot.
     49. Stiegler and Norman, Symbolic Misery, 67.
     50. James Duesterberg writes that Derrida saw a world “liberated from
 reference, made up of pure signs referring only to themselves,” and that with
 the LLM, we see that Derrida’s description is accurate, because “words now are
 things.” Duesterberg, “Neither Governed nor Free.” I agree that words as material
 forces are relevant, but the referential function, though not the basis of language,
 remains in play, before and after LLMs.
     51. Kittler, Gramophone Film Typewriter.
     52. Kittler, “There Is No Software,” in Truth of the Technological World, 223.
     53. This is not to deny the point that Lacan already made, which is that com-
 putation creates a “hole in the Real” by creating new feedback-couplings between
 representations and physics. The best elaboration of this argument is Siegert, Pas-
 sage des Digitalen. But this is the definition of the symbolic in Lacan and so applies
 to language too.
     54. Dobson, “Vector Hermeneutics,” 81–93.
     55. Chun, “On Software,” 26–51.
     56. I address this more fully in chapters 2 and 3—the shift to graphical or
 even tensor processing units could be taken to be a shift from classical comput-
 ing, although I am not aware of a media-theoretical argument to this effect. I
 do not think that they change the basic issue, however, which is that a learning
 system is built on a symbolic, rather than some analog or biological, system.
     57. There has been rather more attention to images and their relation to the
 computationally produced symbolic order, probably because the artificial image

                            Notes to Introduction                               217

has been a regular part of our social experience for well over a century. See, e.g.,
Mitchell, Reconfigured Eye.
     58. Maniglier, “Processing Cultures,” 159.
     59. MIT Technology Review, “This Horse-Riding Astronaut Is a Milestone.”
     60. Halpern et al., “Surplus Data,” 197–210.
     61. Underwood, “Empirical Triumph of Theory.”
     62. Semiology is thus a completely different proposal from the hotly debated
“Sapir–Whorf hypothesis,” which claims that language influences or even constitutes
 elements of thinking as such. Semiology proposes instead that the final value of a
 sign is in the communicative process of language and thus asks to what extent other
sign-systems have to be structured like language to make sense for us. The question
is one of media and philology rather than the metaphysics of the mind (which
remains metaphysical even when the mind is purported to be treated empirically).
     63. Barthes, Elements of Semiology, 41.
     64. Dreyfus, What Computers Still Can’t Do. The best modernization of
Dreyfus’s approach is Smith, Promise of Artificial Intelligence; for my critique of
 this approach in general, see Weatherby, “Intermittent Legitimacy,” 11–39.
     65. It also opens up a line of thinking about embodied thought that has
 some overlap with the important school that emerged from Second Cybernet-
 ics, especially in this latter’s phenomenological articulation. See the important
 book by Varela et al., Embodied Mind; see also Clarke and Hansen, Emergence and
Embodiment.
     66. See the extensive summary in Crawford, Atlas of AI, and the many reports
from organizations like AI Now, Data and Society, and McKinsey.
     67. Piantadosi, “Modern Language Models.”
     68. Bender et al., “On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots,” 617.
     69. Bender et al., 610–23.
     70. Bender et al., 613; Bender and Koller, “Climbing towards NLU,” 5185–98.
     71. Bender et al., “On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots,” 611.
     72. Bender and Koller, “Climbing towards NLU,” 5185.
     73. The argument “rests on an a priori distinction between humans and lan-
guage models elaborated through discussion of the communicative contexts for
human language,” as Katherine Bode and Lauren M. E. Goodlad write. See Bode
and Goodlad, “Data Worlds.”
     74. Mollick, Co-intelligence.
     75. Bender et al., “On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots,” 614.
     76. Bender et al., 614.
     77. Yarden Katz has extensively criticized this engineering-friendly line of
 critique in his Artificial Whiteness. Some of the proponents of this critique have
 moved to a position of abolition, or at least moratorium, on the use of chatbots,
 the second of the two options available from this standpoint.
     78. Buschek and Thorp, “Models All the Way Down.”
     79. Geroulanos, An Atheism That Is Not Humanist.
     80. The acronym stands for “transhumanism, extropianism, singularitarian-
ism, cosmism, rationalism, effective altruism, and longtermism.” See Gebru and
Torres, “TESCREAL Bundle.”
     81. Roose, “AI Poses ‘Risk of Extinction.’ ”
     82. Ord, Precipice.

218                           Notes to chapter 1


1. How the Humanities Lost Language
       1. Pinker, Language Instinct, 19.
       2. Pinker, 19.
       3. Pinker, 19: “language is not a cultural artifact that we learn the way we
learn to tell time or how the federal government works.”
       4. Lacan argues that the symbolic order has a dialectical structure, because
it is totalizing, constituting the very universe it makes available to thought. See
Lacan, The Ego in Freud’s Theory, 30. In chapter 5, I argue that this occurs in two
distinct ways in computational and linguistic formalisms.
       5. An excellent overview of this aspect of Chomsky can be found in Rey,
“Analyticity and Chomskyan Linguistics.” More generally on Chomsky and his
influence, one may read the comprehensive account in Boden, Mind as Machine.
A more technical, standard account of the linguistics history is Newmeyer, Lin-
guistic Theory in America.
       6. On the “flatness” of the Markov chain and the depth of Chomsky’s notion
of “creativity,” see Boden, Mind as Machine, 641.
       7. Chomsky, Syntactic Structures, 15.
       8. Chomsky, 15.
       9. Chomsky, 16.
     10. Pinker writes in Language Instinct, “When we are comprehending sentences,
the stream of words is transparent; we see through to the meaning so automatically
that we can forget that a movie is in a foreign language and subtitled” (21).
     11. Chomsky, Syntactic Structures, 23.
     12. Chomsky, 21.
     13. See Buckner, From Deep Learning to Rational Machines, who argues that
deep learning is vindicating a “moderate empiricism.”
     14. Chomsky and McGilvray, Cartesian Linguistics, 71.
     15. Chomsky and McGilvray.
     16. The problem of this regress is one launching point for German idealism
after Kant, though, as the thought experiment about what it means to think
about thinking was a major inspiration for Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre (Science of
Knowing).
     17. Hauser et al., “Faculty of Language,” 1569.
     18. Chomsky, “Derivation by Phase,” 3.
     19. Chomsky, “Minimalist Inquiries,” 100.
     20. Adger, Language Unlimited, 211–14.
     21. Adger, 216.
     22. Chomsky, Knowledge of Language, 7.
     23. Chomsky, “Genuine Explanation and the Strong Minimalist Thesis.”
     24. Chomsky, Syntactic Structures, 17.
     25. Maniglier, “Processing Cultures,” 155; cf. Tomasello and Ibbotson, “Evi-
dence Rebuts Chomsky’s Theory.”
     26. The psychologist Brenden Lake is experimenting with head cameras on
babies in the language acquisition phase to see if LLMs can learn from visual
and other contextual data in something like the way humans do. See Leffer,
“A Camera-Wearing Baby.”

                               Notes to chapter 1                               219

    27. See Pinker, “Language Acquisition,” 170.
    28. Pinker, 170.
    29. See Tomasello and Ibbotson, “Evidence Rebuts Chomsky’s Theory.”
    30. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, B75/A51.
    31. Kant, A137/B176.
    32. Chomsky, Knowledge of Language, 20.
    33. Chomsky, 22.
    34. Chomsky, 26.
    35. Chomsky, 26.
    36. Chomsky, 26.
    37. Pinker, Language Instinct, 317.
    38. Manning, “Human Language Understanding and Reasoning,” 131.
    39. Firth, Studies in Linguistic Analysis, 11.
    40. Neurath et al., International Encyclopedia of Unified Science.
    41. Harris, “Distributional Structure,” 146.
    42. Harris, Structural Linguistics, 5.
    43. Harris, A Theory of Language and Information.
    44. Lenci and Sahlgren, Distributional Semantics, 6.
    45. Harris, A Theory of Language and Information, 274.
    46. Harris, “Distributional Structure,” 146–47.
    47. Wiggins and Jones, How Data Happened; see their chapter 6, “Data
at War.”
    48. For an account of how this trend influenced speech recognition, where
linguistics and data processing heavily overlapped, see Li, “There’s No Data Like
More Data,” 165–82.
    49. Rieder, Engines of Order, 215, speaking specifically of Bayes as a backbone
of information retrieval.
    50. Léon, Automating Linguistics, 2–3.
    51. Osgood, “Semantic Differential Technique,” 173. We may note that Daniel
Kahneman’s and Amos Tversky’s separate early work on psychological semantics
and measurement theory engages Osgood, suggesting a common root between
behavioral psychology’s models and those that would eventually become vector
semantics.
    52. Osgood, 173.
    53. Shoemaker, “Distributional Semantics.”
    54. Shoemaker.
    55. Rieder, Engines of Order, 238.
    56. Rieder, 215–16.
    57. Norvig, “On Chomsky and the Two Cultures of Statistical Learning.”
    58. Breiman, “Statistical Modeling.”
    59. Norvig, “On Chomsky and the Two Cultures of Statistical Learning.”
    60. Manning, “Probabilistic Syntax,” 291.
    61. Manning, “Human Language Understanding and Reasoning,” 130.
    62. Manning, 130.
    63. Manning, 134.
    64. Manning, 134.
    65. Manning, 134.

220                            Notes to chapter 1

     66. This view has several hallmarks of a dialectical theory (constitutive inter-
nal divisions, local sequences conditioned by totality, etc.), but its proponents
have, in both generations of its existence, distanced themselves from this term
and the Marxism and Hegelianism associated with it. In the first generation,
the structuralists, Claude Lévi-Strauss leading the charge, distanced themselves
from the Marxism of Jean-Paul Sartre and others in the French public sphere.
In the second generation, usually known as poststructuralist, distance from
Marx’s revolutionary thought was complemented by an insistence that Hegelian
dialectics was naive about semiotics or semiology. This insistence began to break
in the 1990s with publications by Judith Butler, Slavoj Žižek, and Catherine
Malabou that attempted to adopt aspects of Hegel, but to my knowledge, no
work systematically compares structuralism and dialectics. One may also note
that the structuralists themselves often referred to their theory as dialectical, as
in Lévi-Strauss’s treatment following Jakobson in the chapter “Structure and Dia
lectics” in Structural Anthropology, 232–45.
     67. Saussure et al., Course in General Linguistics, 120.
     68. Saussure et al., 120.
     69. Saussure et al., 114.
     70. Saussure et al., 122.
     71. By choosing to put it this way, I mean to signal that I am not making a
rigid distinction between “structuralism” and “poststructuralism,” which I regard
as a single, more or less continuous tradition. The various “breaks” from struc-
ture to something suprastructural are family squabbles. The main difference that
matters to me here is that poststructuralism has on the whole tended to be less
concretely interested in language in the sense of strings of words on a page, other
theories of linguistics structure, and even—unfortunately—the automatization
of language alongside which the statistics view developed. For these two reasons,
I say I am returning to “structuralism” here, although there are some reasons,
to be discussed later in this chapter, why I think that Saussure in particular is
best suited to parse LLMs. Derrida’s reading of Saussure, in particular, seems to
obscure this usefulness in the present.
     72. For the classical argument against the psychological arbitrariness of the
sign, which does not seem to me to solve any problem that Saussure had not
already framed correctly, see the chapter “The Nature of the Linguistic Sign”
in Benveniste and Meek, Problems in General Linguistics.
     73. See the excellent sketch of this debate in Moi, Revolution of the Ordinary,
113ff.
     74. Saussure et al., Course in General Linguistics, 65.
     75. Moi reports that it is “hard to avoid precisely this ‘mistake’ ” of telling
students that the ink on the page is the signifier, because the use of “mate-
rial” but also “psychological” seems to conflict. Moi, Revolution of the Ordinary,
116–17. I think this difficulty comes from a simple material–abstract or material–
conceptual binary of which Saussure once literally symbolized the end in serious
analysis of culture.
     76. Maniglier writes that “the signifier is indeed as mental as the signified,”
so that we might say that the signifier is that socially determined mental content
that is material. Maniglier, “Processing Cultures,” 68.
     77. Pourciau, Writing of Spirit, 71.

                                 Notes to chapter 1                                   221

     78. Here I follow Jameson, who writes that “Saussure’s opposition is dialec-
tical in that it involves a tension between a part and a whole either of which is
inconceivable without the other: being relational rather than substantialist, it
thus strikes directly at the kind of isolation of a single apparently free-standing
element (such as a ‘statement’) foreseen by empirical thinking.” Jameson, Prison-
House of Language, 24. See also Voloshinov, Marxism; and Barthes, Elements of
Semiology, 15; Barthes quite precisely states that all the dichotomies in struc
 turalism are dialectically constructed.
     79. Saussure et al., Course in General Linguistics, 115.
     80. It seems possible that someone could use Lacan’s version of semiology,
 which includes a great deal of (confabulated) mathematics and a genuine engage-
 ment with cybernetics, to do a version of what I am doing here. Notable efforts
 to formalize or otherwise deploy Lacan for mathematical philosophy or media
 theory are those of Alain Badiou and Friedrich Kittler—but neither of these has
 elaborated a way in which language and computation interoperate. Lacan met
 Chomsky and makes some remarks about his system creating a “hole in the real”
 in seminar XXIII, Le Sinthome. But even Slavoj Žižek, who has made perhaps the
 most of Lacan’s formalisms, has not brought them to bear on the concrete analy-
 sis of language across the spectrum to which the structuralists aspired.
     81. I mean generally “speculative realism” and “object-oriented ontology.”
     82. One may think here of the strange case of N. Katherine Hayles’s book
 How We Became Posthuman, published within a year of Jean-Pierre Dupuy’s book
 The Mechanization of the Mind. Although both books took up cognitive topics, and
 Dupuy has continued to publish on what he sees as the philosophical limitations
 of cognitive science as a movement, the books touched off a (wonderful) flood of
 humanistic engagements with cybernetics that is still ongoing. But for some rea-
 son, the cognitivist thought that Dupuy highlighted, and that has played a major
 role in AI, has received not just little explicit attention but little critical awareness
 from the humanities.
     83. Derrida, Of Grammatology, 9.
     84. In a vehement critique of Derrida in the New York Review of Books, the phi-
 losopher John Searle pointed out that there is a long tradition in philosophy that,
 if anything, was more focused on gramme than on phone, perhaps extending from
 Leibniz to Frege and Russell and beyond. As Searle notes, the result of Derrida’s
 popularity seems to have been an almost total lack of engagement with a “golden
 age” of theories of language. Whatever one makes of Searle’s unrestrained anger
 at Derrida’s understanding of metaphysics, these points seem instructive to me,
 forty years on. Searle, review of The Word Turned Upside Down.
     85. Derrida, Margins of Philosophy, 11.
     86. Bunz, “Nachdenken über generatives Schreibens.” See the English at
 “Thinking through Generated Writing,” MediArXiv, https://doi.org/10.33767/osf
 .io/4th3x.
     87. Derrida, Margins of Philosophy, 12.
     88. Derrida, “Plato’s Pharmacy,” 103.
     89. Many exceptions to this statement are cited throughout this book,
 and there are some that I do not engage here, but none has to date made much
 attempt to wrest back the object “language,” in either public or academic percep-
 tion, from the other disciplines—it is too often seen as a fait accompli that some

222                            Notes to chapter 1

more fundamental aspects of language are treated by other disciplines, while its
cultural aspects are then consigned to literature departments. LLMs have the
potential to reverse the direction of this interdisciplinary arrangement.
    90. One may prefer a cultural-historical account of the loss of language, which
would have to reckon with John Guillory’s claim that English, in particular, has
seen its symbolic capital fade as the specific needs of cultural knowledge have
shifted in the elite in the United States over the last generation. But precisely
when cultural needs shift as the mode of production gradually changes, and class
constitution along with it, the need for critique and cultural knowledge that is
up to date on technical and scientific forms of knowledge, and contributes to
them—if against the grain—is one key to survival. See Guillory, Cultural Capital,
and Guillory, Professing Criticism.
    91. Simon, “Cognitive Science,” 33.
    92. Simon, 36.
    93. Simon, 43.
    94. The so-called replication crisis has mushroomed to the point where it
is unclear whether one should trust virtually any quantitatively based result in
social science, especially in psychology. See Leys, Anatomy of a Train Wreck, and
Gigerenzer, “Statistical Rituals.”
    95. Firth, “Applications of General Linguistics,” 2–3.
    96. Hjelmslev, Prolegomena to a Theory of Language, 39–40.
    97. Hjelmslev, 40.
    98. Barthes, Elements of Semiology, 40.
    99. Maniglier, “Processing Cultures,” 168.
   100. Dupuy, Mechanization of the Mind, 52; see also 93, where the “transcen
dental subject” was replaced by the “physical symbol system” of Simon and
Newell.
   101. Katz, “Noam Chomsky on Where Artificial Intelligence Went Wrong.”


2. The Eliza Effect Goes Global
      1. Simondon describes this serration as follows: an element (like the core of
the steam engine) is discovered, leading to a smooth progressive line of evolution
until a new element (like the vacuum tube) is synthesized. In a somewhat less
inspiring logic, AI usually proceeds by some local innovation in a representation
system, followed by hype, funding, and panic, and ending in the “smooth” prog-
ress of a series of (semi-)functional software systems that fade into the digital
background. Simondon, On the Mode of Existence.
      2. The foregoing is summarized from Weizenbaum, “ELIZA”; and
 eizenbaum, Computer Power and Human Reason.
 W
      3. Riskin, “A Sort of Buzzing”; Biever, “ChatGPT Broke the Turing Test”;
 Weatherby, “ChatGPT Broke the Turing Test.”
      4. Dupuy, Mechanization of the Mind.
      5. Roose, “A Conversation with Bing’s Chatbot.”
      6. See Hayles’s account of emergent personality in these systems. Hayles,
 “Inside the Mind of an AI.”
      7. Haugeland, Artificial Intelligence.
      8. Nilsson, Quest for Artificial Intelligence.

                               Notes to chapter 3                                223

     9. Turing, “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.”
    10. Murgia, “Sci-Fi Writer Ted Chiang.”
    11. Rumelhart, Foundations.
    12. Eichhorn, Content.
    13. Rosenblatt, Principles of Neurodynamics, 76–77.
    14. Müggenburg, “Clean by Nature,” 15–16.
    15. Minsky and Papert, Perceptrons, 2.
    16. A wonderful history is offered by Mitchell, whose account of Marvin
Minsky’s famous, but ultimately failed, critique of neural nets is among the
best I have seen. Mitchell, Artificial Intelligence. Minsky and his coauthor Papert
proved that perceptrons had a very clear ceiling in terms of problem solving, but
their “intuitive” extension of their proof to multilayered (“deep”) neural nets has
proven a case of severe overreach. Minsky and Papert, Perceptrons.
    17. Harnad, “Symbol Grounding Problem,” 337.
    18. Kirkwood, Endless Intervals.
    19. Haugeland, Artificial Intelligence.
    20. Galloway, “Golden Age of Analog.”
    21. Dobson, “Vector Hermeneutics.”
    22. Buckner, “Connectionism.”
    23. Weatherby and Justie, “Indexical AI.”
    24. This is why I cannot entirely go along with the proposals that AI is “dumb”
or “unintelligent,” as Broussard and, separately, Bajohr have proposed. Whatever
we mean by “dumb” must also be entangled with whatever it turns out we mean
by “intelligent,” which is pending. Broussard, Artificial Unintelligence; Bajohr,
“Dumb Meaning.”
    25. Turing, “On Computable Numbers.”
    26. Turing, “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.”
    27. Turing, “Lecture on the Automatic Computing Engine.”
    28. Chun, “On Software.”
    29. Hodges and Hofstadter, Alan Turing, 484.
    30. Dennett, “Will AI Achieve Consciousness?”
    31. Baudrillard, Simulacra and Simulation.
    32. McCulloch and Pitts, “A Logical Calculus.”
    33. Cassirer and Woglom, Problem of Knowledge.
    34. Weatherby, “Digital Metaphysics.”
    35. Abraham, Rebel Genius.
    36. McCulloch, “A Heterarchy of Values.”

3. The Semiological Surround, or How Language
   Is the Medium of Computation
      1. Saussure et al., Course in General Linguistics, 16.
      2. Saussure et al., 68.
      3. Maniglier argues that this is because all other sign-systems “share with
linguistic objects the same ontology.” Maniglier, “Processing Cultures,” 164–65. It
is rather unclear if this is true of computation as such, however.
      4. Barthes, Elements of Semiology, 10.
      5. Barthes, 10.

224                            Notes to chapter 3

      6. Kornbluh, Immediacy.
      7. Fazi, “Computational Search for Unity,” 52–54.
      8. Domingos, Master Algorithm; Anderson, “End of Theory.” On the his-
tory of LLMs and universal language, see Binder, Language and the Rise of the
Algorithm.
      9. See my account in Weatherby, “Intermittent Legitimacy.”
    10. Joque, Revolutionary Mathematics.
    11. Newell and Simon, “Computer Science as Empirical Inquiry.”
    12. Buckner, “Empiricism without Magic.”
    13. Malabou, Morphing Intelligence, 110.
    14. Malabou, Morphing Intelligence, 11.
    15. Simondon, On the Mode of Existence: “In the living being content becomes
coding, whereas in the machine coding and content remain separate as condition
and conditioned. Content introduced into human memory will superimpose itself
on prior content and take form on it: the living is that in which the a posteriori be-
comes a priori; memory is the function by which a posteriori matters become a pri-
ori” (138). Creating rules out of stuff is indeed one of the dreams of AI, and though
few claim that any one technical system does this type of work now, the sense
that this work is distributed between humans and digital systems is widespread.
    16. Horkheimer and Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment.
    17. The philosopher Yuk Hui adapted the term from Bernard Stiegler’s
reading of Husserl’s lectures on the phenomenology of time-consciousness. It
suggests that the “retention” of memory and the “protention” of anticipated time
are both externalized in our writing technologies, such that they actively form
temporality and experience as such. Stiegler, Technics and Time; Hui, “Archives of
the Future.”
    18. Kelleher, Deep Learning; LeCun et al., “Deep Learning.”
    19. The following account, including examples, is based on Peirce et al.,
Elements of Logic, 619–44.
    20. Parisi, “Reprogramming Decisionism”; Parisi, Contagious Architecture.
    21. Peirce et al., Elements of Logic, 625.
    22. Frege and Beaney, Frege Reader.
    23. See Tiqqun, Cybernetic Hypothesis.
    24. Halpern, Beautiful Data.
    25. Halpern et al., “Surplus Data.”
    26. Halpern and Mitchell, Smartness Mandate.
    27. Amaro, Black Technical Object.
    28. Wynter, “Ceremony Found,” 84–245.
    29. Kittler, “There Is No Software,” in Truth of the Technological World, 223.
    30. von Neumann, “First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC.”
    31. Brian Rotman has argued that mathematics is semiotic all the way down.
 See Rotman, Mathematics as Sign.
    32. Kissinger and coauthors give a convincing list. Kissinger et al., Age of AI.
    33. Vaswani et al., “Attention Is All You Need,” preceded by Badhanau et al.,
 “Neural Machine Translation.”
    34. These had already been described in the 1980s; variations of the idea are
 used throughout Rumelhart, Foundations.
    35. Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, “Long Short-Term Memory.”

                              Notes to chapter 4                                225

    36. See Wolfram, “What Is ChatGPT Doing?”
    37. Wolfram. Web crawl and other scraping techniques are now being called
into question on both regulative and competitive grounds, but LLMs already con-
tain much of Reddit, all of Wikipedia (which may contribute to their “emergent”
ability to identify facts), and much more besides. This partial view of language is
nevertheless so large that its “partiality” is not concrete, at least not yet.
    38. Weatherby and Justie, “Indexical AI.”
    39. Wei et al., “Chain-of-Thought Prompting.”
    40. A similar picture of meaning is given by Willard V. O. Quine, which he
summarizes by saying that it is “misleading to speak of the empirical content of
an individual statement.” Quine, “Two Dogmas of Empiricism,” 40.
    41. Ramesh et al., “Hierarchical Text-Conditional Image Generation.”


4. Large Literary Machines
     1. This chapter owes a great deal to a semester-long study of form in mathe
matics and literary analysis that the Digital Theory Lab at New York University
conducted in the spring semester of 2024. It would be significantly impoverished
if that collaborative thinking had not gone on.
     2. Haugeland, Artificial Intelligence, 106.
     3. Brown et al., “Language Models.”
     4. It also gives form to the very experimentation that led to modern language
processing techniques. See Pressman, Digital Modernism.
     5. Parrish, “Language Models.” There is a growing literature that examines
LLMs’ ability to write poems, how humans grade or react to their poetry, and
so on. While the nonliterary studies of this sort seem symptomatic to me of the
unconscious tendency to view poetry as the essence of language, the studies by
literary scholars and digital humanists largely fail to ask how poetry and language
are related at all, so I reserve focus for Parrish’s exemplary work here.
     6. Parrish.
     7. Parrish.
     8. Parrish.
     9. Nick Monfort has recreated the experiment in Python in a way that allows
one to play with the vast extent of the poem; see https://nickm.com/memslam
/stochastic_texts.html.
    10. Parrish, “Language Models.”
    11. Austin, How to Do Things with Words, 22.
    12. See Derrida, Limited Inc.
    13. Brown et al., “Language Models,” 49.
    14. Brown et al., 49.
    15. Kirschenbaum, “Spec Acts,” 378.
    16. Kirschenbaum, 378.
    17. Kirschenbaum, 378–79.
    18. Kramnick and Nersessian, “Form and Explanation,” 651.
    19. Kornbluh, Order of Forms.
    20. Peirce et al., Elements of Logic, 229.
    21. Hayles, “Inside the Mind of an AI.”
    22. Shannon and Weaver, Mathematical Theory of Communication, 21.

226                           Notes to chapter 4

    23. Shannon and Weaver, 11.
    24. This is a verbal formulation of what is now technically known as
Kolmogorov complexity. See Shannon and Weaver, 56.
    25. Shannon and Weaver, 31.
    26. For the connection between cybernetics, Shannon, and Jakobson that this
 phrase suggests, see Geoghegan, “From Information Theory to French Theory.” I
 make a less orthodox connection between Jakobson’s poetic function and Kurt
 Goedel’s idea of “incompleteness” in chapter 5.
    27. Something like “iteration” in Derrida’s sense resides here. See Derrida,
 Limited Inc.; cf. Liu, “Cybernetic Unconscious,” 39–99.
    28. Liu, “Cybernetic Unconscious.”
    29. Liu, “Wittgenstein in the Machine,” 439.
    30. Liu, 439.
    31. Liu, 444.
    32. Liu, 455.
    33. Gastaldi and Pellissier, “Calculus of Language.”
    34. Gastaldi and Pellissier, 570.
    35. Gastaldi and Pellissier, 570.
    36. Gastaldi and Pellissier, 572.
    37. Geroulanos, An Atheism That Is Not Humanist.
    38. Culler, Literary in Theory, 24.


5. Computational Meaning
     1. Benjamin, Reflections.
     2. Wolfram puts the number of possible 3-grams at forty thousand words at
six trillion. Wolfram, “What Is ChatGPT Doing?”
     3. Shannon traces the levels from character to word and even to some
sentence-level coherence but does not theorize them as different levels. Shannon,
“Prediction and Entropy.”
     4. Since I wrote these words, I have been humbled to see bumper stickers of
the most absurd sort with numbers, like 70.3 and 30.5, indicating a willingness
to transcribe and brag about even the most minor differences of ultra running.
But I stand by the analysis here, as I think that the norms it expresses are indeed
norms, even if they are proven by vain exceptions.
     5. See my argument in Weatherby, “Irony and Redundancy.”
     6. Collingwood, Principles of Art.
     7. Collingwood, 310–11.
     8. See Saussure’s own exposition of the syntagm in Saussure et al., Course in
General Linguistics, 122ff.
     9. Gastaldi and Pellissier, “Calculus of Language,” 575.
    10. Gastaldi and Pellissier, 575.
    11. Mikolov et al., “Distributed Representations,” 2.
    12. Mikolov et al., 8.
    13. Mikolov et al., 2.
    14. Mikolov et al., 1.
    15. Mikolov et al., 1.
    16. The dimension is not the single value but its relation to the other values

                               Notes to chapter 5                                227

in that dimension in the matrix, measured as cosine similarity, or how close
two plotted angles are to each other on a graph. This “proximity” is influenced
by multiple dimensions simultaneously—but the intuition that the dimensions
represent different nodes of meaning is persistent.
    17. Olah et al., “Building Blocks.”
    18. Spillner et al., “Conceptual Shadows.”
    19. Li, “Divination Engines.”
    20. See Karpathy, “Unreasonable Effectiveness,” who borrows his title from
“Martian” mathematician Eugene Wigner. Wigner, “Unreasonable Effective-
ness,” 534–49. Wigner’s problem is a long-standing metaphysical one: how and
why is any aspect of nature available to elegant mathematical formulation? The
computation-to-language pipeline is both less mysterious and, on its face, mathe-
matically messier.
    21. Gastaldi and Pellissier, “Calculus of Language,” 576.
    22. Gastaldi and Pellissier, 576.
    23. Gastaldi and Pellissier, 576–77.
    24. Weatherby and Justie, “Indexical AI,” 413–14.
    25. Vaswani et al., “Attention Is All You Need,” 5.
    26. This “openness” is what achieves the vastly larger scale of processing, by
reducing required computation—even though LLMs are now hugely costly in
terms of energy. It’s possible that the readdition of some of the earlier techniques
will play a role going forward, and we have already seen Google release a system,
called “Griffin,” that uses RNNs with local attention. De et al., “Griffin.”
    27. The anthropologist Nick Seaver has shown that the metaphor was a mat-
ter of contention among the paper’s authors. Seaver, “Attention Is All You Need.”
    28. Buckner, From Deep Learning to Rational Machines, 272.
    29. Saussure et al., Course in General Linguistics, 122.
    30. Saussure et al., 115.
    31. Saussure et al., 120.
    32. It specifically recalls what Marx calls the “expanded general form of value”
in chapter 1 of Capital, in which all commodities are valued by all other commodi
ties without a general equivalent. (Marx’s passage is itself derived from Hegel’s
concept of the “total relation” that sits on the border of the logic of essence,
tipping it over into the logic of the concept—or in other words, the moment when
a differential, dualistic system is endowed with meaning.) I hope to pursue this
important connection between neural nets and dialectics in the future. For now,
we can note that Saussure is specifying, in the dialectical tradition, that language,
seen from the standpoint of semiology, has no “general equivalent”—which
seems to agree with Harris’s claim that linguistics must happen strictly inside
language, because metalanguage is a subset of language itself. One can imagine
from this standpoint a way in which the American and European structuralist
traditions might have collaborated.
    33. In the current environment, most of these features seem to come not
from the model itself but from downstream mechanisms for selection, especially
RLHF.
    34. Jakobson, Linguistics and Poetics, 27.
    35. Jakobson, 27.
    36. Jakobson, 27.

228                             Notes to chapter 5

    37. Jakobson, 27.
    38. Jakobson, 38 and 43.
    39. Pourciau, Writing of Spirit: “poetry, in other words, is the mode of lan-
guage that makes diachronic utterances out of synchronic analogies” (232).
    40. Jakobson, “Linguistics and Poetics,” 26.
    41. Jakobson, 27.
    42. Jakobson, 25.
    43. Pourciau, Writing of Spirit, 235–36.
    44. See Jakobson, Poetry of Grammar.
    45. Jakobson, “Quest,” 29.
    46. Gödel, “Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze”; see also Goldstein, Incom-
pleteness, who gives a wonderfully holistic view of the proof.
    47. Chomsky, Syntactic Structures, 15.
    48. See Pourciau, Writing of Spirit.
    49. Jakobson, Linguistics and Poetics, 18.


6. Poetic Ideology
     1. See Bajohr, “Whoever Controls Language.”
     2. Horkheimer and Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment, 109.
     3. See Goldberg, “Justine Bateman.”
     4. The song’s tune was generated, but the lyrics, which are weirdly machinic,
as James Vincent noted for The Verge, were written by a human. Vincent, “This
AI-Written Pop Song.” The release of Udio, which can create a song on any topic
in any genre in seconds, confirms my analysis of this earlier artifact: its songs are
generic in a way that borders on the uncanny but that might pass below notice in
a grocery store background, for example. Throughout this chapter, I use examples
from the early period of 2023, partly because these were the objects that first
grabbed my interpretive attention, but partly because I have not to date seen
more compelling ones for the case I am making in this chapter. I also think that
we are awash in examples we do not even know are such cases of generated ideol
ogy, texts, and images. So, these examples are meant to draw attention to this
larger problem.
     5. Ted Chiang calls it a “blurry jpeg of the web,” which mixes metaphors in a
way that muddles medium specificity but has some appeal nevertheless. Chiang,
“ChatGPT Is a Blurry JPEG of the Web.”
     6. See Perrotta, “Peabody EDI.”
     7. Efforts at interpretability often surface some version of semantic pack-
ages, like in the case of Anthropic’s “Golden Gate bridge” paper. Their team used
sparse autoencoders to reveal “concepts” in their multimodal Claude models,
with the hope of “steering” the models using the concepts as semantic hooks. To
date, their only flaunted result is that they are able to get a model to say “I am the
Golden Gate bridge” instead of pablum about its existence as an AI. See Temple-
ton et al., “Scaling Monosemanticity.”
     8. See Handelman, Mathematical Imagination.
     9. I will note here that the reported generation cannot be reproduced, be-
cause generative AI is meant to produce something different each time you use it.
It therefore presents a difficulty for any “science” one wants to perform using it.

                              Notes to chapter 6                               229

    10. See Huyssen, “Breitbart, Bannon, Trump.”
    11. See the account by Brian Cantwell Smith, which is by far the most
elegant philosophical account of the new AI to date. Smith, Promise of Artificial
Intelligence.
    12. Gramsci, Prison Notebooks.
    13. Greenberg, Art and Culture, 6.
    14. Greenberg, 15.
    15. Greenberg, 15.
    16. Barthes and Heath, Image, Music, Text, 45–46.
    17. Greenberg, Art and Culture, 27.
    18. Steyerl, “Mean Images.”
    19. Gibson, Burning Chrome.
    20. Let me again point out that these examples are partly manually produced.
My impression is that the artists making them are intentionally bringing this
effect to the surface in amusing and terrifying ways.
    21. Edwards, “Why AI Detectors Think.”
    22. One such method drawing attention right now is “instruction tuning,”
which uses examples of the type of reasoning that will succeed in the prompt to
elicit better answers from these systems. See especially the idea of the “stochas-
tic chain-of-thought” in Wei et al., “Chain-of-Thought Prompting.” These types
of techniques will likely soon obscure the linguistic functions of ChatGPT and
similar systems, as will their passage into unseen functionality packages within
software like Microsoft Assistant, Microsoft Word, and Adobe’s suite.
    23. Fisher, Capitalist Realism.
    24. Foucault, Order of Things, 261.
    25. Althusser, On the Reproduction of Capitalism, 256.
    26. Jameson, “Postmodernism,” 53–92.
    27. This account of Lacan relies heavily on the second year of Lacan’s seminar,
The Ego in Freud’s Theory, although the full picture of the registers only emerges
over the course of the more than twenty years of the seminar. The composite
picture I present here is meant not to get at the nuances of Lacan’s picture but
to provide the basis on which to understand Althusser’s definition of ideology.
    28. Chun, “On Software,” 18.
    29. Chun, 18.
    30. Chun, 19.
    31. This is Chun’s very pointed response to Kittler’s claim that “there is no
software” (and thus, in a sense for him, no ideology).
    32. Chun, Programmed Visions, 71.
    33. Chun, “On Software,” 17–18.
    34. Jameson, “Postmodernism,” 90.
    35. Jameson, 92.
    36. Horkheimer and Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment, xi.
    37. Adorno, “Beitrag zur Ideologienlehre,” 474.
    38. Adorno, 474.
    39. Adorno, 474.
    40. This point anticipates the critique of postmodernism and neoliberal ideol-
ogy in Fredric Jameson, Slavoj Žižek, and Mark Fisher.
    41. Adorno et al., Aesthetic Theory, 4.

230                             Notes to chapter 6

   42. Adorno et al., 5.
   43. Horkheimer and Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment, 31.

Conclusion
      1. Kirschenbaum, “Prepare for the Textpocalypse.”
      2. If we combine the GPT function with text-guided diffusion models like
“Gen-2 by Runway,” which offer storyboard generation, we can see how this type
of layout/draft labor is on the brink of real automatization. https://research
.runwayml.com/gen2.
      3. See Benanav, Automation.
      4. Marx and Mandel, Capital, 492–643.
      5. Srnicek, Platform Capitalism.
      6. Sohn-Rethel, Intellectual and Manual Labour.
      7. Babbage, On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, 153–54. See the
comprehensive accounts in Daston, “Enlightenment Calculations,” and Schaffer,
“Babbage’s Intelligence.” It is worth noting that Babbage’s mental division of labor
and his work on computing machines take place in the heart of the first modern
rise of data, what Ian Hacking has dubbed the “avalanche of printed numbers.”
Hacking, “Biopower and the Avalanche of Printed Numbers.” I do not think we
need to go so far as to say that “all labor is logic” to do justice to this problem, as
Pasquinelli does in Eye of the Master. The transformation of intelligent activities
into forms of labor seems like a straightforward and continuous process of base-
to-superstructure “last-account determination” to me, and so part of what Marx
called the “real subsumption of labor.” In passing, we might note that Stiegler’s
“proletarianization” also fits the profile of this process.
      8. Babbage, 154.
      9. Babbage, 156.
    10. Babbage, 156.
    11. See the classic account in Chandler, Visible Hand, 16.
    12. Babbage, On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, 156.
    13. Babbage, 156.
    14. Kittler argues on Lacanian grounds that this process “desexuated” writing
compared to its Romantic and even modernist literary frames—a claim I have yet
to see fully processed in the literature on these overlapping fields. Kittler, Gramo-
phone Film Typewriter.
    15. Lovelace, “Notes on the Sketch,” 696.
    16. Marx and Mandel, Capital, 643–55.
    17. Kittler, Gramophone Film Typewriter.
    18. Jeffrey Kirkwood has shown that this process is proto-digital. Kirkwood,
Endless Intervals.
    19. Kittler took this point, of course, from Jacques Derrida, whose Of Gram-
matology was crucial to the launch of poststructuralism.
    20. His earlier book, Discourse Networks, was a magisterial treatise on this
earlier composite notion of “writing” in the Romantic era.
    21. Kittler, Gramophone Film Typewriter, 15.
    22. Kittler uses this phrase often; see, e.g., Kittler, “Rock Music: A Misuse of
Military Equipment,” in Truth of the Technological World, 152–64.

                           Notes to Conclusion                       231

23. Guillory, Professing Criticism, 144.
24. Igarashi, “Machine Writing.”
25. Here I agree with Sack, Software Arts.
26. Guillory, Professing Criticism, 148.
27. Ong, Rhetoric, Romance, and Technology.
28. See the classic study by Carruthers, Book of Memory.
29. See the delightful account in McCulloch, Because Internet.
30. Curtius et al., European Literature, 23, translation modified.
31. Barthes, Semiotic Challenge, 22.
32. Barthes, 19–20.
33. Steyerl, “Common Sensing?,” 75.

This page intentionally left blank
