[page xi]

F O R E W O R D
The purpose of this collection of writings by Charles Sanders Peirce
is to provide, in a convenient format, those of his most important
papers that will enable readers to form a relatively complete impres­
sion of the main doctrines of his system of philosophy and to study its
development. The present volume covers a period of about twenty-
seven years, roughly one-half of Peirce’s immensely productive life;
the remaining two decades will be covered in the second volume.
Limitations of space have forced us to exclude, almost entirely, his
mathematical, logical, and scientific writings, as well as his many con­
tributions to such disciplines as history and psychology. (But readers
should be forewarned that Peirce’s thought, more than that of any
other classic American philosopher, is self-consciously related to math­
ematical, logical, and scientific conceptions. Many of his most signifi­
cant scientific writings are available in the annual reports of the U.S.
Coast and Geodetic Survey and the first six volumes of the Writings of
Charles S. Peirce; his logical writings in volumes 2-4 of the Collected
Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce; and his mathematical writings in the
four volumes of Carolyn Eisele’s The New Elements ofMathematics.) The
writings in this volume are arranged chronologically from 1867 to 1893,
ending with Peirce’s first sustained and systematic presentation of his
evolutionary metaphysics in the Monist.
The Introduction provides a summary account of Peirce’s philoso­
phy, which serves as a general background and provides structure for
the twenty-five items in the present volume. These begin with Peirce’s
highly regarded alternative to Kantian philosophy, his “ N ew List of
Categories,” from which he sets out to develop a new system of
thought that will answer many of the perennial questions of philoso­
phy. In theJournal o fSpeculative Philosophy Cognition Series (items 2-4),
he attempts to work out a new account of mind and reality based on
the results of his “ new list” and to provide the foundation for a truly
objective and empirical system of philosophy, in which epistemology
would be grounded in the representation of external facts; in brief, to
unify philosophy and science. In his review of Fraser’s Berkeley (item
5), Peirce gives an account of his newly embraced “ scholastic realism”
and develops a common-sense theory of truth and reality that goes far
in the direction of his soon-to-be-born pragmatism. Not surprisingly,
his pragmatic turn is also apparent in “ A N ew Class of Observations”
(item 6); for, by this time, his pragmatism was already five years old.
It is noteworthy that in this paper Peirce includes sensations within
the class of ‘objects’ that should be studied scientifically by controlled

[page xii]

xii I Foreword
observation, and there is at least the suggestion that, for philosophical
and scientific investigations, he is beginning to consider phenome­
nology as an alternative to logic. The “ Illustrations of the Logic of
Science” (items 7-12) contain Peirce’s first published account of prag­
matism—though the name does not occur. This series, sometimes said
to be the lesson of Darwin for philosophy, marks an important stage
in Peirce’s continuing advance toward a more and more realistic sys­
tem of thought and, according to Max Fisch, it is “ the nineteenth-
century Discourse in the Method o fRightly Conducting the Reason and Search­
ingfor the Truth in the Sciences. ” Item 13, the first part of an essay on the
algebra of logic, deals with certain affinities between logical, epistemo-
logical, psychological, and physiological conceptions, which suggests
that Peirce had by this time acquired an architectonic purview. Cer­
tainly by 1882, in his outline for his Johns Hopkins logic course (item
14), he is emphasizing the underlying unity of the sciences, for he
proclaims that it is in the application of the methods of one science to
another that the chief advances of thought will be made in the years
to come.
If there is a significant turning-point in the twenty-five papers in
this volume, it comes in “ Design and Chance” (item 15), where Peirce
accepts the doctrine that absolute chance is an active agent in the
evolution of the universe and even of the laws of nature, a doctrine that
marks his turn toward the evolutionary metaphysics of the latter part
of this volume. The next two items represent another important step
in Peirce’s development, namely his recognition of the need for indices
both in logic and in thought, for it is only with indices that reference
can be made to individuals or to actual events and states of affairs. In
item 16, Peirce reintroduces his best-known semiotic triad (icon, index,
symbol), and in item 17 he proclaims the importance of the Outward
Clash, the compelling sense of an opposing other in all experience: and
thus takes an important step toward accepting the reality of second­
ness. After “ Design and Chance,” many of the strands of thought that
run through the first seventeen papers coalesce, and enough fell into
place sometime in 1885 to lead Peirce to his great guess at the riddle of
the universe. It was the synthesis of his theory of categories with his
new evolutionary cosmology that most directly led to his hypothesis
that “ three elements are active in the world” : first, chance; second, law;
and third, habit-taking. This guess is first formulated in item 18, and the
remaining seven items fill out the details and ramifications of this guess
for philosophy and science. “ A Guess at the Riddle” (item 19) consti­
tutes Peirce’s first general treatment of his new evolutionary philoso­
phy, a broad and systematic theory based on his guess. His “ discovery”
that the active elements of the universe are coincident with his catego­
ries leads him to accept them as the architectonic key to philosophy.
It is the key he proceeds to use to reorganize the different branches of

[page xiii]

Foreword I xiii
science and philosophy. Peirce projected “ A Guess at the Riddle” as
a full treatise on his new system of thought, in which all human
knowledge would be reorganized according to his architectonic pro­
gram, but circumstances prevented his completing that work. Item 20
provides, in a somewhat popular form, parts of what would have been
included in the unwritten second chapter of the larger treatise, and
items 21-25 fill in many of the remaining gaps. Thus, what began in 1867
as an analytical, epistemological philosophy, came to fruition in 1891-93
in the evolutionary and social philosophy of the five papers of the
Monist Metaphysical Series.
Peirce was fifty-three years old when the final paper in this volume
was published in 1893. He would live for another twenty-one years and,
during that time, would produce his most fully developed theory of
signs and many of his most subtle and profound metaphysical theories.
It was also during these later years that his interest in pragmatism was
rekindled and that, in an attempt to work out a proof of his pragma­
tism, he put into service his unique system of graphical logic (his
existential graphs) alongside his categories and his theory of signs.
As the present volume ends, Peirce has not yet arrived at many of
the views described in the Introduction. Not for another five years
would he be what Max Fisch has called “ a three-category realist,” and
he had been “ a two-category realist,” who accepted the reality of
secondness, for only about three years. Most of the papers in the
present volume were written while Peirce’s realism was limited to a
single universe, that of thirdness—or the world of thought. The
twenty-five papers should be read with this in mind, but also with the
understanding that Peirce is on his way toward a more complete realism.
But what should be kept in mind, above all, is that Peirce’s writings
are signs of a great intellect in theprocess of working its way toward the
truth.
But these signs are profuse. Peirce’s extant writings— and there are
many that were lost during his peregrinations for the Coast and Geo­
detic Survey and on several other occasions after his death— would fill
over one hundred (500-page) volumes. A selected edition of some fifty
volumes would be necessary to get a comprehensive sense of his work
in mathematics, the natural sciences, philosophy and logic, history and
psychology, and the several other areas to which he contributed. The
most ambitious multi-volume edition, Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A
Chronological Edition, is now underway at the Peirce Edition Project in
Indianapolis; thirty volumes are projected. The first multi-volume
edition appeared sixty years ago, when the first six of eight volumes
of the Collected Papers (1931-35, 1958) were published. Four other major
editions have appeared within the last fifteen years. Peirce’s Contribu­
tions to THE NATION was edited by Kenneth Ketner, in four parts,
between 1975 and 1988, and his New Elements of Mathematics, in four

[page xiv]

xiv I Foreword
volumes, by Carolyn Eisele in 1976. The following year saw the publi­
cation of Peirce’s Complete Published Works, a 149-microfiche edition
accompanied by a printed Comprehensive Bibliography (revised and en­
larged by 12 fiches in 1986), and in 1985, Carolyn Eisele brought out two
volumes of Historical Perspectives on Peirce J
s Logic of Science.
The present two-volume collection is not intended to replace the
more comprehensive editions, but to provide an affordable and reliable
text that covers the full extent of Peirce’s system of philosophy. Its
thematic boundaries are more expansive than those of several other
one- or two-volume collections; it is arranged chronologically, in two
parts, so as to permit study of the development of Peirce’s thought;
and, importantly, it pays especial attention to the integrity of the
edited text of his writings. Although the last few items cannot be said
to be fully critical texts, the volume as a whole may be considered
reliable from a textual point of view.
O f the twenty-five items included in this volume, nineteen were
published during Peirce’s lifetime. Since these are among his most
important philosophical writings, all have been republished in the
different volumes of the Collected Papers, and a number of them have
reappeared, in whole or in part, in various other anthologies and in the
first five volumes of Writings. The six remaining items (6,15, and 17-20)
are unpublished manuscripts and typescripts. Only items 17 and 19 are
included in the Collected Papers, and the remaining four items have
appeared for the first time, or will soon appear, in the Writings: item
6 in W3, item 15 in W4, item 18 in W5, item 20 in W6. All six manuscripts
and typescripts have been edited from the originals in H arvard’s
Houghton Library. The first eighteen items in the present volume
have been adopted directly from their appearance in the Writings,
volumes 2 through 5 (including some of the corrections in the second
printing of volume 2), and as these have been prepared according to the
standards of the Modern Language Association’s Committee on Schol­
arly Editions, they represent critical, authoritative texts. (For emenda­
tions and textual cruxes in these eighteen items, which are not repro­
duced in the Notes, readers should consult that edition.) We have
attempted to edit items 19-25 according to similar standards, but they
cannot be said to have had the benefit of the same intensive, complete
sort of historical, bio-bibliographical, and textual/editorial work that
is required in the preparation of a critical edition. This is especially
true for the five articles in the Monist Metaphysical Series (items 21-25),
for which there are a number of relevant manuscripts and galleys, and,
to a lesser degree, for “ A Guess at the Riddle” (item 19), for several
chapters of which there are more versions than one; in the latter, we
have chosen what seemed most representative and finished.
In all cases, we have corrected typographical errors and other obvi­

[page xv]

Foreword I xv
ous mistakes (and have listed most of the emendations in editorial notes
following Peirce’s text) but have retained inconsistencies in spelling
and punctuation when they reflect acceptable nineteenth-century
standards and practices. (Only the word “ indispensible” has been per­
mitted to appear in Peirce’s idiosyncratic form, for that is how he
consistently, and consciously, spelled it throughout his life.) Purely
cosmetic changes, such as the italicization of book titles or the indenta­
tion of opening paragraphs, have been made silently. We have also
supplied titles for the three untitled items (5,15, 20), and missing words
are supplied in italic brackets. For the rest, our editing has been guided
by restraint and accuracy, and the texts included here represent what
Peirce wrote, not what we think he should have written.
The twenty-five items in the present collection are printed with a
minimum of editorial intrusion in the text, although we have used a
few editorial symbols to reflect certain physical problems in both
published and unpublished papers, and have indicated, in standard
form (with superscript arabic numerals), where we have contributed
editorial notes. The footnotes appearing at the bottom of their respec­
tive pages are Peirce’s own and are identified by asterisks, daggers, and
so on. (In a few of these footnotes, we have provided, in square brack­
ets, additional information— such as names, dates, page numbers, and
references to papers in the Writings— which seemed more useful and
economical here than in additional entries in the Notes section.) The
(editorial) Notes, which are numbered consecutively within each of
the twenty-five items, provide various kinds of information (including
translations) that Peirce himself did not provide. Preceding this Fore­
word, there is a brief Chronology listing the most significant dates and
events in Peirce’s life and work, and the volume concludes with a
detailed Index.
Tw o other features in Peirce’s text must be mentioned: the edito­
rial symbols and the headnotes appearing between title and text. The
editorial symbols, as indicated, reflect physical problems, whether in
published papers or unpublished manuscripts and typescripts, and
they include the following: words (or parts of words) appearing in
italic brackets indicate that they have been supplied (or reconstructed)
by the editors; italic brackets enclosing three ellipsis points indicate
one or more lost manuscript pages; and sets of double slashes mark the
beginning and end of Peirce’s undecided alternate readings, with the
single slash dividing the original from the alternative inscription. The
headnotes, which appear in reduced type between the title of each item
and the text proper, serve several purposes. They identify each item
as a published paper or an unpublished manuscript; provide informa­
tion on its composition or publication (and its later use elsewhere in
Peirce’s work and its republication in one of the two main editions of

[page xvi]

xvi I Foreword
his writings); characterize its contents and main arguments; and indi­
cate its place in the overall development of Peirce’s system of philoso­
phy. Papers published during Peirce’s lifetime are identified by P
followed by a number and the bibliographic information provided in
the Comprehensive Bibliography (2nd rev. ed. [Bowling Green, OH: Phi­
losophy Documentation Center, 1986]). Unpublished papers are identi­
fied by M S followed by the number assigned in Richard Robin’s An­
notated Catalogue of the Papers o f Charles S. Peirce (Amherst: University
of Massachusetts Press, 1967) and his “ The Peirce Papers: A Supple­
mentary Catalogue” (Transactions o f the Charles S. Peirce Society 7 [1971]:
37—
57); when the reference is to newly numbered manuscripts in their
reassembled and chronologically arranged form as listed in the Writ­
ings, MS is printed in italic type (and followed by the new Peirce
Edition Project number). Republication (or first publication) of each
item is indicated by W (Writings of Charles S. Peirce), followed by vol­
ume and page numbers; CP (Collected Papers o f Charles Sanders Peirce),
followed by volume and paragraph numbers; and, in one instance,
H P P LS (Historical Perspectives on Peirce's Logic o f Science), followed by
page numbers. (Some of these identifying letters are used in the Intro­
duction as well, which also includes a reference to N EM , Carolyn
Eisele’s edition of The New Elements of Mathematics.)
Although there are several references, especially in the Introduc­
tion, to some of the more important secondary studies on Peirce’s
philosophy, it might have been helpful, some might say, to have pro­
vided a list of “ Secondary Studies” or “ Further Readings.” We decided
against such a list for three reasons: (1) the number of secondary studies
on Peirce has grown to enormous proportions, especially during the
last two decades, and brief articles are sometimes more helpful than
whole monographs; (2) whatever selection we might make (with its
concomitant exclusions) would be sure to exhibit our biases and criti­
cal dispositions; and (3) there are two useful lists of secondary studies,
through 1982, in the Comprehensive Bibliography and in The Relevance of
Charles Peirce (La Salle, IL: The Hegeler Institute, 1983), and the im­
provement in library indexing services and the growing use of biblio­
graphic databases have almost obviated the need for printed bibliogra­
phies. If there are two studies with which everyone should be familiar,
whether novice or seasoned scholar, they are Christopher Hookway’s
Peirce (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1985), which will shortly be
available in paperback, and Max Fisch’s Peirce, Semeiotic, and Pragma­
tism (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986), which represents
many years of searching scholarship. And we should not neglect to
mention that the Transactions, the journal of the Peirce Society, is
already in its twenty-seventh year.
N or should we neglect to mention, finally, that we have had some
help in the preparation of this first of our two volumes of Peirce’s

[page xvii]

Foreword I xvii
selected philosophical writings. We are grateful, for her invaluable
assistance, to Beth Sakaguchi; to our colleagues at the Indiana U niver­
sity Press, for their encouragement and cooperation; to the Indiana
University School of Liberal Arts for its continuing support; and to
André De Tienne, for his scholarly advice and careful reading of a
large part of the whole manuscript.
Indianapolis
July 1991
Nathan Houser
Christian Kloesel
