[page 83]

5
Frasers The Works of
George Berkeley
P 60: North American Review u j (October i8yi):^.^-y2.
[Alsopublished in W'2:462-87 (with Chauncey Wright's criti­
cism and Peirce's response [pp. 487-90]) and in CP 8.7-38.]
In what may be the most important of all his reviews, Peirce
discusses the realist-nominalist controversy (which he believed
to be offundamental significance for philosophy as well as
life) and gives a detailed account of his already slightly
modified scholastic realism. Peirce's common-sense account of
truth and reality contains important elements ofhis develop­
ing pragmatism.
The Works of George Berkeley, D.D., formerly Bishop o f Cloyne: including
many ofhis Writings hitherto unpublished. With Prefaces, Annotations, his
Life and Letters, and an Account of his Philosophy. By Alexander
Campbell Fraser, M.A., Professor of Logic and Metaphysics in the
University of Edinburgh. In Four Volumes. Oxford: At the Clarendon
Press. 8vo. 1871.
This new edition of Berkeley’s works is much superior to any of
the former ones. It contains some writings not in any of the other
editions, and the rest are given with a more carefully edited text. The
editor has done his work well. The introductions to the several pieces
contain analyses of their contents which will be found of the greatest
service to the reader. On the other hand, the explanatory notes which
disfigure every page seem to us altogether unnecessary and useless.
Berkeley’s metaphysical theories have at first sight an air of para­
dox and levity very unbecoming to a bishop. He denies the existence
of matter, our ability to see distance, and the possibility of forming the
simplest general conception; while he admits the existence of Platonic
ideas; and argues the whole with a cleverness which every reader
admits, but which few are convinced by. His disciples seem to think
the present moment a favorable one for obtaining for their philosophy
a more patient hearing than it has yet got. It is true that we of this day

[page 84]

84 I The Essential Peirce
are sceptical and not given to metaphysics, but so, say they, was the
generation which Berkeley addressed, and for which his style was
chosen; while it is hoped that the spirit of calm and thorough inquiry
which is now, for once, almost the fashion, will save the theory from
the perverse misrepresentations which form erly assailed it, and lead
to a fair examination of the arguments which, in the minds of his
sectators, put the truth of it beyond all doubt. But above all it is
anticipated that the Berkeleyan treatment of that question of the valid­
ity of human knowledge and of the inductive process of science, which
is now so much studied, is such as to command the attention of scien­
tific men to the idealistic system. To us these hopes seem vain. The
truth is that the minds from whom the spirit of the age emanates have
now no interest in the only problems that metaphysics ever pretended
to solve. The abstract acknowledgment of God, Freedom, and Immor­
tality, apart from those other religious beliefs (which cannot possibly
rest on metaphysical grounds) which alone may animate this, is now
seen to have no practical consequence whatever. The world is getting
to think of these creatures of metaphysics, as Aristotle of the Platonic
ideas: T e p e ric rja a r a yap kern , Kai ei '¿cttiv, o\)8ev irpdq r o v \o y o v
ecrriv.1 The question of the grounds of the validity of induction has,
it is true, excited an interest, and may continue to do so (though the
argument is now become too difficult for popular apprehension); but
whatever interest it has had has been due to a hope that the solution
of it would afford the basis for sure and useful maxims concerning the
logic of induction,— a hope which would be destroyed so soon as it
were shown that the question was a purely metaphysical one. This is
the prevalent feeling, among advanced minds. It may not be just; but
it exists. And its existence is an effectual bar (if there were no other)
to the general acceptance of Berkeley’s system. The few who do now
care for metaphysics are not of that bold order of minds who delight
to hold a position so unsheltered by the prejudices of common sense
as that of the good bishop.
As a matter of history, however, philosophy must always be inter­
esting. It is the best representative of the mental development of each
age. It is so even of ours, if we think what really is our philosophy.
Metaphysical history is one of the chief branches of history, and ought
to be expounded side by side with the history of society, of govern­
ment, and of war; for in its relations with these we trace the signifi­
cance of events for the human mind. The history of philosophy in the
British Isles is a subject possessing more unity and entirety within
itself than has usually been recognized in it. The influence of Descartes
was never so great in England as that of traditional conceptions, and
we can trace a continuity between modern and mediaeval thought
there, which is wanting in the history of France, and still more, if
possible, in that of Germany.

[page 85]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 85
From very early times, it has been the chief intellectual characteris­
tic of the English to wish to effect everything by the plainest and
directest means, without unnecessary contrivance. In war, for exam­
ple, they rely more than any other people in Europe upon sheer hardi­
hood, and rather despise military science. The main peculiarities of
their system of law arise from the fact that every evil has been rectified
as it became intolerable, without any thoroughgoing measure. The bill
for legalizing marriage with a deceased w ife’s sister is yearly pressed
because it supplies a remedy for an inconvenience actually felt; but
nobody has proposed a bill to legalize marriage with a deceased hus­
band’s brother. In philosophy, this national tendency appears as a
strong preference for the simplest theories, and a resistance to any
complication of the theory as long as there is the least possibility that
the facts can be explained in the simpler way. And, accordingly, Brit­
ish philosophers have always desired to weed out of philosophy all
conceptions which could not be made perfectly definite and easily
intelligible, and have shown strong nominalistic tendencies since the
time of Edward I, or even earlier.2Berkeley is an admirable illustration
of this national character, as well as of that strange union of nominal­
ism with Platonism, which has repeatedly appeared in history, and has
been such a stumbling-block to the historians of philosophy.
The mediaeval metaphysic is so entirely forgotten, and has so close
a historic connection with modern English philosophy, and so much
bearing upon the truth of Berkeley’s doctrine, that we may perhaps be
pardoned a few pages on the nature of the celebrated controversy
concerning universals. And first let us set down a few dates. It was at
the very end of the eleventh century that the dispute concerning
nominalism and realism, which had existed in a vague way before,
began to attain extraordinary proportions. During the twelfth century
it was the matter of niost interest to logicians, when William of Cham-
peaux, Abélard, John of Salisbury, Gilbert de la Porrée, and many
others, defended as many different opinions. But there was no historic
connection between this controversy and those of scholasticism
proper, the scholasticism of Aquinas, Scotus, and Ockam. For about
the end of the twelfth century a great revolution of thought took place
in Europe. What the influences were which produced it requires new
historical researches to say. N o doubt, it was partly due to the Cru­
sades. But a great awakening of intelligence did take place at that time.
It requires, it is true, some examination to distinguish this particular
movement from a general awakening which had begun a century
earlier, and had been growing stronger ever since. But now there was
an accelerated impulse. Commerce was attaining new importance, and
was inventing some of her chief conveniences and safeguards. Law,
which had hitherto been utterly barbaric, began to be a profession.
The civil law was adopted in Europe, the canon law was digested; the

[page 86]

86 I The Essential Peirce
common law took some form. The Church, under Innocent III, was
assuming the sublime functions of a moderator over kings. And those
orders of mendicant friars were established, two of which did so much
for the development of the scholastic philosophy. Art felt the spirit of
a new age, and there could hardly be a greater change than from the
highly ornate round-arched architecture of the twelfth century to the
comparatively simple Gothic of the thirteenth. Indeed, if any one
wishes to know what a scholastic commentary is like, and what the
tone of thought in it is, he has only to contemplate a Gothic cathedral.
The first quality of either is a religious devotion, truly heroic. One
feels that the men who did these works did really believe in religion
as we believe in nothing. We cannot easily understand how Thomas
Aquinas can speculate so much on the nature of angels, and whether
ten thousand of them could dance on a needle’s point. But it was
simply because he held them for real. If they are real, why are they not
more interesting than the bewildering varieties of insects which natu­
ralists study; or why should the orbits of double stars attract more
attention than spiritual intelligences? It will be said that we have no
means of knowing anything about them. But that is on a par with
censuring the schoolmen for referring questions to the authority of the
Bible and of the Church. If they really believed in their religion, as
they did, what better could they do? And if they found in these author­
ities testimony concerning angels, how could they avoid admitting it.
Indeed, objections of this sort only make it appear still more clearly
how much those were the ages of faith. And if the spirit was not
altogether admirable, it is only because faith itself has its faults as a
foundation for the intellectual character. The men of that time did
fully believe and did think that, for the sake of giving themselves up
absolutely to their great task of building or of writing, it was well
worth while to resign all the joys of life. Think of the spirit in which
Duns Scotus must have worked, who wrote his thirteen volumes in
folio, in a style as condensed as the most condensed parts of Aristotle,
before the age of thirty-four. Nothing is more striking in either of the
great intellectual products of that age, than the complete absence of
self-conceit on the part of the artist or philosopher. That anything of
value can be added to his sacred and catholic work by its having the
smack of individuality about it, is what he has never conceived. His
work is not designed to embody his ideas, but the universal truth; there
will not be one thing in it however minute, for which you will not find
that he has his authority; and whatever originality emerges is of that
inborn kind which so saturates a man that he cannot himself perceive
it. The individual feels his own worthlessness in comparison with his
task, and does not dare to introduce his vanity into the doing of it.
Then there is no machine-work, no unthinking repetition about the
thing. Every part is worked out for itself as a separate problem, no

[page 87]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 87
matter how analogous it may be in general to another part. And no
matter how small and hidden a detail may be, it has been conscien­
tiously studied, as though it were intended for the eye of God. Allied
to this character is a detestation of antithesis or the studied balancing
of one thing against another, and of a too geometrical grouping,—a
hatred of posing which is as much a moral trait as the others. Finally,
there is nothing in which the scholastic philosophy and the Gothic
architecture resemble one another more than in the gradually increas­
ing sense of immensity which impresses the mind of the student as he
learns to appreciate the real dimensions and cost of each. It is very
unfortunate that the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries
should, under the name of Middle Ages, be confounded with others,
which they are in every respect as unlike as the Renaissance is from
modern times. In the history of logic, the break between the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries is so great that only one author of the former
age is ever quoted in the latter. If this is to be attributed to the fuller
acquaintance with the works of Aristotle, to what, we would ask, is
this profounder study itself to be attributed, since it is now known that
the knowledge of those works was not imported from the Arabs? The
thirteenth century was realistic, but the question concerning univer­
s a l was not as much agitated as several others. Until about the end of
the century, scholasticism was somewhat vague, immature, and uncon­
scious of its own power. Its greatest glory was in the first half of the
fourteenth century. Then Duns Scotus,* a Briton (for whether Scotch,
Irish, or English is disputed), first stated the realistic position consist­
ently, and developed it with great fulness and applied it to all the
different questions which depend upon it. His theory of “ formalities”
was the subtlest, except perhaps Hegel’s logic, ever broached, and he
was separated from nominalism only by the division of a hair. It is not
therefore surprising that the nominalistic position was soon adopted
by several writers, especially by the celebrated William of Ockam, who
took the lead of this party by the thoroughgoing and masterly way in
which he treated the theory and combined it with a then rather recent
but now forgotten addition to the doctrine of logical terms. With
Ockam, who died in 1347, scholasticism may be said to have culminated.
After him the scholastic philosophy showed a tendency to separate
itself from the religious element which alone could dignify it, and sunk
first into extreme formalism and fancifulness, and then into the mer­
ited contempt of all men; just as the Gothic architecture had a very
similar fate, at about the same time, and for much the same reasons.
The current explanations of the realist-nominalist controversy are
equally false and unintelligible. They are said to be derived ultimately
*Died 1308.

[page 88]

88 I The Essential Peirce
from Bayle’s Dictionary; at any rate, they are not based on a study of
the authors. “ Few, very few, for a hundred years past,” says Hallam,
with truth, “ have broken the repose of the immense works of the
schoolmen.” 3 Yet it is perfectly possible so to state the matter that no
one shall fail to comprehend what the question was, and how there
might be two opinions about it. Are universals real? We have only to
stop and consider a moment what was meant by the word real, when
the whole issue soon becomes apparent. Objects are divided into fig­
ments, dreams, etc., on the one hand, and realities on the other. The
former are those which exist only inasmuch as you or I or some man
imagines them; the latter are those which have an existence indepen­
dent of your mind or mine or that of any number of persons. The real
is that which is not whatever we happen to think it, but is unaffected
by what we may think of it. The question, therefore, is whether man,
horse, and other names of natural classes, correspond with anything
which all men, or all horses, really have in common, independent of
our thought, or whether these classes are constituted simply by a
likeness in the way in which our minds are affected by individual
objects which have in themselves no resemblance or relationship what­
soever. N ow that this is a real question which different minds will
naturally answer in opposite ways, becomes clear when we think that
there are two widely separated points of view, from which reality, as
just defined, may be regarded. Where is the real, the thing independent
of how we think it, to be found? There must be such a thing, for we
find our opinions constrained; there is something, therefore, which
influences our thoughts, and is not created by them. We have, it is true,
nothing immediately present to us but thoughts. Those thoughts, how­
ever, have been caused by sensations, and those sensations are con­
strained by something out of the mind. This thing out of the mind,
which directly influences sensation, and through sensation thought,
because it is out of the mind, is independent of how we think it, and
is, in short, the real. Here is one view of reality, a very familiar one.
And from this point of view it is clear that the nominalistic answer
must be given to the question concerning universals. For, while from
this standpoint it may be admitted to be true as a rough statement that
one man is like another, the exact sense being that the realities external
to the mind produce sensations which may be embraced under one
conception, yet it can by no means be admitted that the two real men
have really anything in common, for to say that they are both men is
only to say that the one mental term or thought-sign “ man” stands
indifferently for either of the sensible objects caused by the two exter­
nal realities; so that not even the two sensations have in themselves
anything in common, and far less is it to be inferred that the external
realities have. This conception of reality is so familiar, that it is un­
necessary to dwell upon it; but the other, or realist conception, if less

[page 89]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 89
familiar, is even more natural and obvious. All human thought and
opinion contains an arbitrary, accidental element, dependent on the
limitations in circumstances, power, and bent of the individual; an
element of error, in short. But human opinion universally tends in the
long run to a definite form, which is the truth. Let any human being
have enough information and exert enough thought upon any ques­
tion, and the result will be that he will arrive at a certain definite
conclusion, which is the same that any other mind will reach under
sufficiently favorable circumstances. Suppose two men, one deaf, the
other blind. One hears a man declare he means to kill another, hears
the report of the pistol, and hears the victim cry; the other sees the
murder done. Their sensations are affected in the highest degree with
their individual peculiarities. The first information that their sensa­
tions will give them, their first inferences, will be more nearly alike,
but still different; the one having, for example, the idea of a man
shouting, the other of a man with a threatening aspect; but their final
conclusions, the thought the remotest from sense, will be identical and
free from the one-sidedness of their idiosyncrasies. There is, then, to
every question a true answer, a final conclusion, to which the opinion
of every man is constantly gravitating. He may for a time recede from
it, but give him more experience and time for consideration, and he
will finally approach it. The individual may not live to reach the truth;
there is a residuum of error in every individual’s opinions. N o matter;
it remains that there is a definite opinion to which the mind of man
is, on the whole and in the long run, tending. On many questions the
final agreement is already reached, on all it will be reached if time
enough is given. The arbitrary w ill or other individual peculiarities of
a sufficiently large number of minds may postpone the general agree­
ment in that opinion indefinitely; but it cannot affect what the charac­
ter of that opinion shall be when it is reached. This final opinion, then,
is independent, not indeed of thought in general, but of all that is
arbitrary and individual in thought; is quite independent of how you,
or I, or any number of men think. Everything, therefore, which will
be thought to exist in the final opinion is real, and nothing else. What
is the p o w e r of external things, to affect the senses? To say that people
sleep after taking opium because it has a soporific power, 4is that to say
anything in the world but that people sleep after taking opium because
they sleep after taking opium? To assert the existence of a power or
potency, is it to assert the existence of anything actual? Or to say that
a thing has a potential existence, is it to say that it has an actual
existence? In other words, is the present existence of a power anything
in the world but a regularity in future events relating to a certain thing
regarded as an element which is to be taken account of beforehand, in
the conception of that thing? If not, to assert that there are external
things which can be known only as exerting a power on our sense, is

[page 90]

90 I The Essential Peirce
nothing different from asserting that there is a general drift in the
history of human thought which will lead it to one general agreement,
one catholic consent. And any truth more perfect than this destined
conclusion, any reality more absolute than what is thought in it, is a
fiction of metaphysics. It is obvious how this way of thinking harmo­
nizes with a belief in an infallible Church, and how much more natural
it would be in the Middle Ages than in Protestant or positivist times.
This theory of reality is instantly fatal to the idea of a thing in
itself,— a thing existing independent of all relation to the mind’s con­
ception of it. Yet it would by no means forbid, but rather encourage
us, to regard the appearances of sense as only signs of the realities.
Only, the realities which they represent would not be the unknowable
cause of sensation, but noumena, or intelligible conceptions which are
the last products of the mental action which is set in motion by sensa­
tion. The matter of sensation is altogether accidental; precisely the
same information, practically, being capable of communication
through different senses. And the catholic consent which constitutes
the truth is by no means to be limited to men in this earthly life or to
the human race, but extends to the whole communion of minds to
which we belong, including some probably whose senses are very
different from ours, so that in that consent no predication of a sensible
quality can enter, except as an admission that so certain sorts of senses
are affected. This theory is also highly favorable to a belief in external
realities. It will, to be sure, deny that there is any reality which is
absolutely incognizable in itself, so that it cannot be taken into the
mind. But observing that “ the external” means simply that which is
independent of what phenomenon is immediately present, that is of
how we may think or feel; just as “ the real” means that which is
independent of how we may think or feel about it; it must be granted
that there are many objects of true science which are external, because
there are many objects of thought which, if they are independent of
that thinking whereby they are thought (that is, if they are real), are
indisputably independent of all other thoughts and feelings.
It is plain that this view of reality is inevitably realistic; because
general conceptions enter into all judgments, and therefore into true
opinions. Consequently a thing in the general is as real as in the
concrete. It is perfectly true that all white things have whiteness in
them, for that is only saying, in another form of words, that all white
things are white; but since it is true that real things possess whiteness,
whiteness is real. It is a real which only exists by virtue of an act of
thought knowing it, but that thought is not an arbitrary or accidental
one dependent on any idiosyncrasies, but one which will hold in the
final opinion.
This theory involves a phenomenalism. But it is the phenomenal­
ism of Kant, and not that of Hume. Indeed, what Kant called his

[page 91]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 91
Copernican step5 was precisely the passage from the nominalistic to
the realistic view of reality. It was the essence of his philosophy to
regard the real object as determined by the mind. That was nothing
else than to consider every conception and intuition which enters
necessarily into the experience of an object, and which is not transi­
tory and accidental, as having objective validity. In short, it was to
regard the reality as the normal product of mental action, and not as
the incognizable cause of it.
This realistic theory is thus a highly practical and common-sense
position. Wherever universal agreement prevails, the realist will not
be the one to disturb the general belief by idle and fictitious doubts.
For according to him it is a consensus or common confession which
constitutes reality. What he wants, therefore, is to see questions put to
rest. And if a general belief, which is perfectly stable and immovable,
can in any way be produced, though it be by the fagot and the rack,
to talk of any error in such belief is utterly absurd. The realist will hold
that the very same objects which are immediately present in our minds
in experience really exist just as they are experienced out of the mind;
that is, he will maintain a doctrine of immediate perception. He will
not, therefore, sunder existence out of the mind and being in the mind
as two wholly improportionable modes. When a thing is in such rela­
tion to the individual mind that that mind cognizes it, it is in the mind;
and its being so in the mind w ill not in the least diminish its external
existence. For he does not think of the mind as a receptacle, which if
a thing is in, it ceases to be out of. T o make a distinction between the
true conception of a thing and the thing itself is, he will say, only to
regard one and the same thing from two different points of view; for
the immediate object of thought in a true judgment is the reality. The
realist will, therefore, believe in the objectivity of all necessary concep­
tions, space, time, relation, cause, and the like.
N o realist or nominalist ever expressed so definitely, perhaps, as is
here done, his conception of reality. It is difficult to give a clear notion
of an opinion of a past age, without exaggerating its distinctness. But
careful examination of the works of the schoolmen will show that the
distinction between these two views of the real—one as the fountain
of the current of human thought, the other as the unmoving form to
which it is flowing— is what really occasions their disagreement on the
question concerning universals. The gist of all the nominalist’s argu­
ments will be found to relate to a res extra animam, while the realist
defends his position only by assuming that the immediate object of
thought in a true judgment is real. The notion that the controversy
between realism and nominalism had anything to do with Platonic
ideas is a mere product of the imagination, which the slightest exami­
nation of the books would suffice to disprove. But to prove that the
statement here given of the essence of these positions is historically

[page 92]

92 I The Essential Peirce
true and not a fancy sketch, it will be well to add a brief analysis of
the opinions of Scotus and Ockam.
Scotus sees several questions confounded together under the usual
utrum universale est aliquid in rebus. In the first place, there is the ques­
tion concerning the Platonic forms. But putting Platonism aside as at
least incapable of proof, and as a self-contradictory opinion if the
archetypes are supposed to be strictly universal, there is the celebrated
dispute among Aristotelians as to whether the universal is really in
things or only derives its existence from the mind. Universality is a
relation of a predicate to the subjects of which it is predicated. That
can exist only in the mind, wherein alone the coupling of subject and
predicate takes place. But the word universal is also used to denote
what are named by such terms as a man or a horse; these are called
universals, because a man is not necessarily this man, nor a horse this
horse. In such a sense it is plain universals are real; there really is a
man and there really is a horse. The whole difficulty is with the
actually indeterminate universal, that which not only is not necessar­
ily this, but which, being one single object of thought, is predicable of
many things. In regard to this it may be asked, first, is it necessary to
its existence that it should be in the mind; and, second, does it exist
in re? There are two ways in which a thing may be in the mind,—
habitualiter and actualiter. A notion is in the mind actualiter when it is
actually conceived; it is in the mind habitualiter when it can directly
produce a conception. It is by virtue of mental association (we moderns
should say), that things are in the mind habitualiter. In the Aristotelian
philosophy, the intellect is regarded as being to the soul what the eye
is to the body. The mind perceives likenesses and other relations in the
objects of sense, and thus just as sense affords sensible images of things,
so the intellect affords intelligible images of them. It is as such a species
intelligibilis that Scotus supposes that a conception exists which is in
the mind habitualiter, not actualiter. This species is in the mind, in the
sense of being the immediate object of knowledge, but its existence in
the mind is independent of consciousness. N ow that the actual cognition
of the universal is necessary to its existence, Scotus denies. The subject
of science is universal; and if the existence of universal were dependent
upon what we happened to be thinking, science would not relate to
anything real. On the other hand, he admits that the universal must
be in the mind habitualiter, so that if a thing be considered as it is
independent of its being cognized, there is no universality in it. For
there is in re extra no one intelligible object attributed to different
things. He holds, therefore, that such natures (i.e. sorts of things) as
a man and a horse, which are real, and are not of themselves necessarily
this man or this horse, though they cannot exist in re without being
some particular man or horse, are in the species intelligibilis always

[page 93]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 93
represented positively indeterminate, it being the nature of the mind
so to represent things. Accordingly any such nature is to be regarded
as something which is of itself neither universal nor singular, but is
universal in the mind, singular in things out of the mind. If there were
nothing in the different men or horses which was not of itself singular,
there would be no real unity except the numerical unity of the singu­
lars; which would involve such absurd consequences as that the only
real difference would be a numerical difference, and that there would
be no real likenesses among things. If, therefore, it is asked whether
the universal is in things, the answer is, that the nature which in the
mind is universal, and is not in itself singular, exists in things. It is the
very same nature which in the mind is universal and in re is singular;
for if it were not, in knowing anything of a universal we should be
knowing nothing of things, but only of our own thoughts, and our
opinion would not be converted from true to false by a change in
things. This nature is actually indeterminate only so far as it is in the
mind. But to say that an object is in the mind is only a metaphorical
way of saying that it stands to the intellect in the relation of known
to knower. The truth is, therefore, that that real nature which exists
in rey apart from all action of the intellect, though in itself, apart from
its relations, it be singular, yet is actually universal as it exists in
relation to the mind. But this universal only differs from the singular
in the manner of its being conceived (formaliter), but not in the manner
of its existence (realiter).6
Though this is the slightest possible sketch of the realism of Scotus,
and leaves a number of important points unnoticed, yet it is sufficient
to show the general manner of his thought and how subtle and difficult
his doctrine is. That about one and the same nature being in the grade
of singularity in existence, and in the grade of universality in the mind,
gave rise to an extensive doctrine concerning the various kinds of
identity and difference, called the doctrine of theformalitates; and this
is the point against which Ockam directed his attack.
Ockam’s nominalism may be said to be the next stage in English
opinion. As Scotus’s mind is always running on forms, so Ockam’s is
on logical terms; and all the subtle distinctions which Scotus effects by
his formalitates, Ockam explains by implied syncategorematics (or ad­
verbial expressions, such as per se, etc.) in terms. Ockam always thinks
of a mental conception as a logical term, which, instead of existing on
paper, or in the voice, is in the mind, but is of the same general nature,
namely, a sign. The conception and the word differ in two respects:
first, a word is arbitrarily imposed, while a conception is a natural sign;
second, a word signifies whatever it signifies only indirectly, through
the conception which signifies the same thing directly. Ockam enunci­
ates his nominalism as follows:

[page 94]

94 I The Essential Peirce
It should be known that singular may be taken in two senses. In one sense,
it signifies that which is one and not many; and in this sense those who hold
that the universal is a quality of mind predicable of many, standing however
in this predication, not for itself, but for those many (i.e. the nominalists), have
to say that every universal is truly and really singular; because as every word,
however general we may agree to consider it, is truly and really singular and
one in number, because it is one and not many, so every universal is singular.
In another sense, the name singular is used to denote whatever is one and not
many, is a sign of something which is singular in the first sense, and is not fit
to be the sign of many. Whence, using the word universal for that which is not
one in number,—an acceptation many attribute to it,—I say that there is no
universal; unless perchance you abuse the word and say that people is not one
in number and is universal. But that would be puerile. It is to be maintained,
therefore, that every universal is one singular thing, and therefore there is no
universal except by signification, that is, by its being the sign of many.7
The arguments by which he supports this position present nothing of
interest.* Against Scotus’s doctrine that universals are without the
mind in individuals, but are not really distinct from the individuals,
but only formally so, he objects that it is impossible there should be
any distinction existing out of the mind except between things really
distinct. Yet he does not think of denying that an individual consists
of matter and form, for these, though inseparable, are really distinct
things; though a modern nominalist might ask in what sense things
could be said to be distinct independently of any action of the mind,
which are so inseparable as matter and form. But as to relation, he most
emphatically and clearly denies that it exists as anything different
from the things related; and this denial he expressly extends to rela­
tions of agreement and likeness as well as to those of opposition. While,
therefore, he admits the real existence of qualities, he denies that these
real qualities are respects in which things agree or differ; but things
which agree or differ agree or differ in themselves and in no respect
extra animam. He allows that things without the mind are similar, but
this similarity consists merely in the fact that the mind can abstract
one notion from the contemplation of them. A resemblance, therefore,
consists solely in the property of the mind by which it naturally
imposes one mental sign upon the resembling things. Yet he allows
there is something in the things to which this mental sign corresponds.
This is the nominalism of Ockam so far as it can be sketched in a
single paragraph, and without entering into the complexities of the
Aristotelian psychology nor of the parva logicalia. He is not so thor­
*The entia non sunt multiplicanda praeter necessitatem is the argument of Durand de St.
Pour^ain. But any given piece of popular information about scholasticism may be safely
assumed to be wrong.

[page 95]

oughgoing as he might be, yet compared with Durandus and other
contemporary nominalists he seems very radical and profound. He is
truly the venerabilis inceptor of a new way of philosophizing which has
now broadened, perhaps deepened also, into English empiricism.
England never forgot these teachings. During that Renaissance
period when men could think that human knowledge was to be ad-
vanced by the use of Cicero’s Commonplaces, we naturally see little
effect from them; but one of the earliest prominent figures in modern
philosophy is a man who carried the nominalistic spirit into every­
thing,— religion, ethics, psychology, and physics, the plusquam nomi-
nalis, Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury. His razor cuts off, not merely
substantial forms, but every incorporeal substance. As for universals,
he not only denies their real existence, but even that there are any
universal conceptions except so far as we conceive names. In every
part of his logic, names and speech play an extraordinarily important
part. Truth and falsity, he says, have no place but among such crea­
tures as use speech, for a true proposition is simply one whose predi­
cate is the name of everything of which the subject is the name. “ From
hence, also, this may be deduced, that the first truths were arbitrarily
made by those that first of all imposed names upon things, or received
them from the imposition of others. For it is true (for example), that
man is a living creature, but it is for this reason that it pleased men to
impose both those names on the same thing.” 8The difference between
true religion and superstition is simply that the state recognizes the
former and not the latter.
The nominalistic love of simple theories is seen also in his opinion,
that every event is a movement, and that the sensible qualities exist
only in sensible beings, and in his doctrine that man is at bottom
purely selfish in his actions.
His views concerning matter are worthy of notice, because Berke­
ley is known to have been a student of Hobbes, as Hobbes confesses
himself to have been of Ockam. The following paragraph gives his
opinion:—
And as for that matter which is common to all things, and which philoso­
phers, following Aristotle, usually call materia prima, that is,first matter, it is
not a body distinct from all other bodies, nor is it one of them. What then is
it? A mere name; yet a name which is not of vain use; for it signifies a
conception of body without the consideration of any form or other accident
except only magnitude or extension, and aptness to receive form and other
accident. So that whensoever we have use of the name body in general, if we
use that of materia prima, we do well. For when a man, not knowing which
was first, water or ice, would find out which of the two were the matter of
both, he would be fain to suppose some third matter which were neither of
these two; so he that would find out what is the matter of all things ought to
Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 95

[page 96]

96 I The Essential Peirce
suppose such as is not the matter of anything that exists. Wherefore materia
prima is nothing; and therefore they do not attribute to it form or any other
accident, besides quantity; whereas all singular things have their forms and
accidents certain.
Materiaprima therefore is body in general, that is, body considered univer­
sally, not as having neither form nor any accident, but in which no form nor
any other accident but quantity are at all considered, that is, they are not
drawn into argumentation, (p. 118)9
The next great name in English philosophy is Locke’s. His philoso­
phy is nominalistic, but does not regard things from a logical point of
view at all. Nominalism, however, appears in psychology as sensation­
alism; for nominalism arises from taking that view of reality which
regards whatever is in thought as caused by something in sense, and
whatever is in sense as caused by something without the mind. But
everybody knows that this is the character of Locke’s philosophy. He
believed that every idea springs from sensation and from his (vaguely
explained) reflection.
Berkeley is undoubtedly more the offspring of Locke than of any
other philosopher. Yet the influence of Hobbes with him is very evi­
dent and great; and Malebranche doubtless contributed to his thought.
But he was by nature a radical and a nominalist. His whole philosophy
rests upon an extreme nominalism of a sensationalistic type. He sets
out with the proposition (supposed to have been already proved by
Locke), that all the ideas in our minds are simply reproductions of
sensations, external and internal. He maintains, moreover, that sensa­
tions can only be thus reproduced in such combinations as might have
been given in immediate perception. We can conceive a man without
a head, because there is nothing in the nature of sense to prevent our
seeing such a thing; but we cannot conceive a sound without any pitch,
because the two things are necessarily united in perception. On this
principle he denies that we can have any abstract general ideas, that
is, that universals can exist in the mind; if I think of a man it must be
either of a short or a long or a middle-sized man, because if I see a man
he must be one or the other of these. In the first draft of the Introduc­
tion of the Principles o f Human Knowledge, which is now for the first
time printed, he even goes so far as to censure Ockam for admitting
that we can have general terms in our mind; Ockam’s opinion being
that we have in our minds conceptions, which are singular themselves,
but are signs of many things.* But Berkeley probably knew only of
*The sole difference between Ockam and Hobbes is that the former admits the
universal signs in the mind to be natural, while the latter thinks they only follow
instituted language. The consequence of this difference is that, while Ockam regards all
truth as depending on the mind’s naturally imposing the same sign on two things,
Hobbes will have it that the first truths were established by convention. But both would

[page 97]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 97
Ockam from hearsay, and perhaps thought he occupied a position like
that of Locke. Locke had a very singular opinion on the subject of
general conceptions. He says:—
If we nicely reflect upon them, we shall find that general ideas are fictions,
and contrivances of the mind, that carry difficulty with them, and do not so
easily offer themselves as we are apt to imagine. For example, does it not
require some pains and skill to form the general idea of a triangle (which is
none of the most abstract, comprehensive, and difficult); for it must be neither
oblique nor rectangle, neither equilateral, equicrural, nor scalenon, but all and
none of these at once? In effect, is something imperfect that cannot exist, an
idea wherein some parts of several different and inconsistent ideas are put
together.10
T o this Berkeley replies:—
Much is here said of the difficulty that abstract ideas carry with them, and
the pains and skill requisite in forming them. And it is on all hands agreed that
there is need of great toil and labor of the mind to emancipate our thoughts
from particular objects, and raise them to those sublime speculations that are
conversant about abstract ideas. From all which the natural consequence
should seem to be, that so difficult a thing as the forming of abstract ideas was
not necessary to communication, which is so easy and familiar to all sort of
men. But we are told, if they seem obvious and easy to grown men, it is only
because by constant and familiar use they are made so. Now, I would fain
know at what time it is men are employed in surmounting that difficulty. It
cannot be when they are grown up, for then it seems they are not conscious
of such painstaking; it remains, therefore, to be the business of their childhood.
And surely the great and multiplied labor of framing abstract notions will be
found a hard task at that tender age. Is it not a hard thing to imagine that a
couple of children cannot prate together of their sugar-plums and rattles, and
the rest of their little trinkets, till they have first tacked together numberless
inconsistencies, and so formed in their minds abstract general ideas, and an­
nexed them to every common name they make use of?11
In his private note-book Berkeley has the following:— “Mem. To
bring the killing blow at the last, e.g. in the matter of abstraction to
bring Locke’s general triangle in the last.” 12
There was certainly an opportunity for a splendid blow here, and
he gave it.
From this nominalism he deduces his idealistic doctrine. And he
puts it beyond any doubt that, if this principle be admitted, the exis­
doubtless allow that there is something in re to which such truths corresponded. But the
sense of Berkeley’s implication would be that there are no universal thought-signs at all.
Whence it would follow that there is no truth and no judgments but propositions spoken
or on paper.

[page 98]

98 I The Essential Peirce
tence of matter must be denied. Nothing that we can know or even
think can exist without the mind, for we can only think reproductions
of sensations, and the esse of these is percipi. To put it another way, we
cannot think of a thing as existing unperceived, for we cannot separate
in thought what cannot be separated in perception. It is true, I can
think of a tree in a park without anybody by to see it; but I cannot
think of it without anybody to imagine it; for I am aware that I am
imagining it all the time. Syllogistically: trees, mountains, rivers, and
all sensible things are perceived; and anything which is perceived is
a sensation; now for a sensation to exist without being perceived is
impossible; therefore, for any sensible thing to exist out of perception
is impossible. N or can there be anything out of the mind which resem­
bles a sensible object, for the conception of likeness cannot be separated
from likeness between ideas, because that is the only likeness which
can be given in perception. An idea can be nothing but an idea, and
it is absurd to say that anything inaudible can resemble a sound, or that
anything invisible can resemble a color. But what exists without the
mind can neither be heard nor seen; for we perceive only sensations
within the mind. It is said that Matter exists without the mind. But
what is meant by matter? It is acknowledged to be known only as
supporting the accidents of bodies; and this word ‘supporting’ in this
connection is a word without meaning. N or is there any necessity for
the hypothesis of external bodies. What we observe is that we have
ideas. Were there any use in supposing external things it would be to
account for this fact. But grant that bodies exist, and no one can say
how they can possibly affect the mind; so that instead of removing a
difficulty, the hypothesis only makes a new one.
But though Berkeley thinks we know nothing out of the mind, he
by no means holds that all our experience is of a merely phantasma­
goric character. It is not all a dream; for there are two things which
distinguish experience from imagination: one is the superior vividness
of experience; the other and most important is its connected character.
Its parts hang together in the most intimate and intricate conjunction,
in consequence of which we can infer the future from the past. “ These
two things it is,” says Berkeley, in effect, “ which constitute reality. I
do not, therefore, deny the reality of common experience, although I
deny its externality.” Here we seem to have a third new conception
of reality, different from either of those which we have insisted are
characteristic of the nominalist and realist respectively, or if this is to
be identified with either of those, it is with the realist view. Is not this
something quite unexpected from so extreme a nominalist? To us, at
least, it seems that this conception is indeed required to give an air of
common sense to Berkeley’s theory, but that it is of a totally different
complexion from the rest. It seems to be something imported into his
philosophy from without. We shall glance at this point again pres­

[page 99]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 99
ently. He goes on to say that ideas are perfectly inert and passive. One
idea does not make another and there is no power or agency in it.
Hence, as there must be some cause of the succession of ideas, it must
be Spirit. There is no idea of a spirit. But I have a consciousness of the
operations of my spirit, what he calls a notion of my activity in calling
up ideas at pleasure, and so have a relative knowledge of m yself as an
active being. But there is a succession of ideas not dependent on my
will, the ideas of perception. Real things do not depend on my thought,
but have an existence distinct from being perceived by me; but the esse
of everything is percipi; therefore, there must be some other mind wherein
they exist. “ As sure, therefore, as the sensible world really exists, so sure
do there an infinite omnipotent Spirit who contains and supports it.” 13
This puts the keystone into the arch of Berkeleyan idealism, and gives
a theory of the relation of the mind to external nature which, com­
pared with the Cartesian Divine Assistance, is very satisfactory. It has
been well remarked that, if the Cartesian dualism be admitted, no
divine assistance can enable things to affect the mind or the mind
things, but divine power must do the whole work. Berkeley’s philoso­
phy, like so many others, has partly originated in an attempt to escape
the inconveniences of the Cartesian dualism. God, who has created our
spirits, has the power immediately to raise ideas in them; and out of
his wisdom and benevolence, he does this with such regularity that
these ideas may serve as signs of one another. Hence, the laws of
nature. Berkeley does not explain how our wills act on our bodies, but
perhaps he would say that to a certain limited extent we can produce
ideas in the mind of God as he does in ours. But a material thing being
only an idea, exists only so long as it is in some mind. Should every
mind cease to think it for a while, for so long it ceases to exist. Its
permanent existence is kept up by its being an idea in the mind of God.
Here we see how superficially the just-mentioned theory of reality is
laid over the body of his thought. If the reality of a thing consists in
its harmony with the body of realities, it is a quite needless extrava­
gance to say that it ceases to exist as soon as it is no longer thought of.
For the coherence of an idea with experience in general does not
depend at all upon its being actually present to the mind all the time.
But it is clear that when Berkeley says that reality consists in the
connection of experience, he is simply using the word reality in a sense
of his own. That an object's independence of our thought about it is con­
stituted by its connection with experience in general, he has never
conceived. On the contrary, that, according to him, is effected by its
being in the mind of God. In the usual sense of the word reality,
therefore, Berkeley’s doctrine is that the reality of sensible things
resides only in their archetypes in the divine mind. This is Platonistic,
but it is not realistic. On the contrary, since it places reality wholly
out of the mind in the cause of sensations, and since it denies reality

[page 100]

100 I The Essential Peirce
(in the true sense of the word) to sensible things in so far as they are
sensible, it is distinctly nominalistic. Historically there have been
prominent examples of an alliance between nominalism and Plato­
nism. Abelard and John of Salisbury, the only two defenders of nomi­
nalism of the time of the great controversy whose works remain to us,
are both Platonists; and Roscellin, the famous author of the sententia
deflatu vocis, the first man in the Middle Ages who carried attention
to nominalism, is said and believed (all his writings are lost) to have
been a follower of Scotus Erigena, the great Platonist of the ninth
century. The reason of this odd conjunction of doctrines may perhaps
be guessed at. The nominalist, by isolating his reality so entirely from
mental influence as he has done, has made it something which the
mind cannot conceive; he has created the so often talked of “ impropor-
tion between the mind and the thing in itself.” And it is to overcome
the various difficulties to which this gives rise, that he supposes this
noumenon, which, being totally unknown, the imagination can play
about as it pleases, to be the emanation of archetypal ideas. The reality
thus receives an intelligible nature again, and the peculiar inconve­
niences of nominalism are to some degree avoided.14
It does not seem to us strange that Berkeley’s idealistic writings
have not been received with much favor. They contain a great deal of
argumentation of doubtful soundness, the dazzling character of which
puts us more on our guard against it. They appear to be the produc­
tions of a most brilliant, original, powerful, but not thoroughly disci­
plined mind. He is apt to set out with wildly radical propositions,
which he qualifies when they lead him to consequences he is not
prepared to accept, without seeing how great the importance of his
admissions is. He plainly begins his principles of human knowledge
with the assumption that we have nothing in our minds but sensations,
external and internal, and reproductions of them in the imagination.
This goes far beyond Locke; it can be maintained only by the help of
that “ mental chemistry” started by H artley.15 But soon we find him
admitting various notions which are not ideas, or reproductions of
sensations, the most striking of which is the notion of a cause, which
he leaves himself no way of accounting for experientially. Again, he
lays down the principle that we can have no ideas in which the sensa­
tions are reproduced in an order or combination different from what
could have occurred in experience; and that therefore we have no
abstract conceptions. But he very soon grants that we can consider a
triangle, without attending to whether it is equilateral, isosceles, or
scalene; and does not reflect that such exclusive attention constitutes
a species of abstraction. His want of profound study is also shown in
his so wholly mistaking, as he does, the function of the hypothesis of
matter. He thinks its only purpose is to account for the production of
ideas in our minds, so occupied is he with the Cartesian problem. But

[page 101]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 101
the real part that material substance has to play is to account for (or
formulate) the constant connection between the accidents. In his the­
ory, this office is performed by the wisdom and benevolence of God
in exciting ideas with such regularity that we can know what to ex­
pect. This makes the unity of accidents a rational unity, the material
theory makes it a unity not of a directly intellectual origin. The ques­
tion is, then, which does experience, which does science decide for?
Does it appear that in nature all regularities are directly rational, all
causes final causes; or does it appear that regularities extend beyond
the requirement of a rational purpose, and are brought about by me­
chanical causes? N ow science, as we all know, is generally hostile to
the final causes, the operation of which it would restrict within certain
spheres, and it finds decidedly an other than directly intellectual regu­
larity in the universe. Accordingly the claim which Mr. Collyns
Simon, Professor Fraser, and Mr. Archer Butler make for Berkeleyan-
ism, that it is especially fit to harmonize with scientific thought, is as
far as possible from the truth. The sort of science that his idealism
would foster would be one which should consist in saying what each
natural production was made for. Berkeley’s own remarks about natu­
ral philosophy show how little he sympathized with physicists. They
should all be read; we have only room to quote a detached sentence
or two:—
To endeavor to explain the production of colors or sound by figure, mo­
tion, magnitude, and the like, must needs be labor in vain. . . . In the business
of gravitation or mutual attraction, because it appears in many instances, some
are straightway for pronouncing it universal; and that to attract and be at­
tracted by every body is an essential quality inherent in all bodies whatever.
. . . There is nothing necessary or essential in the case, but it depends entirely
on the will of the Governing Spirit, who causes certain bodies to cleave
together or tend towards each other according to various laws, whilst he keeps
others at a fixed distance; and to some he gives a quite contrary tendency, to
fly asunder just as he sees convenient. . . . First, it is plain philosophers amuse
themselves in vain, when they inquire for any natural efficient cause, distinct
from mind or spirit. Secondly, considering the whole creation is the workman­
ship of a wise andgood Agent, it should seem to become philosophers to employ
their thoughts (contrary to what some hold) about the final causes of things;
and I must confess I see no reason why pointing out the various ends to which
natural things are adapted, and for which they were originally with unspeak­
able wisdom contrived, should not be thought one good way of accounting for
them, and altogether worthy of a philosopher. (Vol. I, p. 466)16
After this how can his disciples say “that the true logic ofphysics is the
first conclusion from his system/” 17
As for that argument which is so much used by Berkeley and
others, that such and such a thing cannot exist because we cannot so

[page 102]

102 I The Essential Peirce
much as frame the idea of such a thing,—that matter, for example, is
impossible because it is an abstract idea, and we have no abstract
ideas,—it appears to us to be a mode of reasoning which is to be used
with extreme caution. Are the facts such, that if we could have an idea
of the thing in question, we should infer its existence, or are they not?
If not, no argument is necessary against its existence, until something
is found out to make us suspect it exists. But if we ought to infer that
it exists, if we only could frame the idea of it, why should we allow
our mental incapacity to prevent us from adopting the proposition
which logic requires? If such arguments had prevailed in mathematics
(and Berkeley was equally strenuous in advocating them there), and if
everything about negative quantities, the square root of minus, and
infinitesimals, had been excluded from the subject on the ground that
we can form no idea of such things, the science would have been
simplified no doubt, simplified by never advancing to the more diffi­
cult matters. A better rule for avoiding the deceits of language is this:
Do things fulfil the same function practically? Then let them be signi­
fied by the same word. Do they not? Then let them be distinguished.
If I have learned a formula in gibberish which in any way jogs my
memory so as to enable me in each single case to act as though I had
a general idea, what possible utility is there in distinguishing between
such a gibberish and formula and an idea? Why use the term a general
idea in such a sense as to separate things which, for all experiential
purposes, are the same?
The great inconsistency of the Berkeleyan theory, which prevents
his nominalistic principles from appearing in their true colors, is that
he has not treated mind and matter in the same way. All that he has
said against the existence of matter might be said against the existence
of mind; and the only thing which prevented his seeing that, was the
vagueness of the Lockian reflection, or faculty of internal perception.
It was not until after he had published his systematic exposition of his
doctrine, that this objection ever occurred to him. He alludes to it in
one of his dialogues, but his answer to it is very lame. Hume seized
upon this point, and, developing it, equally denied the existence of
mind and matter, maintaining that only appearances exist. Hume’s
philosophy is nothing but Berkeley’s, with this change made in it, and
written by a mind of a more sceptical tendency. The innocent bishop
generated Hume; and as no one disputes that Hume gave rise to all
modern philosophy of every kind, Berkeley ought to have a far more
important place in the history of philosophy than has usually been
assigned to him. His doctrine was the half-way station, or necessary
resting-place between Locke’s and Hum e’s.
Hum e’s greatness consists in the fact that he was the man who had
the courage to carry out his principles to their utmost consequences,
without regard to the character of the conclusions he reached. But

[page 103]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 103
neither he nor any other one has set forth nominalism in an absolutely
thoroughgoing manner; and it is safe to say that no one ever will,
unless it be to reduce it to absurdity.
We ought to say one word about Berkeley’s theory of vision. It was
undoubtedly an extraordinary piece of reasoning, and might have
served for the basis of the modern science. Historically it has not had
that fortune, because the modern science has been chiefly created in
Germany, where Berkeley is little known and greatly misunderstood.
We may fairly say that Berkeley taught the English some of the most
essential principles of that hypothesis of sight which is now getting to
prevail, more than a century before they were known to the rest of the
world. This is much; but what is claimed by some of his advocates is
astounding. One writer says that Berkeley’s theory has been accepted
by the leaders of all schools of thought! Professor Fraser admits that
it has attracted no attention in Germany, but thinks the German mind
too a priori to like Berkeley’s reasoning.18 But Helmholtz, who has
done more than any other man to bring the empiricist theory into
favor, says: “ Our knowledge of the phenomena of vision is not so
complete as to allow only one theory and exclude every other. It seems
to me that the choice which different savans make between different
theories of vision has thus far been governed more by their metaphysi­
cal inclinations than by any constraining power which the facts have
had.” 19 The best authorities, however, prefer the empiricist hypothe­
sis; the fundamental proposition of which, as it is of Berkeley’s, is that
the sensations which we have in seeing are signs of the relations of
things whose interpretation has to be discovered inductively. In the
enumeration of the signs and of their uses, Berkeley shows considera­
ble power in that sort of investigation, though there is naturally no
very close resemblance between his and the modern accounts of the
matter. There is no modern physiologist who would not think that
Berkeley had greatly exaggerated the part that the muscular sense
plays in vision.
Berkeley’s theory of vision was an important step in the develop­
ment of the associationalist psychology. He thought all our concep­
tions of body and of space were simply reproductions in the imagina­
tion of sensations of touch (including the muscular sense). This, if it
were true, would be a most surprising case of mental chemistry, that
is of a sensation being felt and yet so mixed with others that we cannot
by an act of simple attention recognize it. Doubtless this theory had
its influence in the production of H artley’s system.
Hum e’s phenomenalism and H artley’s associationalism were put
forth almost contemporaneously about 1750. They contain the funda­
mental positions of the current English “ positivism.” From 1750 down
to 1830— eighty years— nothing of particular importance was added to
the nominalistic doctrine. At the beginning of this period Hume was

[page 104]

104 I The Essential Peirce
toning down his earlier radicalism, and Smith’s theory of Moral Senti­
ments appeared. Later came Priestley’s materialism, but there was
nothing new in that; and just at the end of the period, Brow n’s Lectures
on the Human Mind. The great body of the philosophy of those eighty
years is of the Scotch common-sense school. It is a weak sort of realistic
reaction, for which there is no adequate explanation within the sphere
of the history of philosophy. It would be curious to inquire whether
anything in the history of society could account for it. In 1829 appeared
James M ill’s Analysis of the Human Mind, a really great nominalistic
book again. This was followed by Stuart M ill’s Logic in 1843. Since
then, the school has produced nothing of the first importance; and it
will very likely lose its distinctive character now for a time, by being
merged in an empiricism of a less metaphysical and more working
kind. Already in Stuart Mill the nominalism is less salient than in the
classical writers; though it is quite unmistakable.
Thus we see how large a part of the metaphysical ideas of to-day
have come to us by inheritance from very early times, Berkeley being
one of the intellectual ancestors whose labors did as much as any one’s
to enhance the value of the bequest. The realistic philosophy of the last
century has now lost all its popularity, except with the most conserva­
tive minds. And science as well as philosophy is nominalistic. The
doctrine of the correlation of forces, the discoveries of Helmholtz, and
the hypotheses of Liebig and of Darwin, have all that character of
explaining familiar phenomena apparently of a peculiar kind by ex­
tending the operation of simple mechanical principles, which belongs
to nominalism. Or if the nominalistic character of these doctrines
themselves cannot be detected, it will at least be admitted that they are
observed to carry along with them those daughters of nominalism,—
sensationalism, phenomenalism, individualism, and materialism. That
physical science is necessarily connected with doctrines of a debasing
moral tendency will be believed by few. But if we hold that such an
effect will not be produced by these doctrines on a mind which really
understands them, we are accepting this belief, not on experience,
which is rather against it, but on the strength of our general faith that
what is really true it is good to believe and evil to reject. On the other
hand, it is allowable to suppose that science has no essential affinity
with the philosophical views with which it seems to be every year
more associated. History cannot be held to exclude this supposition;
and science as it exists is certainly much less nominalistic than the
nominalists think it should be. Whewell represents it quite as well as
Mill. Yet a man who enters into the scientific thought of the day and
has not materialistic tendencies, is getting to be an impossibility. So
long as there is a dispute between nominalism and realism, so long as
the position we hold on the question is not determined by any proof
indisputable, but is more or less a matter of inclination, a man as he

[page 105]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 105
gradually comes to feel the profound hostility of the two tendencies
will, if he is not less than man, become engaged with one or other and
can no more obey both than he can serve God and Mammon. If the
two impulses are neutralized within him, the result simply is that he
is left without any great intellectual motive. There is, indeed, no
reason to suppose the logical question is in its own nature unsuscepti­
ble of solution. But that path out of the difficulty lies through the
thorniest mazes of a science as dry as mathematics. N ow there is a
demand for mathematics; it helps to build bridges and drive engines,
and therefore it becomes somebody’s business to study it severely. But
to have a philosophy is a matter of luxury; the only use of that is to
make us feel comfortable and easy. It is a study for leisure hours; and
we want it supplied in an elegant, an agreeable, an interesting form.
The law of natural selection, which is the precise analogue in another
realm of the law of supply and demand, has the most immediate effect
in fostering the other faculties of the understanding, for the men of
mental power succeed in the struggle for life; but the faculty of philos­
ophizing, except in the literary way, is not called for; and therefore a
difficult question cannot be expected to reach solution until it takes
some practical form. If anybody should have the good luck to find out
the solution, nobody else would take the trouble to understand it. But
though the question of realism and nominalism has its roots in the
technicalities of logic, its branches reach about our life. The question
whether the genus homo has any existence except as individuals, is the
question whether there is anything of any more dignity, worth, and
importance than individual happiness, individual aspirations, and in­
dividual life. Whether men really have anything in common, so that
the community is to be considered as an end in itself, and if so, what
the relative value of the two factors is, is the most fundamental practi­
cal question in regard to every public institution the constitution of
which we have it in our power to influence.
