[page 106]

6
On a New Class of
Observations, Suggested by
the Principles ofLogic
M S 1104. [Firstpublished, as MS jzz, z
V
z W j:2jj-j7.J Written
in the summer o f 1877, apparently for presentation, fj&ij ¿nV/'
recommends the observational study of sensations (as
Peirce recommendedfor all sciences, evew mathematics). Op­
posed to the “ordinary ” view that “there are ultimate sensa­
tions without any general relations between them, ” Peirce
argues that, although we can never completely capture in
general descriptions the differences between different sensa­
tions, w 6'#« “make an indefinite progress toward such a
result. ” But i f that is unconvincing, Peirce goes on to say,
perhaps we should try a phenomenological approach. Whether
there are pure and completely determinate individual sensa­
tions is a question that can be dealt with by observational
science; “here then, "he concludes, “w # whole world o f obser­
vation, to which we have been systematically blind, simply
because of a wrong metaphysical prejudice. ”
It is usually admitted that there are two classes of mental represen­
tations, Immediate Representations or Sensations and Mediate Repre­
sentations or Conceptions. The former are completely determinate or
individual objects of thought; the latter are partially indeterminate or
general objects. Granting that both these classes of objects exist, the
question of the principle of Individuation or of the respect in which
the individual differs from the general becomes one of extreme diffi­
culty. Duns Scotus after a masterly criticism of all the attempts at
answering it, puts forward the theory that the distinction is a peculiar
one without any general character, and therefore itself presenting this
peculiar aspect of individuality. Occam denies that any general objects
of thought exist, which implies that no objects of thought have any
resemblances, differences, or relations of any kind.1 1 on the other hand
have undertaken to show that just the reverse of this is the case. That

[page 107]

On a New Class of Observations I 107
no object is individual but that the things the most concrete have still
a certain amount of indeterminacy. Take, Phillip of Macedón for ex­
ample. This object is logically divisible into Phillip drunk and Phillip
sober; and so on; and you do not get down to anything completely
determinate till you specify an indivisible instant of time, which is an
ideal limit not attained in thought or in re.
It follows from this doctrine that we have no pure sensations, but
only sensational elements of thought. Thus, the difference between
blue and red, since it contains a sensational element, cannot be fully
represented by any general description. As the sensational element is
in this case very large, the failure of any attempt to describe the
difference between blue & red in general terms is very striking. But,
according to my theory of logic, since no pure sensations or individual
objects exist, it follows that there must be some relation between blue
& red & some general respect in which they differ, & therefore a step
can be made towards a general description of their difference and if
that general description is unsatisfactory, as it must be, then another
relation must exist between the two colors, & an addition based on it
may be made to the general description, & so on ad infinitum.
Here, then, are two metaphysical theories; the ordinary one and
mine. According to the former, there are ultimate sensations without
any general relations between them; according to the latter, although
the differences between different sensations can never be completely
covered by a general description, yet we may make an indefinite prog­
ress toward such a result. Which is true? I have no need to make any
special observations to determine that, any more than I would in a
question of a Perpetual Motion. I rest upon general principles which
are deduced by irrefragable reasoning, from facts so general as to be
admitted by all the world. But, for those who cannot understand this
reasoning, I point to some facts which are not far to seek.
Different sensations resemble one another. That is sufficiently pa­
tent, & there is already a relation between sensations which at once
totally & irretrievably overthrows the ordinary theory. Different sen­
sations also differ in intensity. There is another class of relations be­
tween them, irreconcileable with their individual character. But it is
commonly said that of relations of kind between different elementary
sensations there are none. What none? When our ordinary language
classifies them according to their kinds into colors, sounds, tastes,
smells, feelings? This is not commonly noticed, but it is commonly said
(I mean by physicists) that there is no meaning in the comparison of
the intensity of a red and green light. Here I have 74 pieces of different
coloured ribbons each one numbered upon which I have made fre­
quent photometric experiments extending over a period of 12 months.2
N ow / say that a red and green can be compared in intensity with a
considerable degree of accuracy. On another occasion, when the fig­

[page 108]

108 I The Essential Peirce
ures are relevant, I will give them. They are not so now, because you
can all see that that red is darker than that blue & that that blue is
darker than that red. There is an uncertainty in the judgment, a proba­
ble error. But that probable error is only another fact, another numeri­
cally determinate relation between the two sensations. So with a light
& a sound. They can also be compared in intensity. Consider with
equal attention the sound of a cannon or the appearance of a sixth
magnitude star. Which is most intense? Can there be any doubt. Con­
sider the light of the sun, & the sound of a falling pin. In the laws of
these relations of intensity between different sensations there is an
immense research, a branch of science. These are not the only relations
between sensations but they are the most tangible and the natural
starting point.
Here then is a whole world of observation, to which we have been
systematically blind, simply because of a wrong metaphysical preju­
dice. One of the most accomplished men of science in the country went
so far as to say to me the other day, that there was no reason to suppose
that the sensations of color of one person had any resemblance to those
of another! Violently as this flies in the face of the principles of induc­
tive reasoning, I was not surprized to hear it said, because as Aristotle
says etre 4>iXocro<\>r]Teov (¡>cXocro4>rjTeov tire ¡Jirj (j>iXocro(j>7)Teou
<\)i\ocro<f)7)T€ov, iravTox; de <
f>cXocro(j)7]Teov. 3 Whether we have an
antimetaphysical metaphysics or a pro-metaphysical metaphysics, a
metaphysics we are sure to have. And the less pains we take with it
the more crudely metaphysical it w ill be.
