[page 200]

13
[from] On the Algebra ofLogic
(1880)
P 167: American Journal of Mathematics 3 (1880)^5-57.
[Also published in W41163-73 (with two earlier versions of
part of thefirst chapter, M SS 350 and 354 [pp. 38-467, and
a fragmentary continuation of the whole article, which ends
with “to be continued, ” in MS 371 [pp. 210-11]) and in CP
3.154-81. (Three further attempts at a continuation are in
W5:107-15.)] This article holds a place ofsome importance in
the history o f formal logic and mathematics. In what is
published herefrom thefirst chapter; Peirce discusses the rela­
tionship between thinking and cerebration (or logic andphys­
iology), formulates the theory fo r his logic o f the copula em­
ploying statements o f inclusion rather than Boolean
equations, and places some of his important epistemological
conceptions into the context offormal logic. (Item 16 repre­
sents the subsequent stage of his development of this part
of the algebra of logic and should be read in conjuction with
item 13.)
C h a p t e r I.— S y l l o g i s t i c .
§1. Derivation of Logic.
In order to gain a clear understanding of the origin of the various
signs used in logical algebra and the reasons of the fundamental for­
mulas, we ought to begin by considering how logic itself arises.
Thinking, as cerebration, is no doubt subject to the general laws of
nervous action.
When a group of nerves are stimulated, the ganglions with which
the group is most intimately connected on the whole are thrown into
an active state, which in turn usually occasions movements of the
body. The stimulation continuing, the irritation spreads from gan­
glion to ganglion (usually increasing meantime). Soon, too, the parts
first excited begin to show fatigue; and thus for a double reason the

[page 201]

[from] On the Algebra o f Logic (1880) I 201
bodily activity is of a changing kind. When the stimulus is withdrawn,
the excitement quickly subsides.
It results from these facts that when a nerve is affected, the reflex
action, if it is not at first of the sort to remove the irritation, w ill change
its character again and again until the irritation is removed; and then
the action will cease.
N ow , all vital processes tend to become easier on repetition.1 Along
whatever path a nervous discharge has once taken place, in that path
a new discharge is the more likely to take place.
Accordingly, when an irritation of the nerves is repeated, all the
various actions which have taken place on previous similar occasions
are the more likely to take place now, and those are most likely to take
place which have most frequently taken place on those previous occa­
sions. N ow, the various actions which did not remove the irritation
may have previously sometimes been performed and sometimes not;
but the action which removes the irritation must have always been
performed, because the action must have every time continued until
it was performed. Hence, a strong habit of responding to the given
irritation in this particular way must quickly be established.
A habit so acquired may be transmitted by inheritance.
One of the most important of our habits is that one by virtue of
which certain classes of stimuli throw us at first, at least, into a purely
cerebral activity.
V ery often it is not an outward sensation but only a fancy which
starts the train of thought. In other words, the irritation instead of
being peripheral is visceral. In such a case the activity has for the most
part the same character; an inward action removes the inward excita­
tion. A fancied conjuncture leads us to fancy an appropriate line of
action. It is found that such events, though no external action takes
place, strongly contribute to the formation of habits of really acting
in the fancied way when the fancied occasion really arises.
A cerebral habit of the highest kind, which will determine what we
do in fancy as well as what we do in action, is called a belief The
representation to ourselves that we have a specified habit of this kind
is called ajudgment. A belief-habit in its development begins by being
vague, special, and meagre; it becomes more precise, general, and full,
without limit. The process of this development, so far as it takes place
in the imagination, is called thought. A judgment is formed; and under
the influence of a belief-habit this gives rise to a new judgment, indicat­
ing an addition to belief. Such a process is called an inference; the
antecedent judgment is called the premise; the consequent judgment,
the conclusion; the habit of thought, which determined the passage from
the one to the other (when formulated as a proposition), the leading
principle.

[page 202]

202 I The Essential Peirce
At the same time that this process of inference, or the spontaneous
development of belief, is continually going on within us, fresh periph­
eral excitations are also continually creating new belief-habits. Thus,
belief is partly determined by old beliefs and partly by new experi­
ence. Is there any law about the mode of the peripheral excitations?
The logician maintains that there is, namely, that they are all adapted
to an end, that of carrying belief, in the long run, toward certain
predestinate conclusions which are the same for all men. This is the
faith of the logician. This is the matter of fact, upon which all maxims
of reasoning repose. In virtue of this fact, what is to be believed at last
is independent of what has been believed hitherto, and therefore has
the character of reality. Hence, if a given habit, considered as determin­
ing an inference, is of such a sort as to tend toward the final result, it
is correct; otherwise not. Thus, inferences become divisible into the
valid and the invalid; and thus logic takes its reason of existence.
§2. Syllogism and Dialogism.
The general type of inference is
P
. C ,
where .'. is the sign of illation.
The passage from the premise (or set of premises) P to the conclu­
sion C takes place according to a habit or rule active within us. All the
inferences which that habit would determine when once the proper
premises were admitted, form a class. The habit is logically good
provided it would never (or in the case of a probable inference, seldom)
lead from a true premise to a false conclusion; otherwise it is logically
bad. That is, every possible case of the operation of a good habit would
either be one in which the premise was false or one in which the
conclusion would be true; whereas, if a habit of inference is bad, there
is a possible case in which the premise would be true, while the conclu­
sion was false. When we speak of a possible case, we conceive that from
the general description of cases we have struck out all those kinds
which we know how to describe in general terms but which we know
never will occur; those that then remain, embracing all whose non­
occurrence we are not certain of, together with all those whose non­
occurrence we cannot explain on any general principle, are called
possible.
A habit of inference may be formulated in a proposition which
shall state that every proposition c, related in a given general way to
any true proposition py is true. Such a proposition is called the leading
principle of the class of inferences whose validity it implies. When the
inference is first drawn, the leading principle is not present to the
mind, but the habit it formulates is active in such a way that, upon

[page 203]

[from] On the Algebra o f Logic (1880) I 203
contemplating the believed premise, by a sort of perception the con­
clusion is judged to be true.* Afterwards, when the inference is sub­
jected to logical criticism, we make a new inference, of which one
premise is that leading principle of the former inference, according to
which propositions related to one another in a certain way are fit to
be premise and conclusion of a valid inference, while another premise
is a fact of observation, namely, that the given relation does subsist
between the premise and conclusion of the inference under criticism;
whence it is concluded that the inference was valid.
Logic supposes inferences not only to be drawn, but also to be
subjected to criticism; and therefore we not only require the form
P.'.C to express an argument, but also a form, P. —
< C ., to express the
truth of its leading principle. Here P f. denotes any one of the class of
premises, and the corresponding conclusion. The symbol -< is the
copula, and signifies prim arily that every state of things in which a
proposition of the class P. is true is a state of things in which the
corresponding propositions of the class C- are true. But logic also
supposes some inferences to be invalid, and must have a form for
denying the leading premise. This we shall write P^ ^ C., a dash over
any symbol signifying in our notation the negative o f that symbol t
Thus, the form P ? -< C . implies
either, 1, that it is impossible that a premise of the class P^. should be
true,
or, 2, that every state of things in which P . is true is a state of things
in which the corresponding C. is true.
The form P f. ^ C ? implies
both, 1, that a premise of the class P . is possible,
and, 2, that among the possible cases of the truth of a P^ there is one
in which the corresponding C ? is not true.
This acceptation of the copula differs from that of other systems of
syllogistic in a manner which will be explained below in treating of
the negative.
In the form of inference P.'.C the leading principle is not ex­
pressed; and the inference might be justified on several separate princi­
ples. One of these, however, P f. -< C^, is the formulation of the habit
which, in point of fact, has governed the inferences. This principle
contains all that is necessary besides the premise P to justify the con­
clusion. (It w ill generally assert more than is necessary.) We may,
therefore, construct a new argument which shall have for its premises
the two propositions P and P f. —
< C ? taken together, and for its conclu­
*Though the leading principle itself is not present to the mind, we are generally
conscious of inferring on some general principle.
tThis dash was used by Boole [Laws of Thought, p. 119], but not over other than
class-signs.

[page 204]

204 I The Essential Peirce
sion, C. This argument, no doubt, has, like every other, its leading
principle, because the inference is governed by some habit; but yet the
substance of the leading principle must already be contained implicitly
in the premises, because the proposition P . -< C • contains by hypothe­
sis all that is requisite to justify the inference of C from P. Such a
leading principle, which contains no fact not implied or observable in
the premises, is termed a logical principle, and the argument it governs
is termed a complete, in contradistinction to an incomplete, argument, or
enthymeme.
The above will be made clear by an example. Let us begin with the
enthymeme,
Enoch was a man,
Enoch died.
The leading principle of this is, “ All men die.” Stating it, we get the
complete argument,
All men die,
Enoch was a man;
Enoch was to die.
The leading principle of this is nota notae est nota rei ipsius.2 Stating this
as a premise, we have the argument,
Nota notae est nota rei ipsius,
M ortality is a mark of humanity, which is a mark of Enoch;
M ortality is a mark of Enoch.
But this very same principle of the nota notae is again active in the
drawing of this last inference, so that the last state of the argument is
no more complete than the last but one.
There is another way of rendering an argument complete, namely,
instead of adding the leading principle P . —
< conjunctively to the
premise P, to form a new argument, we might add its denial disjunc­
tively to the conclusion; thus,
P
Either C or P ^ C .
i i
A logical principle is said to be an empty or merely formal proposi­
tion, because it can add nothing to the premises of the argument it
governs, although it is relevant; so that it implies no fact except such
as is presupposed in all discourse, as we have seen in §i that certain
facts are implied. We may here distinguish between logical and extra-
logical validity; the former being that of a complete, the latter that of an
incomplete argument. The term logical leading principle we may take to
mean the principle which must be supposed true in order to sustain
the logical validity of any argument. Such a principle states that

[page 205]

[from] On the Algebra of Logic (1880) I 205
among all the states of things which can be supposed without conflict
with logical principles, those in which the premise of the argument
would be true would also be cases of the truth of the conclusion.
N othing more than this would be relevant to the logical leading princi­
ple, which is, therefore, perfectly determinate and not vague, as we
have seen an extralogical leading principle to be.
A complete argument, with only one premise, is called an immediate
inference. Example: All crows are black birds; therefore, all crows are
birds. If from the premise of such an argument everything redundant
is omitted, the state of things expressed in the premise is the same as
the state of things expressed in the conclusion, and only the form of
expression is changed. Now, the logician does not undertake to enu­
merate all the ways of expressing facts: he supposes the facts to be
already expressed in certain standard or canonical forms. But the
equivalence between different ones of his own standard forms is of the
highest importance to him, and thus certain immediate inferences play
the great part in formal logic. Some of these will not be reciprocal
inferences or logical equations, but the most important of them will
have that character.
If one fact has such a relation to a different one that, if the former
be true, the latter is necessarily or probably true, this relation consti­
tutes a determinate fact; and therefore, since the leading principle of
a complete argument involves no matter of fact (beyond those em­
ployed in all discourse), it follows that every complete and material (in
opposition to a merely formal) argument must have at least two prem­
ises.
From the doctrine of the leading principle it appears that if we have
a valid and complete argument from more than one premise, we may
suppress all premises but one and still have a valid but incomplete
argument. This argument is justified by the suppressed premises;
hence, from these premises alone we may infer that the conclusion
would follow from the remaining premises. In this way, then, the
original argument
P Q Jt S T
.. C
is broken up into two, namely, i st,

[page 206]

206 I The Essential Peirce
By repeating this process, any argument may be broken up into argu­
ments of two premises each. A complete argument having two prem­
ises is called a syllogism. *
An argument may also be broken up in a different way by substitut­
ing for the second constituent above, the form
T -< C
Either C or not T.
In this way, any argument may be resolved into arguments, each
of which has one premise and two alternative conclusions. Such an
argument, when complete, may be called a dialogism.
§3. Forms o f Propositions.
In place of the two expressions A -< B and B -< A taken together
we may write A = B;t in place of the two expressions A -< B and
B =< A taken together we may write A < B or B > A; and in place of
the two expressions A :=< B and B ^ A taken together we may
write A MB.
De Morgan, in the remarkable memoir with which he opened his
*The general doctrine of this section is contained in my paper, “ On the Classifica­
tion of Arguments,” 1867. [^¥2:23-48.]
tThere is a difference of opinion among logicians as to whether -< or = is the
simpler relation. But in my paper on the “ Logic of Relatives,” 3 I have strictly demon­
strated that the preference must be given to -< in this respect. The term simpler has an
exact meaning in logic; it means that whose logical depth is smaller; that is, if one
conception implies another, but not the reverse, then the latter is said to be the simpler.
N ow to say that A = B implies that A ^ B, but not conversely. Ergo, etc. It is to no
purpose to reply that A —
< B implies A = (A that is B); it would be equally relevant to
say that A -< B implies A = A. Consider an analogous case. Logical sequence is a simpler
conception than causal sequence, because every causal sequence is a logical sequence but
not every logical sequence is a causal sequence; and it is no reply to this to say that a
logical sequence between two facts implies a causal sequence between some two facts
whether the same or different. The idea that = is a very simple relation is probably due
to the fact that the discovery of such a relation teaches us that instead of two objects
we have only one, so that it simplifies our conception of the universe. On this account
the existence of such a relation is an important fact to learn; in fact, it has the sum of
the importances of the two facts of which it is compounded. It frequently happens that
it is more convenient to treat the propositions A -< B and B —
< A together in their form
A = B; but it also frequently happens that it is more convenient to treat them separately.
Even in geometry we can see that to say that two figures A and B are equal is to say
that when they are properly put together A will cover B and B will cover A; and it is
generally necessary to examine these facts separately. So, in comparing the numbers of
two lots of objects, we set them over against one another, each to each, and observe that
for every one of the lot A there is one of the lot B, and for every one of the lot B there
is one of the lot A.
In logic, our great object is to analyze all the operations of reason and reduce them
to their ultimate elements; and to make a calculus of reasoning is a subsidiary object.
Accordingly, it is more philosophical to use the copula -<, apart from all considerations
of convenience. Besides, this copula is intimately related to our natural logical and
metaphysical ideas; and it is one of the chief purposes of logic to show what validity
those ideas have. Moreover, it will be seen further on that the more analytical copula
does in point of fact give rise to the easiest method of solving problems of logic.

[page 207]

[from] On the Algebra of Logic (1880) I 207
discussion of the syllogism (1846, p. 380), has pointed out that we often
carry on reasoning under an implied restriction as to what we shall
consider as possible, which restriction, applying to the whole of what
is said, need not be expressed.4 The total of all that we consider pos­
sible is called the universe of discourse, and may be very limited.
One mode of limiting our universe is by considering only what actu­
ally occurs, so that everything which does not occur is regarded as
impossible.
The forms A -< B, or A implies B, and A =< B, or A does not imply
B, embrace both hypothetical and categorical propositions. Thus, to
say that all men are mortal is the same as to say that if any man
possesses any character whatever then a mortal possesses that charac­
ter. T o say, ‘if A, then B ’ is obviously the same as to say that from A,
B follows, logically or extralogically. By thus identifying the relation
expressed by the copula with that of illation, we identify the proposi­
tion with the inference, and the term with the proposition. This identi­
fication, by means of which all that is found true of term, proposition,
or inference is at once known to be true of all three, is a most important
engine of reasoning, which we have gained by beginning with a con­
sideration of the genesis of logic.*
O f the two forms A B and A B, no doubt the former is the
more primitive, in the sense that it is involved in the idea of reasoning,
while the latter is only required in the criticism of reasoning. The two
kinds of proposition are essentially different, and every attempt to
reduce the latter to a special case of the former must fail. Boole at­
tempts to express ‘some men are not mortal’, in the form ‘whatever
men have a certain unknown character v are not mortal’.5 But the
propositions are not identical, for the latter does not imply that some
men have that character v; and, accordingly, from Boole’s proposition
we may legitimately infer that ‘whatever mortals have the unknown
character v are not men’; yet we cannot reason from ‘some men are
not mortal’ to ‘some mortals are not men’.t On the other hand, we can
rise to a more general form under which A —
< B and A ^ B are both
included. For this purpose we write A ^ B in the form A -< B, where
A is some-A and B is not-B. This more general form is equivocal in so
far as it is left undetermined whether the proposition would be true
if the subject were impossible. When the subject is general this is the
case, but when the subject is particular (i.e., is subject to the modifica­
*In consequence of the identification in question, in S -< P, I speak of S indifferently
as subject, antecedent, or premise, and of P as predicate, consequent, or conclusion.
+Equally unsuccessful is Mr. Jevons’s attempt to overcome the difficulty by omitting
particular propositions, “ because we can always substitute for it [some] more definite
expressions if we like.” The same reason might be alleged for neglecting the consid­
eration of not. But in fact the form A ^ B is required to enable us to simply deny
A -< B.6

[page 208]

208 I The Essential Peirce
tion some) it is not. The general form supposes merely inclusion of the
subject under the predicate. The short curved mark over the letter in
the subject shows that some part of the term denoted by that letter is
the subject, and that that is asserted to be in possible existence.
The modification of the subject by the curved mark and of the
predicate by the straight mark gives the old set of propositional forms,
viz.:
A. a -< b Every a is b. Universal affirmative.
E. a -< b No a is b. Universal negative.
I. a -< b Some a is b. Particular affirmative.
O. a -< b Some a is not b. Particular negative.
There is, however, a difference between the senses in which these
propositions are here taken and those which are traditional; namely,
it is usually understood that affirmative propositions imply the exis­
tence of their subjects, while negative ones do not. Accordingly, it is
said that there is an immediate inference from A to I and from E to
O. But in the sense assumed in this paper, universal propositions do
not, while particular propositions do, imply the existence of their
subjects. The following figure illustrates the precise sense here as­
signed to the four forms A, E, I, O.
A
In the quadrant marked i there are lines which are all vertical; in
the quadrant marked 2 some lines are vertical and some not; in quad­
rant 3 there are lines none of which are vertical; and in quadrant 4
there are no lines. Now, taking line as subject and vertical as predicate,
A is true of quadrants 1 and 4 and false of 2 and 3.
E is true of quadrants 3 and 4 and false of 1 and 2.
I is true of quadrants 1 and 2 and false of 3 and 4.
O is true of quadrants 2 and 3 and false of 1 and 4.
Hence, A and O precisely deny each other, and so do E and I. But any
other pair of propositions may be either both true or both false or one
true while the other is false.

[page 209]

[from] On the Algebra o f Logic (1880) I 209
De Morgan (“ On the Syllogism ,” No. I, 1846, p. 381) has enlarged
the system of propositional forms by applying the sign of negation
which first appears in A ^ B to the subject and predicate. He thus gets
A —
< B. Every A is B. A is species of B.
B. Some A is not B. A is exient of B.
A -< B. N o A is B. A is external of B.
A ^ B . Some A is B. A is partient of B.
A -< B. Everything is either A or B. A is complement of B.
A 11^ B. There is something besides A and B. A is coinadequate of B.
A —
< B. A includes all B. A is genus of B.
B. A does not include all B. A is deficient of B.
De M organ’s table of the relations of these propositions must be modi­
fied to conform to the meanings here attached to -< and to =
=
<.
We might confine ourselves to the two propositional forms S —
<
P and S P. If we once go beyond this and adopt the form S —
< P, we
must, for the sake of completeness, adopt the whole of De M organ’s
system. But this system, as we shall see in the next section, is itself
incomplete, and requires to complete it the admission of particularity
in the predicate. This has already been attempted by Hamilton, with
an incompetence which ought to be extraordinary.7 I shall allude to
this matter further on, but I shall not attempt to say how many forms
of propositions there would be in the completed system.*8
*In this connection see De Morgan, “ On the Syllogism, No. V ,” 1863.
