[page 225]

16
[from] On the Algebra ofLogic:
A Contribution to the
Philosophy ofNotation
P 296: American Journal of Mathematics 7 (1885)1180-
202. [Alsopublished in W
5:162-90 (with several related manu­
scripts, M SS 506-508 and 538-539 [pp. 107-16 and 191-220])
and in CP3.359-403.] Thispaper, which Peircefirst presented
(at least in part) at the 14-17 October 1884 meeting o f the
National Academy o f Sciences in Newport, RI, consists of
four parts, and it is recognized as a substantial contribution
to modern logic and to the philosophy o f logic and the theory
o f notation. In thefirst part published here, Peirce considers
the different kinds ofsigns requiredfo r afully adequate logic
notation, and he concludes that it is necessary to have tokens
(conventional or general signs, usually called symbols), in­
dexes (demonstrative signs), and icons (signs o f resem­
blance). This is the first published appearance of the icon-
index-symbol trichotomy and Peirce Vfirst application o f his
theory o f signs to his algebraic logic.
I .— T h r e e k i n d s o f S i g n s .
A ny character or proposition either concerns one subject, two
subjects, or a plurality of subjects. For example, one particle has mass,
two particles attract one another, a particle revolves about the line
joining two others. A fact concerning two subjects is a dual character
or relation; but a relation which is a mere combination of two indepen­
dent facts concerning the two subjects may be called degenerate, just as
two lines are called a degenerate conic. In like manner a plural charac­
ter or conjoint relation is to be called degenerate if it is a mere com­
pound of dual characters.
A sign is in a conjoint relation to the thing denoted and to the mind.
If this triple relation is not of a degenerate species, the sign is related
to its object only in consequence of a mental association, and depends
upon a habit. Such signs are always abstract and general, because
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 226]

226 I The Essential Peirce
habits are general rules to which the organism has become subjected.
They are, for the most part, conventional or arbitrary. They include
all general words, the main body of speech, and any mode of conveying
a judgment. For the sake of brevity I will call them tokens. 1
But if the triple relation between the sign, its object, and the mind,
is degenerate, then of the three pairs
sign object
sign mind
object mind
two at least are in dual relations which constitute the triple relation.
One of the connected pairs must consist of the sign and its object, for
if the sign were not related to its object except by the mind thinking
of them separately, it would not fulfil the function of a sign at all.
Supposing, then, the relation of the sign to its object does not lie in a
mental association, there must be a direct dual relation of the sign to
its object independent of the mind using the sign. In the second of the
three cases just spoken of, this dual relation is not degenerate, and the
sign signifies its object solely by virtue of being really connected with
it. O f this nature are all natural signs and physical symptoms. I call
such a sign an index, a pointing finger being the type of the class.
The index asserts nothing; it only says “ There!” It takes hold of our
eyes, as it were, and forcibly directs them to a particular object, and
there it stops. Demonstrative and relative pronouns are nearly pure
indices, because they denote things without describing them; so are the
letters on a geometrical diagram, and the subscript numbers which in
algebra distinguish one value from another without saying what those
values are.
The third case is where the dual relation between the sign and its
object is degenerate and consists in a mere resemblance between them.
I call a sign which stands for something merely because it resembles
it, an icon. Icons are so completely substituted for their objects as
hardly to be distinguished from them. Such are the diagrams of geome­
try. A diagram, indeed, so far as it has a general signification, is not
a pure icon; but in the middle part of our reasonings we forget that
abstractness in great measure, and the diagram is for us the very thing.
So in contemplating a painting, there is a moment when we lose the
consciousness that it is not the thing, the distinction of the real and the
copy disappears, and it is for the moment a pure dream,— not any
particular existence, and yet not general. At that moment we are
contemplating an icon.
I have taken pains to make my distinction* of icons, indices, and
#See Proceedings of the American Academy ofArts and Sciences, Vol. VII, p. 294, May 14,
1867. [Item 1 above, p. 7.]
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 227]

[from] On the Algebra of Logic I 227
tokens clear, in order to enunciate this proposition: in a perfect system
of logical notation signs of these several kinds must all be employed.
Wjfhrvnf Tokens there wcvnJH no gejwj&iity in .the i&aTejraejoiiy .for
they are the only general signs; and generality is essential to reasoning.
Take, for example, the circles by which Euler represents the relations
of terms. They well fulfil the function of icons, but their want of
generality and their incompetence to express propositions must have
been felt by everybody who has used them. Mr. Venn has, therefore,
been led to add shading to them; and this shading is a conventional sign
of the nature of a token.2 In algebra, the letters, both quantitative and
functional, are of this nature. But tokens alone do not state what is the
subject of discourse; and this can, in fact, not be described in general
terms; it can only be indicated. The actual world cannot be distin­
guished from a world of imagination by any description. Hence the
need of pronouns and indices, and the more complicated the subject
the greater the need of them. The introduction of indices into the
algebra of logic is the greatest merit of Mr. M itchell’s system.* He
writes F x to mean that the proposition F is true of every object in the
universe, and F u to mean that the same is true of some object. This
distinction can only be made in some such way as this. Indices are also
required to show in what manner other signs are connected together.
With these two kinds of signs alone any proposition can be expressed;
but it cannot be reasoned upon, for reasoning consists in the observa­
tion that where certain relations subsist certain others are found, and
it accordingly requires the exhibition of the relations reasoned with in
an icon. It has long been a puzzle how it could be that, on the one hand,
mathematics is purely deductive in its nature, and draws its conclu­
sions apodictically, while on the other hand, it presents as rich and
apparently unending a series of surprising discoveries as any observa­
tional science. Various have been the attempts to solve the paradox by
breaking down one or other of these assertions, but without success.
The truth, however, appears to be that all deductive reasoning, even
simple syllogism, involves an element of observation; namely, deduc­
tion consists in constructing an icon or diagram the relations of whose
parts shall present a complete analogy with those of the parts of the
object of reasoning, of experimenting upon this image in the imagina­
tion, and of observing the result so as to discover unnoticed and hidden
relations among the parts. For instance, take the syllogistic formula,
All M is P
S is M
5 is P
*Studies in Logic. By Members of theJohns Hopkins University. Boston: Little, Brown,
: Co., 1883. [“ On a N ew Algebra of Logic,” pp. 72-106.]
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 228]

228 I The Essential Peirce
This is really a diagram of the relations of S, M, and P. The fact that
the middle terrr occurs in the two premises is actually exhibited, and
this must be done or the notation will be of no value. As for algebra,
the very idea of the art is that it presents formulae which can be
manipulated, and that by observing the effects of such manipulation
we find properties not to be otherwise discerned. In such manipula­
tion, we are guided by previous discoveries which are embodied in
general formulae. These are patterns which we have the right to imi­
tate in our procedure, and are the icons par excellence of algebra. The
letters of applied algebra are usually tokens, but the x, y, z, etc. of a
general formula, such as
(x + y)z = xz + yz,
are blanks to be filled up with tokens, they are indices of tokens. Such
a formula might, it is true, be replaced by an abstractly stated rule (say
that multiplication is distributive); but no application could be made
of such an abstract statement without translating it into a sensible
image.
In this paper, I purpose to develope an algebra adequate to the
treatment of all problems of deductive logic, showing as I proceed
what kinds of signs have necessarily to be employed at each stage of
the development. I shall thus attain three objects. The first is the
extension of the power of logical algebra over the whole of its proper
realm. The second is the illustration of principles which underlie all
algebraic notation. The third is the enumeration of the essentially
different kinds of necessary inference; for when the notation which
suffices for exhibiting one inference is found inadequate for explaining
another, it is clear that the latter involves an inferential element not
present to the former. Accordingly, the procedure contemplated
should result in a list of categories of reasoning, the interest of which
is not dependent upon the algebraic way of considering the subject. I
shall not be able to perfect the algebra sufficiently to give facile meth­
ods of reaching logical conclusions: I can only give a method by which
any legitimate conclusion may be reached and any fallacious one
avoided. But I cannot doubt that others, if they will take up the subject,
will succeed in giving the notation a form in which it will be highly
useful in mathematical work. I even hope that what I have done may
prove a first step toward the resolution of one of the main problems
of logic, that of producing a method for the discovery of methods in
mathematics.
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
