[page 242]

18
One, Two, Three:
Kantian Categories
MS 89/. [First published, as M S 572, 1» W31292-94; see also
M SS 545, 546, 548, 573, 575, 57#, and 582.] Sometime in 1885,
it occurred to Peirce that he may have found the key to the
secret of the universe, and he wrote to William James on 20
October: “I have something very vast now. . . . It is . . . an
attempt to explain the laws of nature, to show their general
characteristics and to trace them to their origin & predict new
laws by the laws of the laws o f nature. ” He then made his
famous \guess': “three elements are active in the world,first,
chance; second, law; and third, habit-taking. Such is ourguess
o f the secret of the sphynx. ” It remainedfor him to work the
details and consequences o f this grand hypothesis into afull-
fledged theory. The present paper; written in the summer of
1886for a book to be entitled “ One, Two, ” is one of
several attempts to organize the principal claims needed to
support his guess (and is an early version of thefirst chapter
of item 19).
This is the day for doubting axioms. With mathematicians, the
question is settled; there is no reason to believe that the geometrical
axioms are exactly true. Metaphysics is an imitation of geometry, and
with the geometrical axioms the metaphysical axioms must go too.
We have no reason to think that the sum of the three angles of a
triangle is exactly equal to two right-angles. All that we can say is
that the excess or defect is proportional to the area of the triangle,
and that it is excessively minute even for the most enormous trian­
gles of astronomy. The sum of the three angles of a triangle of unit
size is a physical constant nearly equal to 180 degrees; but its exact
value is unknown to us.
Since we have no reason to think that this constant is exactly equal
to 180 degrees, and there is an infinite multitude of other values that
it can equally well have, the odds are at present infinity to one against
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:19 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 243]

One, Two, Three: Kantian Categories I 243
its being exactly 180 degrees, so that that hypothesis ought to be en­
tirely dismissed from our minds.
It is difficult for us to believe that any physical constant, any finite
quantity in nature, is primordial. It may be so, but we cannot help at
least asking how it came to have the precise value that it has. Especially
do we feel the need of an explanation when the quantity in question
comes very near to unity, zero, or any other remarkable number. For
then it is suggested that there must have been some cause tending to
change the value of the constant and to bring it nearer and nearer to
the number that it nearly equals. In such a case, therefore, we have a
positive reason for thinking that the quantity is not primordial.
Thus the principles of logic require us to think that space did not
always have its present simple construction, but that this has been
brought about by some gradual process. This is not quite a correct
statement, however, because space, as an individual receptacle of
things, is a fiction. Were it otherwise, absolute position and absolute
velocity in space would mean something, which we have no reason to
think that they do. What is true is that there are certain general laws
of position, but not that there is a receptacle which accounts for those
laws. This is a fiction of geometry.
The same reasoning applies to the axiom that every thing that
happens is completely determined by exact laws. We have no reason
to think that the accordance of phenomena with formulae is absolutely
exact. Whenever we attempt to verify the accordance of fact with law,
we find discrepancies which we rightly enough attribute to errors of
observation. But we cannot be sure that there are not similar, though
much smaller, aberrations in the events themselves. Since we have no
reason to think that the mean aberration of phenomena from law is
equal to zero, it is infinitely more probable that it is not. We must
therefore suppose an element of absolute chance, sporting, spon­
taneity, originality, freedom, in nature.1 We must further suppose that
this element in the ages of the past was indefinitely more prominent
than now, and that the present almost exact conformity of nature to
law is something that has been gradually brought about. We have to
suppose that in looking back into the indefinite past we are looking
back towards times when the element of law played an indefinitely
small part in the universe.
If the universe is thus progressing from a state of all but pure
chance to a state of all but complete determination by law, we must
suppose that there is an original, elemental, tendency of things to
acquire determinate properties, to take habits. This is the Third or
mediating element between chance, which brings forth First and origi­
nal events, and law which produces sequences or Seconds. N ow the
tendency to take habits is something essentially finite in amount, an
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:19 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 244]

244 I The Essential Peirce
infinitely strong tendency of this sort [unlike an absolute conformity
to law] is inconceivable and self-contradictory. Consequently this
tendency must itself have been gradually evolved; and it would evi­
dently tend to strengthen itself.2
Here then is a rational physical hypothesis, which is calculated to
account, or all but account for everything in the universe except pure
originality itself. The next step in order would be to attempt to verify
this hypothesis by seeing how far it would account for and explain the
observed characteristics of the laws of nature. But I postpone that to
another chapter3 in order now to sketch the remainder of the theory
of which this hypothesis is but a part.
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:19 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
