[page 245]

19
A Guess at the Riddle
MS pop. [First published in CP 1.354 (the opening outline),
1.1-2 (the next two paragraphs), 1*355-68 (chapter 1), 1.3/3
(chapter 3), 1.374-75 and 37P-83 (chapter 4; missing are the
final sentence o f the second paragraph, the third paragraph,
and the first half of the fourth paragraph), and 1.385-416
(chapters 5, 6, and 7). An earlier opening page has the title
“Notesfo r a Book, to be entitled ‘A Guess at the Riddle, ’ with
a Vignette of the Sphynx below the Title. ”] Although chapters
2, 8, andp are missing (andprobably were never written) and
chapter3 is a mere outline, “A Guess at the Riddle ” isperhaps
Peirce !rgreatest and most original contribution to speculative
philosophy, and it marks his deliberate turn to architectonic
thought. His three categories, which he speculates are iso­
morphic with the three elements that are active in the universe
(chance, law, and habit-taking), serve as the structure for
organizing the branches ofphilosophy and science, and it is
clear that he anticipated a complete reorganization ofhuman
knowledge around his triad of universal conceptions; for as
he wrote, on a variant opening page, “this book, i f ever
written, as it soon will be i f I am in a situation to do it, will
be one of the births o f time. ” Although, unfortunately, Peirce
never was in such a situation, it isfortunate that many of
his major ideas in the “ Guess” would soon appear in the
papers of the Monist Metaphysical Series (items 21-25).
Chapter 1. One, Tw o, Three. Already written.1
Chapter 2. The triad in reasoning. Not touched.2 It is to be made as
follows. 1. Three kinds of signs; as best shown in my last paper in the
Am. Jour. Math.32. Term, proposition, and argument, mentioned in my
paper on a new list of categories.4 3. Three kinds of argument, deduc­
tion, induction, hypothesis, as shown in my paper in Studies in Logic. 5
Also three figures of syllogism, as shown there and in my paper on the
classification of arguments.64. Three kinds of terms, absolute, relative,
and conjugative, as shown in my first paper on Logic of Relatives.7
There are various other triads which may be alluded to. The dual

[page 246]

246 I The Essential Peirce
divisions of logic result from a false way of looking at things abso­
lutely. Thus, besides affirmative and negative, there are really probable
enunciations, which are intermediate. So besides universal and partic­
ular there are all sorts of propositions of numerical quantity. For
example, the particular proposition Some A is B, means At least one
A is B. But we can also say At least 2 A ’s are B ’s. Also, All the A ’s but
one are B ’s, etc. etc. ad infinitum. We pass from dual quantity, or a
system of quantity such as that of Boolian algebra, where there are
only two values, to plural quantity.
Chapter 3. The triad in metaphysics. This chapter one of the best, is
to treat of the theory of cognition.
Chapter 4. The triad in psychology. The greater part is written.
Chapter 5. The triad in physiology. The greater part is written.
Chapter 6. The triad in biology. This is to show the true nature of the
Darwinian hypothesis.
Chapter 7. The triad in physics. The germinal chapter. 1. The necessity
of a natural history of the laws of nature, so that we may get some
notion of what to expect. 2. The logical postulate for explanation
forbids the assumption of any absolute. That is, it calls for the intro­
duction of thirdness. 3. Metaphysics is an imitation of geometry; and
mathematicians having declared against axioms, the metaphysical axi­
oms are destined to fall too. 4. Absolute chance. 5. The universality of
the principle of habit. 6. The whole theory stated. 7. Consequences.
Chapter 8. The triad in sociology or shall I say pneumatology. That
the consciousness is a sort of public spirit among the nerve-cells. Man
as a community of cells; compound animals and composite plants;
society; nature. Feeling implied in firstness.
Chapter 9. The triad in theology. Faith requires to be materialists
without flinching.8
To erect a philosophical edifice that shall outlast the vicissitudes of
time, my care must be, not so much to set each brick with nicest
accuracy, as to lay the foundations deep and massive. Aristotle builded
upon a few deliberately chosen concepts— such as matter and form, act
and power—very broad, and in their outlines vague and rough, but
solid, unshakable, and not easily undermined; and thence it has come
to pass that Aristotelianism is babbled in every nursery, that “ English
Common Sense,” for example, is thoroughly peripatetic, and that ordi­
nary men live so completely within the house of the Stagyrite that
whatever they see out of the windows appears to them incomprehensi­
ble and metaphysical. Long it has been only too manifest that, fondly
habituated though we be to it, the old structure will not do for modern
needs; and accordingly, under Descartes, Hobbes, Kant, and others,
repairs, alterations, and partial demolitions have been carried on for

[page 247]

A Guess at the Riddle I 247
the last three centuries. One system, also, stands upon its own ground;
I mean the new Schelling-Hegel mansion, lately run up in the German
taste, but with such oversights in its construction that, although brand
new, it is already pronounced uninhabitable. The undertaking which
this volume inaugurates is to make a philosophy like that of Aristotle,
that is to say, to outline a theory so comprehensive that, for a long time
to come, the entire work of human reason, in philosophy of every
school and kind, in mathematics, in psychology, in physical science, in
history, in sociology, and in whatever other department there may be,
shall appear as the filling up of its details. The first step toward this
is to find simple concepts applicable to every subject.
But before all else, let me make the acquaintance of my reader, and
express my sincere esteem for him and the deep pleasure it is to me
to address one so wise and so patient. I know his character pretty well,
for both the subject and the style of this book ensure his being one out
of millions. He will comprehend that it has not been written for the
purpose of confirming him in his preconceived opinions, and he would
not take the trouble to read it if it had. He is prepared to meet with
propositions that he is inclined at first to dissent from; and he looks
to being convinced that some of them are true, after all. He will reflect,
too, that the thinking and writing of this book has taken, I won’t say
how long, quite certainly more than a quarter of an hour, and conse­
quently fundamental objections of so obvious a nature that they must
strike everyone instantaneously will have occurred to the author, al­
though the replies to them may not be of that kind whose full force
can be instantly apprehended.
C h a p t e r I. T r i c h o t o m y
Perhaps I might begin by noticing how different numbers have
found their champions. Tw o was extolled by Peter Ramus, Four by
Pythagoras, Five by Sir Thomas Browne, and so on. For my part, I am
a determined foe of no innocent number; I respect and esteem them
all their several ways; but I am forced to confess to a leaning to the
number three in philosophy. In fact, I make so much use of three-fold
divisions in my speculations, that it seems best to commence by mak­
ing a slight preliminary study of the conceptions upon which all such
divisions must rest. I mean no more than the ideas of First, Second,
Third,— ideas so broad that they may be looked upon rather as moods
or tones of thought, than as definite notions, but which have great
significance for all that. Viewed as numerals, to be applied to what
objects we like, they are indeed thin skeletons of thought, if not mere
words. If we only wanted to make enumerations, it would be out of
place to ask for the significations of the numbers we should have to use;

[page 248]

248 I The Essential Peirce
but then the distinctions of philosophy are supposed to attempt some­
thing far more than that; they are intended to go down to the very
essence of things, and if we are to make one single three-fold philo­
sophical distinction, it behooves us to ask beforehand what are the
kinds of objects that are first, second, and third, not as being so
counted, but in their own true characters. That there are such ideas
of the really First, Second, and Third, we shall presently find reason
to admit.
The First is that whose being is simply in itself, not referring to
anything nor lying behind anything. The Second is that which is what
it is by force of something to which it is second. The Third is that
which is what it is owing to things between which it mediates and
which it brings into relation to each other.
The idea of the absolutely First must be entirely separated from all
conception of or reference to anything else; for what involves a second
is itself a second to that second. The First must therefore be present
and immediate, so as not to be second to a representation. It must be
fresh and new, for if old it is second to its former state. It must be
initiative, original, spontaneous, and free; otherwise it is second to a
determining cause. It is also something vivid and conscious; so only it
avoids being the object of some sensation. It precedes all synthesis and
all differentiation: it has no unity and no parts. It cannot be articulately
thought: assert it, and it has already lost its characteristic innocence;
for assertion always implies a denial of something else. Stop to think
of it, and it has flown! What the world was to Adam on the day he
opened his eyes to it, before he had drawn any distinctions, or had
become conscious of his own existence,—that is first, present, immedi­
ate, fresh, new, initiative, original, spontaneous, free, vivid, conscious,
and evanescent. Only, remember that every description of it must be
false to it.
Just as the first is not absolutely first if thought along with a second,
so likewise to think the Second in its perfection we must banish every
third. The Second is therefore the absolute last. But we need not, and
must not, banish the idea of the first from the second; on the contrary,
the Second is precisely that which cannot be without the first. It meets
us in such facts as Another, Relation, Compulsion, Effect, Depen­
dence, Independence, Negation, Occurrence, Reality, Result. A thing
cannot be other, negative, or independent, without a first to or of
which it shall be other, negative, or independent. Still, this is not a very
deep kind of secondness; for the first might in these cases be destroyed
yet leave the real character of the second absolutely unchanged. When
the second suffers some change from the action of the first, and is
dependent upon it, the secondness is more genuine. But the depen­
dence must not go so far that the second is a mere accident or incident

[page 249]

A Guess at the Riddle I 249
of the first; otherwise the secondness again degenerates. The genuine
second suffers and yet resists, like dead matter, whose existence con­
sists in its inertia. Note, too, that for the Second to have the Finality
that we have seen belongs to it, it must be determined by the first
immoveably, and thenceforth be fixed; so that unalterable fixity be­
comes one of its attributes. We find secondness in occurrence, because
an occurrence is something whose existence consists in our knocking
up against it. A hard fact is of the same sort; that is to say, it is
something which is there, and which I cannot think away, but am
forced to acknowledge as an object or second beside myself, the subject
or number one, and which forms material for the exercise of my will.
The idea of second must be reckoned as an easy one to comprehend.
That of first is so tender that you cannot touch it without spoiling it;
but that of second is eminently hard and tangible. It is very familiar,
too; it is forced upon us daily: it is the main lesson of life. In youth,
the world is fresh and we seem free; but limitation, conflict, constraint,
and secondness generally, make up the teaching of experience. With
what firstness
The scarfed bark puts from her native bay;
with what secondness
doth she return,
With overweathered ribs and ragged sails.9
But familiar as the notion is, and compelled as we are to acknowledge
it at every turn, still we never can realize it; we never can be immedi­
ately conscious of finiteness, or of anything but a divine freedom that
in its own original firstness knows no bounds.
First and Second, Agent and Patient, Yes and No, are categories
which enable us roughly to describe the facts of experience, and they
satisfy the mind for a very long time. But at last they are found
inadequate, and the Third is the conception which is then called for.
The Third is that which bridges over the chasm between the absolute
first and last, and brings them into relationship. We are told that every
science has its Qualitative and its Quantitative stage; now its qualita­
tive stage is when dual distinctions,— whether a given subject has a
given predicate or not,— suffice; the quantitative stage comes when, no
longer content with such rough distinctions, we require to insert a
possible half-way between every two possible conditions of the subject
in regard to its possession of the quality indicated by the predicate.
Ancient mechanics recognized forces as causes which produced mo­
tions as their immediate effects, looking no further than the essentially

[page 250]

250 I The Essential Peirce
dual relation of cause and effect. That was why it could make no
progress with dynamics. The work of Galileo and his successors lay
in showing that forces are accelerations by which a state of velocity is
gradually brought about. The words cause and effect still linger, but
the old conceptions have been dropped from mechanical philosophy;
for the fact now known is that in certain relative positions bodies
undergo certain accelerations. N ow an acceleration, instead of being
like a velocity a relation between two successive positions, is a relation
between three; so that the new doctrine has consisted in the suitable
introduction of the conception of Threeness. On this idea, the whole
of modern physics is built. The superiority of modern geometry, too,
has certainly been due to nothing so much as to the bridging over of
the innumerable distinct cases with which the ancient science was
encumbered; and we may go so far as to say that all the great steps in
the method of science in every department have consisted in bringing
into relation cases previously discrete.10
We can easily recognize the man whose thought is mainly in the
dual stage by his unmeasured use of language. In former days, when
he was natural, everything with him was unmitigated, absolute, inef­
fable, utter, matchless, supreme, unqualified, root and branch; but now
that it is the fashion to be depreciatory, he is just as plainly marked
by the ridiculous inadequacy of his expressions. The principle of con­
tradiction is a shibboleth for such minds; to disprove a proposition
they will always try to prove there lurks a contradiction in it, notwith­
standing that it may be as clear and comprehensible as the day. Remark
for your amusement the grand unconcern with which mathematics,
since the invention of the calculus, has pursued its way, caring no more
for the peppering of contradiction-mongers than an ironclad for an
American fort.
We have seen that it is the immediate consciousness that is preemi­
nently first, the external dead thing that is preeminently second. In
like manner, it is evidently the representation mediating between
these two that is preeminently third. Other examples, however, should
not be neglected. The first is agent, the second patient, the third is the
action by which the former influences the latter. Between the begin­
ning as first, and the end as last, comes the process which leads from
first to last.
According to the mathematicians, when we measure along a line,
were our yardstick replaced by a yard marked off on an infinitely long
rigid bar, then in all the shiftings of it which we make for the purpose
of applying it to successive portions of the line to be measured, two
points on that bar would remain fixed and unmoved. To that pair of
points, the mathematicians accord the title of the absolute; they are the
points that are at an infinite distance one way and the other as mea­

[page 251]

A Guess at the Riddle I 251
sured by that yard. These points are either really distinct, coincident,
or imaginary (in which case there is but a finite distance completely
round the line), according to the relation of the mode of measurement
to the nature of the line upon which the measurement is made. These
two points are the absolute first and the absolute last or second, while
every measurable point on the line is of the nature of a third. We have
seen that the conception of the absolute first eludes every attempt to
grasp it; and so in another sense does that of the absolute second; but
there is no absolute third, for the third is of its own nature relative,
and this is what we are always thinking, even when we aim at the first
or second. The starting-point of the universe, God the Creator, is the
Absolute First; the terminus of the universe, God completely revealed,
is the Absolute Second; every state of the universe at a measurable
point of time is the third. If you think the measurable is all there is,
and deny it any definite tendency whence or whither, then you are
considering the pair of points that makes the absolute to be imaginary
and are an Epicurean. If you hold that there is a definite drift to the
course of nature as a whole, but yet believe its absolute end is nothing
but the nirvana from which it set out, you make the two points of the
absolute to be coincident, and are a pessimist. But if your creed is that
the whole universe is approaching in the infinitely distant future a
state having a general character different from that toward which we
look back in the infinitely distant past, you make the absolute to consist
in two distinct real points and are an evolutionist.*
This is one of the matters concerning which a man can only learn
from his own reflections, but I believe that if my suggestions are
followed out, the reader will grant that One, Tw o, Three, are more
than mere count-words like “ eeny, meeny, mony, mi,” but carry vast,
though vague ideas.
But it will be asked, why stop at three? Why not go on to find a
// new conception in / distinct idea for // Four, Five, and so on
indefinitely? The reason is that while it is impossible to form a genuine
three by any modification of the pair, without introducing something
of a different nature from the unit and the pair, four, five, and every
higher number can be formed by mere complications of threes. To
make this clear, I will first show it in an example. The fact that A
presents B with a gift C, is a triple relation, and as such cannot possibly
be resolved into any combination of dual relations. Indeed, the very
*The last view is essentially that of Christian theology, too. The theologians hold
the physical universe to be finite, but considering that universe which they will admit
to have existed from all time, it would appear to be in a different condition in the end
from what it was in the beginning, the whole spiritual creation having been accom­
plished, and abiding.

[page 252]

252 I The Essential Peirce
idea of a combination involves that of thirdness, for a combination is
something which is what it is owing to the parts which it brings into
mutual relationship. But we may waive that consideration, and still we
cannot build up the fact that A presents C to B by any aggregate of
dual relations between A and B, B and C, and C and A. A may enrich
B, B may receive C, and A may part with C, and yet A need not
necessarily give C to B. For that, it would be necessary that these three
dual relations should not only coexist, but be welded into one fact.
Thus, we see that a triad cannot be analyzed into dyads. But now I will
show by an example that a four can be analyzed into threes. Take the
quadruple fact that A sells C to B for the price D. This is a compound
of two facts: ist, that A makes with C a certain transaction, which we
may name E; and 2nd, that this transaction E is a sale of B for the price
D. Each of these two facts is a triple fact, and their combination makes
up as genuine a quadruple fact as can be found. The explanation of this
striking difference is not far to seek. A dual relative term, such as
“ lover” or “ servant,” is a sort of blank form, where there are two places
left blank. I mean that in building a sentence round lover, as the
principal word of the predicate, we are at liberty to make anything we
see fit the subject, and then, besides that, anything we please the object
of the action of loving. But a triple relative term such as “ giver” has
two correlates, and is thus a blank form with three places left blank.
Consequently, we can take two of these triple relatives and fill up one
blank place in each with the same letter, X, which has only the force
of a pronoun or identifying index, and then the two taken together will
form a whole having four blank places; and from that we can go on
in a similar way to any higher number. But when we attempt to
imitate this proceeding with dual relatives, and combine two of them
by means of an X, we find we only have two blank places in the
combination, just as we had in either of the relatives taken by itself.
A road with only three-way forkings may have any number of termini,
but no number of straight roads put end on end will give more than
two termini. Thus any number, however large, can be built out of
triads; and consequently no idea can be involved in such a number,
radically different from the idea of three. I do not mean to deny that
the higher numbers may present interesting special configurations
from which notions may be derived of more or less general applicabil­
ity; but these cannot rise to the height of philosophical categories so
fundamental as those that have been considered.
The argument of this book has been developed in the mind of the
author, substantially as it is presented, as a following out of these three
conceptions, in a sort of game of “ follow my leader” from one field of
thought into another. Their importance was originally brought home
to me in the study of logic, where they play so remarkable a part that
I was led to look for them in psychology. Finding them there again,

[page 253]

A Guess at the Riddle I 253
I could not help asking myself whether they did not enter into the
physiology of the nervous system. By drawing a little on hypothesis,
I succeeded in detecting them there; and then the question naturally
came how they would appear in the theory of protoplasm in general.
Here I seemed to break into an interesting avenue of reflections giving
instructive aperçus both into the nature of protoplasm and into the
conceptions themselves; though it was not till later that I mapped out
my thoughts on the subject as they are presented in Chapter V .111had
no difficulty in following the lead into the domain of natural selection;
and once arrived at that point, I was irresistibly carried on to specula­
tions concerning physics. One bold saltus landed me in a garden of
fruitful and beautiful suggestions, the exploration of which long pre­
vented my looking further.12 As soon, however, as I was induced to
look further, and to examine the application of the three ideas to the
deepest problems of the soul, nature, and God, I saw at once that they
must carry me far into the heart of those primeval mysteries. That is
the way the book has grown in my mind: it is also the order in which
I have written it; and only this first chapter is more or less an after­
thought, since at an earlier stage of my studies I should have looked
upon the matter here set down as too vague to have any value. I should
have discerned in it too strong a resemblance to many a crack-brained
book that I had laughed over. A deeper study has taught me that even
out of the mouths of babes and sucklings strength may be brought
forth, and that weak metaphysical trash has sometimes contained the
germs of conceptions capable of growing up into important and posi­
tive doctrines.
Thus, the whole book being nothing but a continual exemplifica­
tion of the triad of ideas, we need linger no longer upon this prelimi­
nary exposition of them. There is, however, one feature of them upon
which it is quite indispensible to dwell. It is that there are two distinct
grades of secondness and three grades of thirdness. There is a close
analogy to this in geometry. Conic sections are either the curves usu­
ally so called, or they are pairs of straight lines. A pair of straight lines
is called a degenerate conic. So plane cubic curves are either the genu­
ine curves of the third order, or they are conics paired with straight
lines, or they consist of three straight lines; so that there are two orders
of degenerate cubics. N early in this same way, besides genuine second­
ness, there is a degenerate sort which does not exist as such, but is only
so conceived. The medieval logicians (following a hint of Aristotle)
distinguished between real relations and relations of reason. A real
relation subsists in virtue of a fact which would be totally impossible
were either of the related objects destroyed; while a relation of reason
subsists in virtue of two facts, one only of which would disappear on
the annihilation of either of the relates. Such are all resemblances: for
any two obiects in nature resemble each other, and indeed in them­

[page 254]

254 I The Essential Peirce
selves just as much as any other two; it is only with reference to our
senses and needs that one resemblance counts for more than another.
Rumford and Franklin resembled one another by virtue of being both
Am ericans;13 but either would have been just as much an American if
the other had never lived. On the other hand, the fact that Cain killed
Abel cannot be stated as a mere aggregate of two facts one concerning
Cain and the other concerning Abel. Resemblances are not the only
relations of reason, though they have that character in an eminent
degree. Contrasts and comparisons are of the same sort. Resemblance
is an identity of characters; and this is the same as to say that the mind
gathers the resembling ideas together into one conception. Other rela­
tions of reason arise from ideas being connected by the mind in other
ways; they consist in the relation between two parts of one complex
concept, or, as we may say, in the relation of a complex concept to
itself, in respect to two of its parts. This brings us to consider a sort
of degenerate secondness that does not fulfill the definition of a rela­
tion of reason. Identity is the relation that everything bears to itself:
Lucullus dines with Lucullus. Again, we speak of allurements and
motives in the language of forces, as though a man suffered compulsion
from within. So with the voice of conscience: and we observe our own
feelings by a reflective sense. An echo is my own voice coming back
to answer itself. So also, we speak of the abstract quality of a thing as
if it were some second thing that the first thing possesses. But the
relations of reason and these self-relations are alike in this, that they
arise from the mind setting one part of a notion into relation to an­
other. All degenerate seconds may be conveniently termed Internal, in
contrast to External seconds, which are constituted by external fact,
and are true actions of one thing upon another.
Among thirds, there are two degrees of degeneracy. The first is
where there is in the fact itself no thirdness or mediation, but where
there is true duality; the second degree is where there is not even true
secondness in the fact itself.
Consider, first, the thirds degenerate in the first degree. A pin
fastens two things together by sticking through one and also through
the other: either might be annihilated, and the pin would continue to
stick through the one which remained. A mixture brings its ingredi­
ents together by containing each. We may term these accidental thirds.
“ How did I slay thy son?” asked the merchant, and the genie replied,
“ When thou threwest away the date-stone, it smote my son who was
passing at the time, on the breast, and he died forthright.” Here there
were two independent facts, first that the merchant threw away the
date-stone, and second that the date-stone struck and killed the genie’s
son. Had it been aimed at him, the case would have been different; for
then there would have been a relation of aiming which would have
connected together the aimer, the thing aimed, and the object aimed

[page 255]

A Guess at the Riddle I 255
at, in one fact. What monstrous injustice and inhumanity on the part
of that genie to hold that poor merchant responsible for such an acci­
dent! I remember how I wept at it, as I lay in my father’s arms and
he first told me the story. It is certainly just that a man, even though
he had no evil intention, should be held responsible for the immediate
effects of his actions; but not for such as might result from them in a
sporadic case here and there, but only for such as might have been
guarded against by a reasonable rule of prudence. Nature herself often
supplies the place of the intention of a rational agent in making a
thirdness genuine and not merely accidental; as when a spark, as third,
falling into a barrel of gunpowder, as first, causes an explosion, as
second. But how does nature do this? By virtue of an intelligible law
according to which she acts. If two forces are combined according to
the parallelogram of forces, their resultant is a real third. Yet any force
may, by the parallelogram of forces be mathematically resolved into
the sum of two others, in an infinity of different ways. Such compo­
nents, however, are mere creations of the mind. What is the difference?
As far as one isolated event goes, there is none; the real forces are no
more present in the resultant than any components that the mathema­
tician may imagine. But what makes the real forces really there is the
general law of nature which calls for them, and not for any other
components of the resultant. Thus, intelligibility, or reason objecti­
fied, is what makes thirdness genuine.
We now come to thirds degenerate in the second degree. The
dramatist Marlowe had something of that character of diction in
which Shakespeare and Bacon agree. This is a trivial example; but the
mode of relation is important. In natural history, intermediate types
serve to bring out the resemblance between forms whose similarity
might otherwise escape attention, or not be duly appreciated. In por­
traiture, photographs mediate between the original and the likeness.
In science, a diagram or analogue of the observed fact leads on to a
further analogy. The relations of reason which go to the formation of
such a triple relation need not be all resemblances. Washington was
eminently free from the faults in which most great soldiers resemble
one another. A centaur is a mixture of a man and a horse. Philadelphia
lies between N ew York and Washington. Such thirds may be called
Intermediate thirds or Thirds of comparison.
Nobody will suppose that I wish to claim any originality in reckon­
ing the triad important in philosophy. Since Hegel, almost every fanci­
ful thinker has done the same. Originality is the last of recommenda­
tions for fundamental conceptions. On the contrary, the fact that the
minds of men have ever been inclined to threefold divisions is one of
the considerations in favor of them. Other numbers have been objects
of predilection to this philosopher and that, but three has been promi­
nent at all times and with all schools. M y whole method w ill be found

[page 256]

256 I The Essential Peirce
to be in profound contrast with that of Hegel; I reject his philosophy
in toto.14 Nevertheless, I have a certain sympathy with it, and fancy
that if its author had only noticed a very few circumstances he would
himself have been led to revolutionize his system. One of these is the
double division or dichotomy of the second idea of the triad. He has
usually overlooked external secondness, altogether. In other words, he
has committed the trifling oversight of forgetting that there is a real
world with real actions and reactions. Rather a serious oversight that.
Then Hegel had the misfortune to be unusually deficient in mathemat­
ics. He shows this in the very elementary character of his reasoning.
Worse still, while the whole burden of his song is that philosophers
have neglected to take thirdness into account, which is true enough of
the theological kind, with whom alone he was acquainted (for I do not
call it acquaintance to look into a book without comprehending it), he
unfortunately did not know, what it would have been of the utmost
consequence for him to know, that the mathematical analysts had in
great measure escaped this great fault, and that the thorough-going
pursuit of the ideas and methods of the differential calculus would be
sure to cure it altogether. Hegel’s dialectical method is only a feeble
and rudimentary application of the principles of the calculus to meta­
physics. Finally Hegel’s plan of evolving everything out of the ab-
stractest conception by a dialectical procedure, though far from being
so absurd as the experientialists think, but on the contrary represent­
ing one of the indispensible parts of the course of science, overlooks
the weakness of individual man, who wants the strength to wield such
a weapon as that.
C h a p t e r III. T h e T r ia d i n M e t a p h y s i c s
I will run over all the conceptions that played an important [ro\e]
in the pre-Socratic philosophy and see how far they can be expressed
in terms of one, two, three.
i. The first of all the conceptions of philosophy is that of a primal
matter out of which the world is made.15 Thales and the early Ionian
philosophers busied themselves mainly with this. They called it the
arche, the beginning; so that the conception of First was the quintes­
sence of it. Nature was a wonder to them, and they asked its explana­
tion; from what did it come? That was a good question, but it was
rather stupid to suppose that they were going to learn much even if
they could find out from what sort of matter it was made. But to ask
how it had been formed, as they doubtless did, was not an exhaustive
question, it would only carry them back a little way; they wished to
go to the very beginning at once, and in the beginning there must have
been a homogeneous something, for where there was variety they

[page 257]

A Guess at the Riddle I 257
supposed there must be always an explanation to be sought. The first
must be indeterminate, and the indeterminate first of anything is the
material of which it is formed. Besides, their idea was that they could
not tell how the world was formed unless they knew from what to
begin their account. The inductive /methody of explaining phenomena
by tracing them back step by step to their causes was foreign not only
to them but to all ancient and medieval philosophy; that is the
Baconian idea. Indeterminacy is really a character of the first. But not
the indeterminacy of homogeneity. The first is full of life and variety.
Yet that variety is only potential; it is not definitely there. Still, the
notion of explaining the variety of the world, which was what they
mainly wondered at, by non-variety was quite absurd. How is variety
to come out of the womb of homogeneity; only by a principle of
spontaneity, which is just that virtual variety that is the First.
C h a p t e r IV. T h e T r ia d in P s y c h o l o g y
The line of reasoning which I propose to pursue is peculiar, and
will need some careful study to estimate the strength of it. I shall
review it critically in the last chapter, but meantime I desire to point
out that the step I am about to take, which is analogous to others that
will follow, is not so purely of the nature of a guess as might be
supposed by persons expert in judging of scientific evidence. We have
seen that the ideas of One, Tw o, Three, are forced upon us in logic,
and really cannot be dispensed with. They meet us not once but at
every turn. And we have found reason to think that they are equally
important in metaphysics. How is the extraordinary prominence of
these conceptions to be explained? Must it not be that they have their
origin in the nature of the mind? This is the Kantian form of inference,
which has been found so cogent in the hands of that hero of philoso­
phy; and I do not know that modern studies have done anything to
discredit it. It is true we no longer regard such a psychological explana­
tion of a conception to be as final as Kant thought. It leaves further
questions to be asked; but as far as it goes it seems to be satisfactory.
We find the ideas of First, Second, Third, constant ingredients of our
knowledge. It must then either be that they are continually given to
us in the presentations of sense, or that it is the peculiar nature of the
mind to mix them with our thoughts. N ow we certainly cannot think
that these ideas are given in sense. First, Second, and Third, are not
sensations. They can only be given in sense by things appearing la­
belled as first, second, and third, and such labels things do not usually
bear. They ought therefore to have a psychological origin. A man must
be a very uncompromising partisan of the theory of the tabula rasa to
deny that the ideas of first, second, and third are due to congenital

[page 258]

258 I The Essential Peirce
tendencies of the mind. So far there is nothing in my argument to
distinguish it from that of many a Kantian. The noticeable thing is that
I do not rest here, but seek to put the conclusion to the test by an
independent examination of the facts of psychology, to see whether we
can find any traces of the existence of three parts or faculties of the soul
or modes of consciousness, which might confirm the result just
reached.
Now, three departments of the mind have been generally recog­
nized since Kant; they are: Feeling, Knowing, and Willing. The
unanimity with which this trisection of the mind has been accepted
is, indeed, quite surprising. The division did not have its genesis in the
peculiar ideas of Kant. On the contrary, it was borrowed by him from
dogmatic philosophers, and his acceptance of it was, as has been well
remarked, a concession to dogmatism. It has been allowed even by
psychologists to whose general doctrines it seems positively hostile.
This evidence that there is something true in it, is strengthened by the
fact that it is impossible to make a critical examination of it, with [out]
coming to the conclusion that it is but a rough approximation to the
truth, at best; and this has generally been conceded.
Where did this three-fold division of the functions of the mind
come from? Kant took it ready made from the Leibnitzian writer
Tetens. He drew a suggestion from the rhetoricians of the sixteenth
century and they found it in an imperfect form in their idolized Plato.
In Plato, it appears under a poetical garb and distorted mien which we
cannot believe to have been the original one; and it is easy to credit the
statement of Diogenes Laertius that it came from the school of Py­
thagoras. N ow in the doctrine of Pythagoras everything was con­
nected with number, which was taken to be the foundation of the
world. There is a hint in its history, then, that the three-fold division
of the mind may be connected with the ideas of one, two, three.
By feelings, as constituting one of the great classes of mental activi­
ties, are meant according to Kant and most psychologists feelings of
pleasure and pain. This is not, however, the original doctrine of T e­
tens, who includes under this head all that is immediately present, or
at least the subjective element of it. Kant’s modification suits his pecu­
liar system better than the truth of nature. There is no good reason for
giving such a peculiar place to pleasure and pain; as if they had no
resemblance to anything else that we can feel. Pleasure and pain are
nothing but secondary sensations, or feelings produced by feelings,
whenever the latter reach a certain degree of subjective intensity, that
is, produce a certain amount of commotion in the organism. If we
could pay attention enough, we should probably recognize that every
exertion and every cognition produces pleasure or pain. There is plea­
sure in the contemplation of a theorem of geometry. Pain is perhaps

[page 259]

A Guess at the Riddle I 259
essential to the consciousness of exertion; what we do without pain we
do without effort. But that peculiarity of feelings which makes them
one of the great branches of mental phenomena is that they form the
sum total of all of which we have in immediate and instantaneous
consciousness; they are what is present. We cannot be immediately
conscious of what is past and gone; we only remember it, though it be
past by but the hundredth of a second. N o more can we be immedi­
ately conscious of what is yet to come, however close at hand it may
be. We can only infer it. O f nothing but the fleeting instant can /we7
have absolutely immediate consciousness, or feeling, whether much or
little; and this instant is no sooner present than it is gone. In it we can
be conscious of no change; because we do that by making a little
rehearsal of the process or imitation of it, and that occupies time. We
can draw no inference in an instant, nor can we recognize any inferen­
tial conclusion. We can neither divide nor synthetise; we can only feel.
When an instant has once past, that immediate consciousness can
never be recovered. It is totally and absolutely gone. We cannot com­
pare any subsequent feeling with it, as immediate feeling, because we
cannot have the second in our mind until the first has utterly gone
from us. We remember it; that is to say, we have another cognition
which professes to reproduce it; but we know that there is no resem­
blance between the memory and the sensation, because, in the first
place, nothing can resemble an immediate feeling, for resemblance
supposes a dismemberment and recomposition which is totally foreign
to the immediate, and in the second place, memory is an articulated
complex and worked-over product which differs infinitely and immea­
surably from feeling. Look at a red surface, and try to feel what the
sensation is, and then shut your eyes and remember it. N o doubt
different persons are different in this respect; to some the experiment
will seem to yield an opposite result but I have convinced m yself that
there is nothing in my memory that is in the least like the vision of
the red. When red is not before my eyes, I do not see it at all. Some
people tell me they see it faintly;— a most inconvenient kind of mem­
ory, which would lead to remembering bright red as pale or dingy. I
remember colours with unusual accuracy, because I have had much
training in observing them; but my memory does not consist in any
vision but in a habit by virtue of which I can recognize a newly
presented colour as like or unlike one I had seen before. But even if
the memory of some persons is of the nature of an hallucination,
enough arguments remain to show that immediate consciousness or
feeling is absolutely unlike anything else.
There are grave objections to making a whole third of the mind of
the will alone. One great psychologist has said that the will is nothing
but the strongest desire.16 I cannot grant that; it seems to me to over­

[page 260]

260 I The Essential Peirce
look that fact which of all that we observe is quite the most obtrusive,
namely the difference between dreaming and doing. This is not a
question of defining, but of noticing what we experience; and surely
he who can confound desiring with willing must be a day-dreamer.
The evidence, however, seems to be pretty strong that the conscious­
ness of willing does not differ, at least not very much, from a sensation.
The sense of hitting and of getting hit are nearly the same, and should
be classed together. The common element is the sense of an actual
occurrence, of actual action and reaction. There is an intense reality
about this kind of experience, a sharp sundering of subject and object.
While I am seated calmly in the dark, the lights are suddenly turned
on, and at that instant I am conscious, not of a process of change, but
yet of something more than can be contained in an instant. I have a
sense of a saltus, of there being two sides to that instant. A conscious­
ness of polarity would be a tolerably good phrase to describe what
occurs. For will, then, as one of the great types of consciousness, we
ought to substitute the polar sense.
But by far the most confused of the three members of the division,
in its ordinary statement, is Cognition. In the first place every kind of
consciousness enters into cognition. Feelings, in the sense in which
alone they can be admitted as a great branch of mental phenomena
form the warp and woof of cognition and even in the objectionable
sense of pleasure and pain, they are constituents of cognition. The will,
in the form of attention, constantly enters, and the sense of reality or
objectivity, which is what we have found ought to take the place of
will, in the division of consciousness, is even more essential yet, if
possible. But that element of cognition which is neither feeling nor the
polar sense, is the consciousness of a process, and this in the form of
the sense of learning, of acquiring, of mental growth is eminently
characteristic of cognition. This is a kind of consciousness which can­
not be immediate, because it covers a time, and that not merely because
it continues through every instant of that time, but because it cannot
be contracted into an instant. It differs from immediate consciousness,
as a melody does from one prolonged note. Neither can the conscious­
ness of the two sides of an instant, of a sudden occurrence, in its
individual reality, possibly embrace the consciousness of a process.
This is the consciousness that binds our life together. It is the con­
sciousness of synthesis.
Here then, we have indubitably three radically different elements
of consciousness, these and no more. And they are evidently connected
with the ideas of one-two-three. Immediate feeling is the consciousness
of the first; the polar sense is the consciousness of the second; and
synthetical consciousness is the consciousness of a Third or medium.
Note, too, that just as we have seen that there are two orders of

[page 261]

A Guess at the Riddle I 261
secondness, so the polar sense splits into two, and that in two ways:
for first, there is an active and a passive kind, or Will and Sense, and
second, there are External Will and Sense, in opposition to Internal
Will (self-control, inhibitory will) and Internal Sense (introspection).
In like manner, just as there are three orders of thirdness, so there are
three kinds of synthetical consciousness. The undegenerate and really
typical form has not been made so familiar to us as the others, which
have been more completely studied by psychologists; I shall therefore
mention that last. Synthetical consciousness degenerate in the first
degree, corresponding to accidental thirdness, is where there is an
external compulsion upon us to think things together. Association by
contiguity is an instance of this; but a still better instance is that in our
first apprehension of our experiences, we cannot choose how we will
arrange our ideas in reference to time and space, but are compelled to
think certain things as nearer together than others. It would be putting
the cart before the horse to say that we are compelled to think certain
things together because they are together in time and space; the true
way of stating it is that there is an exterior compulsion upon us to put
them together in our construction of time and space, in our perspec­
tive. Synthetical consciousness degenerate in the second degree, corre­
sponding to intermediate thirds, is where we think different feelings
to be alike or different, which, since feelings in themselves cannot be
compared and therefore cannot be alike, so that to say they are alike
is merely to say that the synthetic consciousness regards them so,
comes to this, that we are internally compelled to synthetise them or
to sunder them. This kind of synthesis appears in a secondary form in
association by resemblance. But the highest kind of synthesis is what
the mind is compelled to make neither by the inward attractions of the
feelings or representations themselves, nor by a transcendental force
of haecceity, but in the interest of intelligibility, that is, in the interest
of the synthetising “ I think” itself; and this it does by introducing an
idea not contained in the data, which gives connections which they
would not otherwise have had. This kind of synthesis has not been
sufficiently studied and especially the intimate relationship of its dif­
ferent varieties has not been duly considered. The work of the poet or
novelist is not so utterly different from that of the scientific man. The
artist introduces a fiction; but it is not an arbitrary one; it exhibits
affinities to which the mind accords a certain approval in pronouncing
them beautiful, which if it is not exactly the same as saying that the
synthesis is true, is something of the same general kind. The geometer
draws a diagram, which if not exactly a fiction, is at least a creation,
and by means of observation of that diagram he is able to synthetise
and show relations between elements which before seemed to have no
necessary connection. The realities compel us to put some things into

[page 262]

262 I The Essential Peirce
very close relation and others less so, in a highly complicated, and in
the sense17 itself unintelligible manner; but it is the genius of the mind,
that takes up all these hints of sense, adds immensely to them, makes
them precise, and shows them in intelligible form in the intuitions of
space and time. Intuition is the regarding of the abstract in a concrete
form, by the realistic hypostatisation of relations; that is the one sole
method of valuable thought. V ery shallow is the prevalent notion that
this is something to be avoided. You might as well say at once that
reasoning is to be avoided because it has led to so much error; quite
in the same philistine line of thought would that be and so well in
accord with the spirit of nominalism that I wonder some one does not
put it forward. The true precept is not to abstain from hypostatisation,
but to do it intelligently.
C h a p t e r V. T h e T r ia d i n P h y s i o l o g y
Granted that there are three fundamentally different kinds of con­
sciousness, it follows as a matter of course that there must be some­
thing threefold in the physiology of the nervous system to account for
them. N o materialism is implied in this, further than that intimate
dependence of the action of the mind upon the body, which every
student of the subject must and does now acknowledge. Once more a
prediction, as it were, is made by the theory; that is to say, certain
consequences, not contemplated in the construction thereof, necessar­
ily result from it; and these are of such a character that their truth or
falsehood can be independently investigated. Were we to find them
strikingly and certainly true, a remarkable confirmation of the theory
would be afforded. So much as this, however, I cannot promise; I can
only say that they are not certainly false; and we must be content to
trace out these consequences, and see what they are, and leave them
to the future judgment of physiologists.
Tw o of the three kinds of consciousness, indeed, the simple and
dual, receive an instant physiological explanation. We know that the
protoplasmic content of every nerve-cell has its active and passive
conditions, and argument is unnecessary to show that Feeling, or
immediate consciousness, arises in an active state of nerve-cells. E x­
periments on the effects of cutting the nerves show that there is no
feeling after communication with the central nerve-cells is severed, so
that the phenomenon has certainly some connection with the nerve-
cells; and feeling is excited by just such stimuli as would be likely to
throw protoplasm into an active condition. Thus, though we cannot
say that every nerve-cell in its active condition has feeling (which we
cannot deny, however), there is scarce room to doubt that the activity
of nerve-cells is the main physiological requisite for consciousness. On
the other hand, the sense of action and reaction, or the polar sense, as

[page 263]

A Guess at the Riddle I 263
we agreed to call it, is plainly connected with the discharge of nervous
energy through the nerve-fibres. External volition, the most typical
case of it, involves such a discharge into muscle cells. In external
sensation, where the polar sense enters in a lower intensity, there is
a discharge from the terminal nerve-cell through the afferent nerve
upon a cell or cells in the brain. In internal volition, or self-control,
there is some inhibitory action of the nerves, which is also known to
involve the movement of nervous force; and in internal observation,
or visceral sensation, there are doubtless transfers of energy from one
central cell to another. Remembering that the polar sense is the sense
of the difference between what was before and what is after a dividing
instant, or the sense of an instant as having sides, we see clearly that
the physiological concomitant of it must be some event which happens
very quickly and leaves a more abiding effect, and this description suits
the passage of a nervous discharge over a nerve-fibre so perfectly, that
I do not think we need hesitate to set this phenomenon down as the
condition of dual consciousness.
Synthetic consciousness offers a more difficult problem. Yet the
explanation of the genuine form of that consciousness, the sense of
learning, is easy enough; it is only the degenerate modes, the sense of
similarity, and the sense of real connection, which oblige us to hesitate.
With regard to these two degenerate forms, I am driven to make
hypotheses.
When two ideas resemble one another, we say that they have some­
thing in common; a part of the one is said to be identical with a part
of the other. In what does that identity consist? Having closed both
eyes, I open first one and then shut it and open the other, and I say
that the two sensations are alike. How can the impressions of two
nerves be judged to be alike? It appears to me that in order that that
should become possible, the two nerve-cells must probably discharge
themselves into one common nerve-cell. In any case, it seems to me
that the first supposition to make, for scientific observation to confirm
or reject, is that two ideas are alike so far as the same nerve-cells have
been concerned in the production of them. In short, the hypothesis is
that resemblance consists in the identity of a common element, and
that that identity lies in a part of the one idea and a part of the other
idea being the feeling peculiar to the excitation of one or more nerve-
cells.
When we find ourselves under a compulsion to think that two
elements of experience which do not particularly resemble one an­
other are, nevertheless, really connected, that connection must, I
think, be due in some way, to a discharge of nerve-energy; for the
whole sense of reality is a determination of polar consciousness, which
is itself due to such discharges. For example, I recognize that a certain
surface, on one side of a certain boundary is red, and on the other side

[page 264]

264 I The Essential Peirce
is blue; or that any two qualities are immediately contiguous in space
or time. If the contiguity is in time, it is by the polar sense directly that
we are conscious of a dividing instant with its difference on the two
sides. If the contiguity is in space, I think we have at first a completely
confused feeling of the whole, as yet unanalysed and unsynthetised,
but afterward, when the analysis has been made, we find ourselves
compelled, in recomposing the elements, to pass directly from what is
on one side of the boundary to what is on the other. I suppose then
that we are compelled to think the two feelings as contiguous because
the nerve-cell whose excitation produces the feeling of one recalled
sensation discharges itself into the nerve-cell whose excitation makes
the feeling of the other recalled sensation.
The genuine synthetic consciousness, or the sense of the process of
learning, which is the preeminent ingredient and quintessence of rea­
son, has its physiological basis quite evidently in the most characteris­
tic property of the nervous system, the power of taking habits. This
depends on five principles, as follows, ist, when a stimulus or irritation
is continued for some time, the excitation spreads from the cells di­
rectly affected to those that are associated with it, and from those to
others, and so on, and at the same time increases in intensity. 2nd, after
a time, fatigue begins to set in. N ow beside the utter fatigue which
consists in the cell’s losing all excitability, and the nervous system
refusing to react to the stimulus at all, there is a gentler fatigue, which
plays a very important part in adapting the brain to serving as an organ
of reason, this form of fatigue consisting in the reflex action or dis­
charge of the nerve-cell ceasing to go on one path and either beginning
on a path where there had been no discharge, or increasing the inten­
sity of the discharge along a path on which there had been previously
only a slight discharge. For example, a frog whose cerebrum or brain
has been removed, and whose hind leg has been irritated by putting
a drop of acid upon it, after repeatedly rubbing the place with the
other foot, as if to wipe off the acid, may at length be observed to give
several hops, the first avenue of nervous discharge having become
fatigued. 3rd, when from any cause the stimulus to a nerve-cell is
removed, the excitation quickly subsides. That it does not do so in­
stantly is well-known, and the phenomenon goes among physicists by
the name of persistence of sensation. All noticeable feeling subsides in
a fraction of a second, but a very small remnant continues for a much
longer time. 4th, if the same cell which was once excited, and which
by some chance had happened to discharge itself along a certain path
or paths, comes to get excited a second time, it is more likely to
discharge itself the second time along some or all of those paths along
which it had previously discharged itself than it would have been had
it not so discharged itself before. This is the central principle of habit;
and the striking contrast of its modality to that of any mechanical law

[page 265]

A Guess at the Riddle I 265
is most significant. The laws of physics know nothing of tendencies or
probabilities; whatever they require at all they require absolutely and
without fail, and they are never disobeyed. Were the tendency to take
habits replaced by an absolute requirement that the cell should dis­
charge itself always in the same way, or according to any rigidly fixed
condition whatever, all possibility of habit developing into intelli­
gence would be cut off at the outset; the virtue of thirdness would be
absent. It is essential that there should be an element of chance in some
sense as to how the cell shall discharge itself; and then that this chance
or uncertainty shall not be entirely obliterated by the principle of
habit, but only somewhat affected. 5th, when a considerable time has
elapsed without a nerve having reacted in any particular way, there
comes in a principle of forgetfulness or negative habit rendering it the
less likely to react in that way. N ow let us see what will be the result
of these five principles taken in combination. When a nerve is stimu­
lated, if the reflex activity is not at first of the right sort to remove the
source of irritation, it will change its character again and again until
the cause of irritation is removed, when the activity will quickly sub­
side. When the nerve comes to be stimulated a second time in the same
way, probably some of the other movements which had been made on
the first occasion will be repeated; but, however this may be, one of
them must ultimately be repeated, for the activity will continue until
this does happen: I mean that movement which removes the source of
irritation. On a third occasion, the process of forgetfulness will have
been begun in regard to any tendency to repeat any of the actions of
the first occasion which were not repeated on the second. O f those
which were repeated, some will probably be repeated again, and some
not; but always there remains that one which must be repeated before
the activity comes to an end. The ultimate effect of this will inevitably
be that a habit gets established of at once reacting in the way which
removes the source of irritation; for this habit alone will be strength­
ened at each repetition of the experiment, while every other will tend
to become weakened at an accelerated rate.
I have invented a little game or experiment with playing-cards to
illustrate the working of these principles; and I can promise the reader
that if he will try it half a dozen times he will be better able to estimate
the value of the account of habit here proposed. The rules of this game
are as follows. Take a good many cards of four suits, say a pack of 52,
though fewer w ill do. The four suits are supposed to represent four
modes in which a cell may react. Let one suit, say spades, represent
that mode of reaction which removes the source of irritation and
brings the activity to an end. In order readily to find a card of any suit
as wanted, you had better lay all the cards down face up and dis­
tributed into four packets, each containing the cards of one suit only.
N ow take 2 spades, 2 diamonds, 2 clubs, and 2 hearts, to represent the

[page 266]

266 I The Essential Peirce
original disposition of the nerve-cell, which is supposed to be equally
likely to react in any of the four ways. You turn these 8 cards face down
and shuffle them with extreme thoroughness.* Then turn up cards
from the top of this pack, one by one until a spade is reached. This
process represents the reaction of the cell. Take up the cards just dealt
off, and add to the pack held in the hand one card of each of those suits
that have just been turned up (for habit) and remove from the pack one
card of each suit not turned up (for forgetfulness). Shuffle, and go
through with this operation 13 times or until the spades are exhausted.
It will then generally be found that you hold nothing but spades in
your hand.
Thus we see how these principles not only lead to the establish­
ment of habits, but to habits directed to definite ends, namely the
removal of sources of irritation. N ow it is precisely action according
to final causes which distinguishes mental from mechanical action; and
the general formula of all our desires may be taken as this: to remove
a stimulus. Every man is busily working to bring to an end that state
of things which now excites him to work.
But we are led yet deeper into physiology. The three fundamental
functions of the nervous system, namely, 1st, the excitation of cells,
2nd, the transfer of excitation over fibres, 3rd, the fixing of definite
tendencies under the influence of habit, are plainly due to three prop­
erties of the protoplasm or life-slime itself. Protoplasm has its active
and its passive condition, its active state is transferred from one part
of it to another, and it also exhibits the phenomena of habit. But these
three facts do not seem to sum up the main properties of protoplasm,
as our theory would lead us to expect them to do. Still, this may be
because the nature of this strange substance is so little understood; and
if we had the true secret of its constitution we might see that qualities
that now appear unrelated really group themselves into one, so that it
may be after all that it accords with our theory better than it seems
to do. There have been at least two attempts to explain the properties
of protoplasm by means of chemical suppositions; but inasmuch as
chemical forces are as far as possible themselves from being under­
stood, such hypotheses, even if they were known to be correct, would
be of little avail. As for what a physicist would understand by a molec­
ular explanation of protoplasm, such a thing seems hardly to have been
thought of; yet I cannot see that it is any more difficult than the
*Cards are almost never shuffled enough to illustrate fairly the principles of proba­
bilities; but if after being shuffled in any of the usual ways, they are dealt into three packs
and taken up again, and then passed from one hand into the other one by one, every
other one going to the top and every other to the bottom of the pack that thus accumu­
lates in the second hand, and finally cut, the shuffling may be considered as sufficient
for the purpose of this game. Whenever the direction is to shuffle, shuffling as thorough
as this is meant.

[page 267]

A Guess at the Riddle I 267
constitution of inorganic matter. The properties of protoplasm are
enumerated as follows: contractility, irritability, automatism, nutri­
tion, metabolism, respiration, and reproduction; but these can all be
summed up under the heads of sensibility, motion, and growth. These
three properties are respectively first, second, and third. Let us, how­
ever, draw up a brief statement of the facts which a molecular theory
of protoplasm would have to account for. In the first place, then,
protoplasm is a definite chemical substance, or class of substances,
recognizable by its characteristic reactions. “ We do not at present,”
says Dr. Michael Foster (1879), “ know anything definite about the
molecular composition of active living protoplasm; but it is more than
probable that its molecule is a large and complex one in which a
proteid substance is peculiarly associated with a complex fat and with
some representative of the carbohydrate group, i.e. that each molecule
of protoplasm contains residues of each of these three great classes.
The whole animal body is modified protoplasm.” 18 The chemical com­
plexity of the protoplasm molecule must be amazing. A proteid is only
one of its constituents, and doubtless very much simpler. Yet chemists
do not attempt to infer from their analyses the ultimate atomic consti­
tution of any of the proteids, the number of atoms entering into them
being so great as almost to nullify the law of multiple proportions. I
do find in the book just quoted the following formula for nuclein, a
substance allied to the proteids. It is C 29H 49N 9P 30 22. But as the sum
of the numbers of atoms of hydrogen, nitrogen, and phosphorus ought
to be even, this formula must be multiplied by some even number; so
that the number of atoms in nuclein must be 224 at the very least. We
can hardly imagine, then, that the number of atoms in protoplasm is
much less than a thousand, and if one considers the very minute
proportions of some necessary ingredients of animal and vegetable
organisms, one is somewhat tempted to suspect that 50000 might do
better, or even come to/be7 looked upon in the future as a ridiculously
small guess. Protoplasm combines with water in all proportions, the
mode of combination being apparently intermediate between solution
and mechanical mixture. According to the amount of water it contains,
it passes from being brittle, to being pliable, then gelatinous, then
slimy, then liquid. Generally, it has the character of being elastico-
viscous; that is to say, it springs back partially after a long strain, and
wholly after a short one; but its viscosity is much more marked than
its elasticity. It is generally full of granules, by which we can see slow
streaming motions in it, continuing for some minutes in one way and
then generally reversed. The effect of this streaming is to cause protu­
berances in the mass, often very long and slender. They occasionally
stick up against gravity; and their various forms are characteristic of
the different kinds of protoplasm. When a mass of it is disturbed by
a jar, a poke, an electric shock, heat, etc., the streams are arrested and

[page 268]

268 I The Essential Peirce
the whole contracts into a ball; or if it were very much elongated
sometimes breaks up into separate spheres. When the external excita­
tion is removed, the mass sinks down into something like its former
condition. Protoplasm also grows; it absorbs material and converts it
into the like of its own substance; and in all its growth and reproduc­
tion, it preserves its specific characters.
Such are the properties that have to be accounted for. What first
arrests our attention as likely to afford the key to the problem, is the
contraction of the mass of protoplasm on being disturbed. This is
obviously due to a vast and sudden increase of what the physicists call
“ surface tension,” or the pulling together of the outer parts, which
phenomenon is always observed in liquids, and is the cause of their
making drops. This surface tension is due to the cohesion, or attraction
between neighboring molecules. The question is, then, how can a
body, on having its equilibrium deranged, suddenly increase the at­
tractions between its neighboring molecules? These attractions must
increase rapidly as the distance is diminished; and thus the answer
suggests itself that the distance between neighboring molecules is
diminished. True, the average distance must remain nearly the same,
but if the distances which had previously been nearly equal are ren­
dered unequal, the attractions between the molecules that are brought
nearer to one another will be much more increased than those between
those that are removed from one another will be diminished. We are
thus led to the supposition that in the ordinary state of the substance,
its particles are moving for the most part in complicated orbital or
quasi-orbital systems, instead of in the chemical molecules or more
definite systems of atoms of less complex substances, these particles
thus moving in orbits not being, however, atoms but chemical mole­
cules. But we must suppose that the forces between these particles are
just barely sufficient to hold them in their orbits and that in fact, as
long as the protoplasm is in an active condition, they are not all so held,
but that one and another get occasionally thrown out of their orbits
and wander about until they are drawn into some other system. We
must suppose that these systems have some approximate composition,
about so many of one kind of particles and so many of another kind,
etc., entering into them. This is necessary to account for the nearly
constant chemical composition of the whole. On the other hand, we
cannot suppose that the number of the different kinds is rigidly exact;
for in that case we should not know how to account for the power of
assimilation. We must suppose then that there is considerable range in
the numbers of particles that go to form an orbital system, and that the
somewhat exact chemical composition of the whole is the exactitude
of a statistical average; just as there is a close equality between the
proportions of the two sexes in any nation or province, though there
is considerable inequality in each of the different households. Owing

[page 269]

A Guess at the Riddle I 269
to the complexity of this arrangement, the moment that there is any
molecular disturbance, producing perturbations, large numbers of the
particles are thrown out of their orbits, the systems are more or less
deranged in the immediate neighborhood of the disturbance, and the
harmonic relations between the different revolutions are somewhat
broken up. In consequence of this, the distances between neighboring
particles, which had presented a systematic regularity, now become
extremely unequal, and their average attractions, upon which the co­
hesion depends, is increased. At the same time, the particles thrown
out of their systems shoot into other systems and derange these in their
turn, and so the disturbance is propagated throughout the entire mass.
The source of disturbance, however, being removed, interchanges of
energy take place, in which there is a tendency to equalise the vis viva19
of the different particles, and they consequently tend to sink down into
orbital motions again, and gradually something very like the original
state of things is reestablished, the original orbital systems remaining,
for the most part, and the wandering particles in large proportion
finding places in these systems or forming new ones. Some of these
particles will not find any places, and thus there will be a certain
amount of wasting of the protoplasmic mass. If the same disturbance
is repeated, so far as the orbital systems remain the same as they were
before, there will [be] a repetition of almost exactly the same events.
The same kinds of particles (the same I mean in mass, velocities,
directions of movement, attractions, etc.) which were thrown out of
the different systems before will generally get thrown out again, until,
if the disturbance is repeated several times, there gets to be rather a
deficiency of those kinds of particles in the different systems, when
some new kinds will begin to be thrown out. These new kinds will
differently perturb the systems into which they fly, tending to cause
classes of particles like themselves to be thrown out, and, in that way,
the direction of propagation of the disturbance, as well as its velocity
and intensity, may be altered, and, in short, the phenomenon of fatigue
w ill be manifested. Even when the protoplasmic mass is left to itself,
there will be some wandering of particles, producing regions of slight
disturbance, and so inequalities of tension; and thus, streams w ill be
set up, movements of the mass will take place, and slender processes
w ill be formed. If, however, the mass be left to itself for a very long
time, all the particles that are readily thrown out, will, in all the
changes that are rung on the combinations of situations and velocities
in the orbital systems, get thrown out; while the others will constantly
tend to settle down into more stable relations; and so the protoplasm
will gradually take a passive state from which its orbital systems are
not easily deranged. The food for those kinds of protoplasm that are
capable of marked reaction has to be presented in chemically complex
form. It must doubtless present particles just like those that revolve in

[page 270]

270 I The Essential Peirce
the orbital systems of the protoplasm. In order to be drawn into an
orbital system, a particle whether of food matter or just thrown off
from some other system, must have the right mass, must present itself
at the right point, and move with the right velocity in the right direc­
tion and be subject to the right attraction. It will be right in all these
respects, if it comes to take the place of a particle which has just been
thrown off; and thus, particles taken in are particularly likely to be of
the same material and masses and to take the same places in the orbits
as those that have been shortly before thrown off. N ow these particles
being the exact representatives of those thrown off, will be likely to be
thrown off by the same disturbances, in the same directions, and with
the same results, as those which were thrown off before; and this
accounts for the principle of habit. All the higher kinds of protoplasm,
those for example which have any marked power of contraction, are
fed with matter chemically highly complex.
C h a p t e r V I. T h e T r ia d i n B i o l o g i c a l D e v e l o p m e n t
Whether the part played by natural selection and the survival of the
fittest in the production of species be large or small, there remains little
doubt that the Darwinian theory indicates a real cause, which tends
to adapt animal and vegetable forms to their environment. A very
remarkable feature of it is that it shows how merely fortuitous varia­
tions of individuals together with merely fortuitous mishaps to them
would, under the action of heredity, result, not in mere irregularity,
nor even in a statistical constancy, but in continual and indefinite
progress toward a better adaptation of means to ends. How can this
be? What, abstractly stated, is the peculiar factor in the conditions of
the problem which brings about this singular consequence?
Suppose a million persons, each provided with one dollar, to sit
down to play a simple and fair game of chance, betting for example
on whether a die turns up an odd or even number. The players are
supposed to make their bets independently of one another, and each
to bet on the result of each throw one dollar against a dollar on the part
of the bank. O f course, at the very first bet, one half of them would
lose their only dollar and go out of the game, for it is supposed that
no credit is allowed, while the other half would win each a dollar and
so come to be worth $2. O f these 500000 players, after the second throw,
250000 would have lost, and so be worth only $1 each, while the other
250000 would have won, and so be worth $3. After the third throw,
125000, or one half of those who had had $1 each, would be ruined;
250000 would be worth $2 (namely one half the 250000 who had had $1
each, and one half the 250000 who had had $3 each) and 125000 would
be worth $4 each. The further progress of the game is illustrated by

[page 271]

the following table, where the numbers of players are given having
each possible sum after the ist, 2nd, 3rd, etc. throws.
A Guess at the Riddle I 271
1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 16th
$1 250000 125000 78125 546871 41015-i
8 21820
2 500000 250000 156250 109375 8 2 0 3 U
3 250000 187500 140625 109375 878901
8 52368
4 125000 125000 109375 93750
5 62500 78125 78125 73242-L
16
55542
6 31250 46875 527341
7 15625 2 734 31 3417911
16
38880
8 7 8 12 1 15625
9 39061
8?89l6
19226
10 19531
11 976-1
16
6714
12
13 1587
14
IS 229
16
17 15
It will be seen by the table,20 that at the end of the 4th throw, the most
usual fortune is $3, at the end of the 9th $4, at the end of the 16th $5,
and in like manner at the end of the 25th it would be $6, at the end of
the 36th $7, and so forth. Here then, would be a continual increase of
wealth, which is a sort of “ adaptation to one’s environment,” produced
by a survival of the fittest, that is, by the elimination from the game
of every player who has lost his last dollar. It is easy to see that the
increase of average and usual wealth comes about by the subtraction
of all those small fortunes which would be in the hands of men who
had once been bankrupt had they been allowed to continue betting.
N ow the adaptation of a species to its environment consists, for the
purposes of natural selection, in a power of continuing to exist, that
is to say, in the power of one generation to bring forth another, for as
long as another generation is brought forth the species will continue
and as soon as this ceases it is doomed after one lifetime. This repro­
ductive faculty, then, depending partly on direct fecundity, and partly

[page 272]

272 I The Essential Peirce
on the animal’s living through the age of procreation, is precisely what
the Darwinian theory accounts for. This character plainly is one of
those which has an absolute minimum, for no animal can produce
fewer offspring than none at all and it has no apparent upper limit, so
that it is quite analogous to the wealth of those players. It is to be
remarked that the phrase “ survival of the fittest” in the formula of the
principle does not mean the survival of the fittest individuals, but the
survival of the fittest types; for the theory does not at all require that
individuals ill-adapted to their environment should die at an earlier
age than others, so long only as they do not reproduce so many off­
spring as others; and indeed it is not necessary that this should go so
far as to extinguish the line of descent, provided there be some reason
why the offspring of ill-adapted parents are less likely than others to
inherit those parents’ characteristics. It seems likely that the process,
as a general rule, is something as follows. A given individual is in some
respect ill-adapted to his environment, that is to say, he has characters
which are generally unfavorable to the production of numerous off­
spring. These characters will be apt to weaken the reproductive sys­
tem of that individual, for various reasons, so that its offspring are not
up to the average strength of the species. This second generation will
couple with other individuals, but owing to their weakness, their
offspring will be more apt to resemble the other parent, and so the
unfavorable character will gradually be eliminated, not merely by
diminished numbers of offspring, but also by the offspring more
resembling the stronger parent. There are other ways in which the
unfavorable characters will disappear. When the procreative power is
weakened, there are many examples to show that the principle of
heredity becomes relaxed, and the race shows more tendency to sport­
ing. This sporting will go on until in the course of it the unfavorable
character has become obliterated. The general power of reproduction
thereupon becomes strengthened, with it the direct procreative force
is reinforced, the hereditary transmission of characters again becomes
more strict, and the improved type is hardened.
But all these different cases are but so many different modes of one
and the same principle, which is, the elimination of unfavorable char­
acters. We see then that there are just three factors in the process of
natural selection; to wit: ist, the principle of individual variation or
sporting; 2nd, the principle of hereditary transmission, which wars
against the first principle; and 3rd, the principle of the elimination of
unfavorable characters.
Let us see how far these principles correspond with the triads that
we have already met with. The principle of sporting is the principle
of irregularity, indeterminacy, chance. It corresponds with the irregu­
lar and manifold wandering of particles in the active state of the
protoplasm. It [\s] the bringing in of something fresh and first. The

[page 273]

A Guess at the Riddle I 273
principle of heredity is the principle of the determination of some­
thing by what went before, the principle of compulsion, correspond­
ing to will and sense. The principle of the elimination of unfavorable
characters is the principle of generalization by a casting out of sporadic
cases, corresponding particularly to the principle of forgetfulness in
the action of the nervous system. We have, then, here, a somewhat
imperfect reproduction of the same triad as before. Its imperfection
may be the imperfection of the theory of development.
C h a p t e r V II. T h e T r ia d i n P h y s i c s
Metaphysical philosophy may almost be called the child of geome­
try. O f the three schools of early Greek philosophers, two, the Ionic
and the Pythagorean, were all geometers, and the interest of the Eleat-
ics in geometry is often mentioned. Plato was a great figure in the
history of both subjects; and Aristotle derived from the study of space
some of his most potent conceptions. Metaphysics depends in great
measure on the idea of rigid demonstration from first principles; and
this idea, as well in regard to the process as the axioms from which it
sets out, bears its paternity on its face. Moreover, the conviction that
any metaphysical philosophy is possible has been upheld at all times,
as Kant well says, by the example in geometry of a similar science.
The unconditional surrender, then, by the mathematicians of our
time of the absolute exactitude of the axioms of geometry cannot prove
an insignificant event for the history of philosophy.21 Gauss, the great­
est of geometers, declares that “ there is no reason to think that the sum
of the three angles of a triangle is exactly equal to two right angles.” 22
It is true, experience shows that the deviation of that sum from that
amount is so excessively small that language must be ingeniously used
to express the degree of approximation: but experience never can show
any truth to be exact, nor so much as give the least reason to think it
to be so, unless it be supported by some other considerations. We can
only say that the sum of the three angles of any given triangle cannot
be much greater or less than two right angles; but that exact value is
only one among an infinite number of others each of which is as
possible as that. So say the mathematicians with unanimity.
The absolute exactitude of the geometrical axioms is exploded; and
the corresponding belief in the metaphysical axioms, considering the
dependence of metaphysics on geometry, must surely follow it to the
tomb of extinct creeds. The first to go must be the proposition that
every event in the universe is precisely determined by causes accord­
ing to inviolable law. We have no reason to think that this is absolutely
exact. Experience shows that it is so to a wonderful degree of approxi­
mation, and that is all. This degree of approximation will be a value
for future scientific investigation to determine; but we have no more

[page 274]

274 I The Essential Peirce
reason to think that the error of the ordinary statement is precisely
zero, than any one of an infinity of values in that neighborhood. The
odds are infinity to one that it is not zero; and we are bound to think
of it as a quantity of which zero is only one possible value. Phoenix,
in his Lectures on Astronom y,23 referring to Joshua’s commanding the
sun to stand still, said that he could not help suspecting that it might
have wiggled a very little when Joshua was not looking directly at it.
We know that when we try to verify any law of nature by experiment,
we always find discrepancies between the observations and the theory.
These we rightly refer to errors of observation; but why may there not
be similar aberrations due to the imperfect obedience of the facts to
law?
Grant that this is conceivable and there can be nothing in experi­
ence to negative it. Strange to say, there are many people who will
have a difficulty in conceiving of an element of lawlessness in the
universe, and who may perhaps be tempted to reckon the doctrine of
the perfect rule of causality as one of the original instinctive beliefs,
like that of space having three dimensions. Far from that, it is histori­
cally altogether a modern notion, a loose inference from the discover­
ies of science. Aristotle often lays it down that some things are deter­
mined by causes while others happen by chance.24 Lucretius,
following Democritus, supposes his primordial atoms to deviate from
their rectilinear trajectories just fortuitously, and without any reason
at all. To the ancients, there was nothing strange in such notions; they
were matters of course; the strange thing would have been to have said
that there was no chance. So we are under no inward necessity of
believing/m7 perfect causality if we do not find any facts to bear it out.
I am very far from holding that experience is our only light; Whe-
w ell’s views of scientific method seem to me truer than M ill’s; so much
so that I should pronounce the known principles of physics to be but
a development of original instinctive beliefs. Yet I cannot help ac­
knowledging that the whole history of thought shows that our instinc­
tive beliefs, in their original condition are so mixed up with error, that
they can never be trusted till they have been corrected by experiment.
N ow the only thing that the inference from experience can ever teach
us is the approximate value of a ratio. It all rests on the principle of
sampling; we take a handful of coffee from a bag, and we judge that
there is about the same proportion of sound beans in the whole bag
that there is in that sample. At this rate, every proposition which we
can be entitled to make about the real world must be an approximate
one; we never can have the right to hold any truth to be exact. Approx­
imation must be the fabric out of which our philosophy has to be built.
I come now to another point. Most systems of philosophy maintain
certain facts or principles as ultimate. In truth, any fact is in one sense
ultimate,— that is to say, in its isolated aggressive stubbornness and

[page 275]

A Guess at the Riddle I 275
individual reality. What Scotus calls the haecceities of things, the
hereness and nowness of them, are indeed ultimate. Why this which
is here is such as it is, how, for instance, if it happens to be a grain of
sand it came to be so small and so hard, we can ask; we can also ask
how it got carried here, but the explanation in this case merely carries
us back to the fact that it was once in some other place, where similar
things might naturally be expected to be. Why IT , independently of
its general characters, comes to have any definite place in the world,
is not a question to be asked; it is simply an ultimate fact. There is also
another class of facts of which it is not reasonable to expect an explana­
tion, namely, facts of indeterminacy or variety. Why one definite kind
of event is frequent and another rare, is a question to be asked, but a
reason for the general fact that of events some kinds are common and
some rare, it would be unfair to demand. If all births took place on a
given day of the week, or if there were always more on Sundays than
on Mondays, that would be a fact to be accounted for, but that they
happen in about equal proportions on all the days requires no particu­
lar explanation. If we were to find that all the grains of sand on a
certain beach separated themselves into two or more sharply discrete
classes, as spherical and cubical ones, there would be something to be
explained, but that they are of various sizes and shapes, of no definable
character, can only be referred to the general manifoldness of nature.
Indeterminacy, then, or pure firstness, and haecceity, or pure second­
ness, are facts not calling for and not capable of explanation. Indeter­
minacy affords us nothing to ask a question about; haecceity is the
ultima ratio, the brutal fact that will not be questioned. But every fact
of a general or orderly nature calls for an explanation; and logic forbids
us to assume in regard to any given fact of that sort that it is of its own
nature absolutely inexplicable. This is what Kant* calls a regulative
principle, that is to say, an intellectual hope.25 The sole immediate
purpose of thinking is to render things intelligible; and to think and
yet in that very act to think a thing unintelligible is a self-stultification.
It is as though a man furnished with a pistol to defend himself against
an enemy were, on finding that enemy very redoubtable, to use his
pistol to blow his own brains out to escape being killed by his enemy.
Despair is insanity. True, there may be facts that will never get ex­
plained; but that any given fact is of the number, is what experience
can never give us reason to think; far less can it show that any fact is
of its own nature unintelligible. We must therefore be guided by the
rule of hope, and consequently we must reject every philosophy or
general conception of the universe, which could ever lead to the con­
clusion that any given general fact is an ultimate one. We must look
*After the scholastics. See Eckius in Petr. Hisp. 48 b nota 1.

[page 276]

276 I The Essential Peirce
forward to the explanation, not of all things, but of any given thing
whatever. There is no contradiction here, any more than there is in
our holding each one of our opinions, while we are ready to admit that
it is probable that not all are true; or any more than there is in saying
that any future time will sometime be passed, though there never will
be a time when all time is past.
Among other regular facts that have to be explained is Law or
regularity itself. We enormously exaggerate the part that law plays in
the universe. It is by means of regularities that we understand what
little we do understand of the world, and thus there is a sort of mental
perspective which brings regular phenomena to the foreground. We
say that every event is determined by causes according to law. But
apart from the fact that this must not be regarded as absolutely true,
it does not mean so much as it seems to do. We do not mean, for
example, that if a man and his antipode both sneeze at the same instant,
that event comes under any general law. That is merely what we call
a coincidence. But what we mean is there was a cause for the first
man’s sneezing, and another cause for the second man’s sneezing; and
the aggregate of these two events make up the first event about which
we began by inquiring. The doctrine is that the events of the physical
universe are merely motions of matter, and that these obey the laws
of dynamics. But this only amounts to saying that among the countless
systems of relationship existing among things we have found one that
is universal and at the same time is subject to law. There is nothing
except this singular character which makes this particular system of
relationship any more important than the others. From this point of
view, uniformity is seen to be really a highly exceptional phenomenon.
But we pay no attention to irregular relationships, as having no inter­
est for us.
We are brought, then, to this: conformity to law exists only within
a limited range of events and even there is not perfect, for an element
of pure spontaneity or lawless originality mingles, or at least, must be
supposed to mingle, with law everywhere. Moreover, conformity with
law is a fact requiring to be explained; and since Law in general cannot
be explained by any law in particular, the explanation must consist in
showing how law is developed out of pure chance, irregularity, and
indeterminacy.
T o this problem we are bound to address ourselves; and it is partic­
ularly needful to do so in the present state of science. The theory of
the molecular constitution of matter has now been carried as far as
there are clear indications to direct us, and we are now in the mists.
To develope the mathematical consequences of any hypothesis as to
the nature and laws of the minute parts of matter, and then to test it
by physical experiment, will take fifty years; and out of the innumera­
ble hypotheses that might be framed, there seems to be nothing to

[page 277]

A Guess at the Riddle I 277
make one more antecedently probable than another. At this rate how
long will it take to make any decided advance? We need some hint as
to how molecules may be expected to behave; whether for instance,
they would be likely to attract or repel one another inversely as the
fifth power of the distance, so that we may be saved from many false
suppositions, if we are not at once shown the way to the true one. Tell
us how the laws of nature came about, and we may distinguish in some
measure between laws that might and laws that could not have re­
sulted from such a process of development.
T o find that out is our task. I will begin the work with this guess.
Uniformities in the modes of action of things have come about by their
taking habits. At present, the course of events is approximately deter­
mined by law. In the past that approximation was less perfect; in the
future it will be more perfect. The tendency to obey laws has always
been and always will be growing. We look back toward a point in the
infinitely distant past when there was no law but mere indeterminacy;
we look forward to a point in the infinitely distant future when there
will be no indeterminacy or chance but a complete reign of law. But
at any assignable date in the past, however early, there was already
some tendency toward uniformity; and at any assignable date in the
future there will be some slight aberrancy from law. Moreover, all
things have a tendency to take habits. For atoms and their parts,
molecules and groups of molecules, and in short every conceivable real
object, there is a greater probability of acting as on a former like
occasion than otherwise. This tendency itself constitutes a regularity,
and is continually on the increase. In looking back into the past we are
looking towards periods when it was a less and less decided tendency.
But its own essential nature is to grow. It is a generalizing tendency;
it causes actions in the future to follow some generalization of past
actions; and this tendency is itself something capable of similar gener­
alization; and thus, it is self-generative. We have therefore only to
suppose the smallest spur of it in the past, and that germ would have
been bound to develope into a mighty and over-ruling principle, until
it supersedes itself by strengthening habits into absolute laws regulat­
ing the action of all things in every respect in the indefinite future.
According to this, three elements are active in the world, first,
chance; second, law; and third, habit-taking.
Such is our guess of the secret of the sphynx. T o raise it from the
rank of a philosophical speculation to that of a scientific hypothesis,
we must show that consequences can be deduced from it with more
or less probability which can be compared with observation. We must
show that there is some method of deducing the characters of the laws
which could result in this way by the action of habit-taking on purely
fortuitous occurrences, and a method of ascertaining whether such
characters belong to the actual laws of nature.

[page 278]

278 I The Essential Peirce
The existence of things consists in their regular behaviour. If an
atom had no regular attractions and repulsions, if its mass was at one
instant nothing, at another a ton, at another a negative quantity, if its
motion instead of being continuous, consisted in a series of leaps from
one place to another without passing through any intervening places,
and if there were no definite relations between its different positions,
velocities and directions of displacement, if it were at one time in one
place and at another time in a dozen, such a disjointed plurality of
phenomena would not make up any existing thing. Not only sub­
stances, but events, too, are constituted by regularities. The flow of
time, for example, in itself is a regularity. The original chaos, there­
fore, where there was no regularity, was in effect a state of mere
indeterminacy, in which nothing existed or really happened.
Our conceptions of the first stages of the development, before time
yet existed, must be as vague and figurative as the expressions of the
first chapter of Genesis. Out of the womb of indeterminacy we must
say that there would have come something by the principle of firstness,
which we may call a flash. Then by the principle of habit there would
have been a second flash. Though time would not yet have been, this
second flash was in some sense after the first, because resulting from
it. Then there would have come other successions ever more and more
closely connected, the habits and the tendency to take them ever
strengthening themselves, until the events would have been bound
together into something like a continuous flow. We have no reason to
think that even now time is quite perfectly continuous and uniform
in its flow. The quasi-flow which would result would, however, differ
essentially from time in this respect, that it would not necessarily be
in a single stream. Different flashes might start different streams, be­
tween which there should be no relations of contemporaneity or suc­
cession. So one stream might branch into two, or two might coalesce.
But the further result of habit would inevitably be to separate utterly
those that were long separated, and to make those which presented
frequent common points coalesce into perfect union. Those that were
completely separated would be so many different worlds which would
know nothing of one another; so that the effect would be just what we
actually observe.
But secondness is of two types. Consequently, besides flashes genu­
inely second to others, so as to come after them, there will be pairs of
flashes, or, since time is now supposed to be developed, we had better
say pairs of states, which are reciprocally second, each member of the
pair to the other. This is the first germ of spatial extension. These
states will undergo changes; and habits will be formed of passing from
certain states to certain others, and of not passing from certain states
to certain others. Those states to which a state will immediately pass,
will be adjacent to it; and thus habits will be formed which will

[page 279]

A Guess at the Riddle I 279
constitute a spatial continuum, but differing from our space by being
very irregular in its connections, having one number of dimensions in
one place and another number in another place, and being different for
one moving state from what it is for another.
Pairs of states will also begin to take habits, and thus each state
having different habits with reference to the different other states, will
give rise to bundles of habits, which will be substances.* Some of these
states will chance to take habits of persistency, and will get to be less
and less liable to disappear; while those that fail to take such habits will
fall out of existence. Thus, substances will get to be permanent.
In fact, habits, from the mode of their formation necessarily consist
in the permanence of some relation, and therefore on this theory, each
law of nature would consist in some permanence, such as the perma­
nence of mass, momentum, and energy. In this respect, the theory suits
the facts admirably.
The substances carrying their habits with them in their motions
through space, will tend to render the different parts of space alike.
Thus, the dimensionality of space w ill tend gradually to uniformity;
and multiple connections, except at infinity, where substances never
go, will be obliterated. At the outset, the connections of space were
probably different for one substance and part of a substance from what
they were for another; that is to say, points adjacent or near one
another for the motions of one body would not be so for another; and
this may possibly have contributed to break substances into little
pieces or atoms. But the mutual actions of bodies would have tended
to reduce their habits to uniformity in this respect; and besides there
must have arisen conflicts between the habits of bodies and the habits
of parts of space, which would never have ceased till they were
brought into conformity.
#I use substance, here, in the old sense of a thing, not in the modern chemical sense.
