[page 298]

22
The Doctrine of
Necessity Examined
P 474: The Monist 2 (April 1892)1321-37. [Also published in
CP 6.35-65; see also the companion piece to this itemyPeirce's
lengthy “Reply to the Necessitarians ” (6.588-618), a reply to
two articles published in theJuly and October 1892 issues by
Paul Carus, editor of the Monist.7 In this paper, Peirce
considers—and then rejects— the main arguments for deter­
minism, and he concludes that an element o f absolute chance
prevails in the world. He names his anti-necessitarian doc­
trine ‘tychism' and argues that “ tychism must give birth to
an evolutionary cosmology, in which all the regularities of
nature and mind are regarded as products of growth. ”
In The Monist for January 1891, I endeavored to show what elemen­
tary ideas ought to enter into our view of the universe.1 1 may mention
that on those considerations I had already grounded a cosmical theory,
and from it had deduced a considerable number of consequences capa­
ble of being compared with experience. This comparison is now in
progress, but under existing circumstances must occupy many years.
I propose here to examine the common belief that every single fact
in the universe is precisely determined by law. It must not be supposed
that this is a doctrine accepted everywhere and at all times by all
rational men. Its first advocate appears to have been Democritus the
atomist, who was led to it, as we are informed, by reflecting upon the
“ impenetrability, translation, and impact of matter (
«
a v r i T V i r i a K a i
<f>opá K a i 7rX7]yr¡ rrjq That is to say, having restricted his
attention to a field where no influence other than mechanical con­
straint could possibly come before his notice, he straightway jumped
to the conclusion that throughout the universe that was the sole princi­
ple of action,— a style of reasoning so usual in our day with men not
unreflecting as to be more than excusable in the infancy of thought.
But Epicurus, in revising the atomic doctrine and repairing its de­
fences, found himself obliged to suppose that atoms swerve from their
courses by spontaneous chance; and thereby he conferred upon the
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 299]

The Doctrine of Necessity Examined I 299
theory life and entelechy.3 For we now see clearly that the peculiar
function of the molecular hypothesis in physics is to open an entry for
the calculus of probabilities. Already, the prince of philosophers had
repeatedly and emphatically condemned the dictum of Democritus
(especially in the Physics, Book II, chapters iv, v, vi), holding that events
come to pass in three ways, namely, (i) by external compulsion, or the
action of efficient causes, (2) by virtue of an inward nature, or the
influence of final causes, and (3) irregularly without definite cause, but
just by absolute chance; and this doctrine is of the inmost essence of
Aristotelianism. It affords, at any rate, a valuable enumeration of the
possible ways in which anything can be supposed to have come about.
The freedom of the will, too, was admitted both by Aristotle and by
Epicurus.4 But the Stoa, which in every department seized upon the
most tangible, hard, and lifeless element, and blindly denied the exis­
tence of every other, which, for example, impugned the validity of the
inductive method and wished to fill its place with the reductio ad absur-
dum, very naturally became the one school of ancient philosophy to
stand by a strict necessitarianism, thus returning to the single princi­
ple of Democritus that Epicurus had been unable to swallow.5 Neces­
sitarianism and materialism with the Stoics went hand in hand, as by
affinity they should. At the revival of learning, Stoicism met with
considerable favor, partly because it departed just enough from A ris­
totle to give it the spice of novelty, and partly because its superficiali­
ties well adapted it for acceptance by students of literature and art who
wanted their philosophy drawn mild. Afterwards, the great discover­
ies in mechanics inspired the hope that mechanical principles might
suffice to explain the universe; and though without logical justification,
this hope has since been continually stimulated by subsequent ad­
vances in physics. Nevertheless, the doctrine was in too evident con­
flict with the freedom of the will and with miracles to be generally
acceptable, at first. But meantime there arose that most widely spread
of philosophical blunders, the notion that associationalism belongs
intrinsically to the materialistic family of doctrines; and thus was
evolved the theory of motives; and libertarianism became weakened.
At present, historical criticism has almost exploded the miracles, great
and small; so that the doctrine of necessity has never been in so great
vogue as now.
The proposition in question is that the state of things existing at
any time, together with certain immutable laws, completely determine
the state of things at every other time (for a limitation to future time
is indefensible). Thus, given the state of the universe in the original
nebula, and given the laws of mechanics, a sufficiently powerful mind
could deduce from these data the precise form of every curlicue of
every letter I am now writing.
Whoever holds that every act of the will as well as every idea of the
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 300]

300 I The Essential Peirce
mind is under the rigid governance of a necessity coordinated with
that of the physical world, will logically be carried to the proposition
that minds are part of the physical world in such a sense that the laws
of mechanics determine everything that happens according to immu­
table attractions and repulsions. In that case, that instantaneous state
of things from which every other state of things is calculable consists
in the positions and velocities of all the particles at any instant. This,
the usual and most logical form of necessitarianism, is called the me­
chanical philosophy.
When I have asked thinking men what reason they had to believe
that every fact in the universe is precisely determined by law, the first
answer has usually been that the proposition is a “ presupposition” or
postulate of scientific reasoning. Well, if that is the best that can be said
for it, the belief is doomed. Suppose it be “ postulated” : that does not
make it true, nor so much as afford the slightest rational motive for
yielding it any credence. It is as if a man should come to borrow
money, and when asked for his security, should reply he “ postulated”
the loan. To “ postulate” a proposition is no more than to hope it is
true. There are, indeed, practical emergencies in which we act upon
assumptions of certain propositions as true, because if they are not so,
it can make no difference how we act. But all such propositions I take
to be hypotheses of individual facts. For it is manifest that no universal
principle can in its universality be comprised6 in a special case or can
be requisite for the validity of any ordinary inference. To say, for
instance, that the demonstration by Archimedes of the property of the
lever would fall to the ground if men were endowed with free will, is
extravagant; yet this is implied by those who make a proposition in­
compatible with the freedom of the will the postulate of all inference.
Considering, too, that the conclusions of science make no pretence to
being more than probable, and considering that a probable inference
can at most only suppose something to be most frequently, or other­
wise approximately, true, but never that anything is precisely true
without exception throughout the universe, we see how far this propo­
sition in truth is from being so postulated.
But the whole notion of a postulate being involved in reasoning
appertains to a by-gone and false conception of logic. Non-deductive,
or ampliative inference is of three kinds: induction, hypothesis, and
analogy. If there be any other modes, they must be extremely unusual
and highly complicated, and may be assumed with little doubt to be
of the same nature as those enumerated. For induction, hypothesis,
and analogy, as far as their ampliative character goes, that is, so far as
they conclude something not implied in the premises, depend upon
one principle and involve the same procedure. All are essentially infer­
ences from sampling. Suppose a ship arrives in Liverpool laden with
wheat in bulk. Suppose that by some machinery the whole cargo be
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 301]

The Doctrine of Necessity Examined I 301
stirred up with great thoroughness. Suppose that twenty-seven thim­
blefuls be taken equally from the forward, midships, and aft parts,
from the starboard, centre, and larboard parts, and from the top, half
depth, and lower parts of her hold, and that these being mixed and the
grains counted, four-fifths of the latter are found to be of quality A.
Then we infer, experientially and provisionally, that approximately
four-fifths of all the grain in the cargo is of the same quality. I say we
infer this experientially and provisionally. By saying that we infer it
experientially, I mean that our conclusion makes no pretension to
knowledge of wheat-in-itself, our ahrjQeia, as the derivation of that
word implies, has nothing to do with latent wheat. We are dealing only
with the matter of possible experience,—experience in the full accep­
tation of the term as something not merely affecting the senses but also
as the subject of thought. If there be any wheat hidden on the ship, so
that it can neither turn up in the sample nor be heard of subsequently
from purchasers,—or if it be half-hidden, so that it may, indeed, turn
up, but is less likely to do so than the rest,—or if it can affect our senses
and our pockets, but from some strange cause or causelessness cannot
be reasoned about,— all such wheat is to be excluded (or have only its
proportional weight) in calculating that true proportion of quality A ,
to which our inference seeks to approximate. By saying that we draw
the inference provisionally, I mean that we do not hold that we have
reached any assigned degree of approximation as yet, but only hold
that if our experience be indefinitely extended, and if every fact of
whatever nature, as fast as it presents itself, be duly applied, according
to the inductive method, in correcting the inferred ratio, then our
approximation will become indefinitely close in the long run; that is
to say, close to the experience to come (not merely close by the exhaus­
tion of a finite collection) so that if experience in general is to fluctuate
irregularly to and fro, in a manner to deprive the ratio sought of all
definite value, we shall be able to find out approximately within what
limits it fluctuates, and if, after having one definite value, it changes
and assumes another, we shall be able to find that out, and in short,
whatever may be the variations of this ratio in experience, experience
indefinitely extended will enable us to detect them, so as to predict
rightly, at last, what its ultimate value may be, if it have any ultimate
value, or what the ultimate law of succession of values may be, if there
be any such ultimate law, or that it ultimately fluctuates irregularly
within certain limits, if it do so ultimately fluctuate. N ow our infer­
ence, claiming to be no more than thus experiential and provisional,
manifestly involves no postulate whatever.
For what is a postulate? It is the formulation of a material fact
which we are not entitled to assume as a premise, but the truth of
which is requisite to the validity of an inference. Any fact, then, which
might be supposed postulated, must either be such that it would ulti­
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 302]

302 I The Essential Peirce
mately present itself in experience, or not. If it will present itself, we
need not postulate it now in our provisional inference, since we shall
ultimately be entitled to use it as a premise. But if it never would
present itself in experience, our conclusion is valid but for the possibil­
ity of this fact being otherwise than assumed, that is, it is valid as far
as possible experience goes, and that is all that we claim. Thus, every
postulate is cut off, either by the provisionality or by the ¿xperiential-
ity of our inference. For instance, it has been said that induction
postulates that, if an indefinite succession of samples be drawn, exam­
ined, and thrown back each before the next is drawn, then in the long
run every grain will be drawn as often as any other, that is to say
postulates that the ratio of the numbers of times in which any two are
drawn will indefinitely approximate to unity. But no such postulate
is made; for if, on the one hand, we are to have no other experience
of the wheat than from such drawings, it is the ratio that presents itself
in those drawings and not the ratio which belongs to the wheat in its
latent existence that we are endeavoring to determine; while if, on the
other hand, there is some other mode by which the wheat is to come
under our knowledge, equivalent to another kind of sampling, so that
after all our care in stirring up the wheat, some experiential grains will
present themselves in the first sampling operation more often than
others in the long run, this very singular fact will be sure to get
discovered by the inductive method, which must avail itself of every
sort of experience; and our inference, which was only provisional,
corrects itself at last. Again, it has been said that induction postulates
that under like circumstances like events will happen, and that this
postulate is at bottom the same as the principle of universal causation.
But this is a blunder, or bevue, due to thinking exclusively of induc­
tions where the concluded ratio is either i or o. If any such proposition
were postulated, it would be that under like circumstances (the cir­
cumstances of drawing the different samples) different events occur in
the same proportions in all the different sets,— a proposition which is
false and even absurd. But in truth no such thing is postulated, the
experiential character of the inference reducing the condition of valid­
ity to this, that if a certain result does not occur, the opposite result
will be manifested, a condition assured by the provisionality of the
inference. But it may be asked whether it is not conceivable that every
instance of a certain class destined to be ever employed as a datum of
induction should have one character, while every instance destined not
to be so employed should have the opposite character. The answer is
that in that case, the instances excluded from being subjects of reason­
ing would not be experienced in the full sense of the word, but would
be among these latent individuals of which our conclusion does not
pretend to speak.
To this account of the rationale of induction I know of but one
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 303]

The Doctrine o f Necessity Examined I 303
objection worth mention: it is that I thus fail to deduce the full degree
of force which this mode of inference in fact possesses; that according
to my view, no matter how thorough and elaborate the stirring and
mixing process had been, the examination of a single handful of grain
would not give me any assurance, sufficient to risk money upon, that
the next handful would not greatly modify the concluded value of the
ratio under inquiry, while, in fact, the assurance would be very high
that this ratio was not greatly in error. If the true ratio of grains of
quality A were 0.80 and the handful contained a thousand grains, nine
such handfuls out of every ten would contain from 780 to 820 grains
of quality A. The answer to this is that the calculation given is correct
when we know that the units of this handful and the quality inquired
into have the normal independence of one another, if for instance the
stirring has been complete and the character sampled for has been
settled upon in advance of the examination of the sample. But in so far
as these conditions are not known to be complied with, the above
figures cease to be applicable. Random sampling and predesignation of
the character sampled for should always be striven after in inductive
reasoning, but when they cannot be attained, so long as it is conducted
honestly, the inference retains some value. When we cannot ascertain
how the sampling has been done or the sample-character selected,
induction still has the essential validity which my present account of
it shows it to have.
I do not think a man who combines a willingness to be convinced
with a power of appreciating an argument upon a difficult subject can
resist the reasons which have been given to show that the principle of
universal necessity cannot be defended as being a postulate of reason­
ing. But then the question immediately arises whether it is not proved
to be true, or at least rendered highly probable, by observation of
nature.
Still, this question ought not long to arrest a person accustomed to
reflect upon the force of scientific reasoning. For the essence of the
necessitarian position is that certain continuous quantities have cer­
tain exact values. Now, how can observation determine the value of
such a quantity with a probable error absolutely nil? T o one who is
behind the scenes, and knows that the most refined comparisons of
masses, lengths, and angles, far surpassing in precision all other mea­
surements, yet fall behind the accuracy of bank-accounts, and that the
ordinary determinations of physical constants, such as appear from
month to month in the journals, are about on a par with an uphol­
sterer’s measurements of carpets and curtains, the idea of mathemati­
cal exactitude being demonstrated in the laboratory will appear simply
ridiculous. There is a recognised method of estimating the probable
magnitudes of errors in physics,—the method of least squares. It is
universally admitted that this method makes the errors smaller than
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 304]

304 I The Essential Peirce
they really are; yet even according to that theory an error indefinitely
small is indefinitely improbable; so that any statement to the effect that
a certain continuous quantity has a certain exact value, if well-founded
at all, must be founded on something other than observation.
Still, I am obliged to admit that this rule is subject to a certain
qualification. Namely, it only applies to continuous* quantity. Now,
certain kinds of continuous quantity are discontinuous at one or at two
limits, and for such limits the rule must be modified. Thus, the length
of a line cannot be less than zero. Suppose, then, the question arises
how long a line a certain person had drawn from a marked point on
a piece of paper. If no line at all can be seen, the observed length is
zero; and the only conclusion this observation warrants is that the
length of the line is less than the smallest length visible with the optical
power employed. But indirect observations,— for example, that the
person supposed to have drawn the line was never within fifty feet of
the paper,— may make it probable that no line at all was made, so that
the concluded length will be strictly zero. In like manner, experience
no doubt would warrant the conclusion that there is absolutely no
indigo in a given ear of wheat, and absolutely no attar in a given lichen.
But such inferences can only be rendered valid by positive experiential
evidence, direct or remote, and cannot rest upon a mere inability to
detect the quantity in question. We have reason to think there is no
indigo in the wheat, because we have remarked that wherever indigo
is produced it is produced in considerable quantities, to mention only
one argument. We have reason to think there is no attar in the lichen,
because essential oils seem to be in general peculiar to single species.
If the question had been whether there was iron in the wheat or the
lichen, though chemical analysis should fail to detect its presence, we
should think some of it probably was there, since iron is almost every­
where. Without any such information, one way or the other, we could
only abstain from any opinion as to the presence of the substance in
question. It cannot, I conceive, be maintained that we are in any better
position than this in regard to the presence of the element of chance
or spontaneous departures from law in nature.
Those observations which are generally adduced in favor of me­
chanical causation simply prove that there is an element of regularity
in nature, and have no bearing whatever upon the question of whether
such regularity is exact and universal, or not. N ay, in regard to this
exactitude, all observation is directly opposed to it; and the most that can
be said is that a good deal of this observation can be explained away.
T ry to verify any law of nature, and you will find that the more precise
your observations, the more certain they will be to show irregular
*Continuous is not exactly the right word, but I let it go to avoid a long and
irrelevant discussion.
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 305]

The Doctrine of Necessity Examined I 305
departures from the law. We are accustomed to ascribe these, and I do
not say wrongly, to errors of observation; yet we cannot usually ac­
count for such errors in any antecedently probable way. Trace their
causes back far enough, and you will be forced to admit they are always
due to arbitrary determination, or chance.
But it may be asked whether if there were an element of real chance
in the universe it must not occasionally be productive of signal effects
such as could not pass unobserved. In answer to this question, without
stopping to point out that there is an abundance of great events which
one might be tempted to suppose were of that nature, it will be sim­
plest to remark that physicists hold that the particles of gases are
moving about irregularly, substantially as if by real chance, and that
by the principles of probabilities there must occasionally happen to be
concentrations of heat in the gases contrary to the second law of
thermodynamics, and these concentrations, occurring in explosive
mixtures, must sometimes have tremendous effects. Here, then, is in
substance the very situation supposed; yet no phenomena ever have
resulted which we are forced to attribute to such chance concentration
of heat, or which anybody, wise or foolish, has ever dreamed of ac­
counting for in that manner.
In view of all these considerations, I do not believe that anybody,
not in a state of case-hardened ignorance respecting the logic of sci­
ence, can maintain that the precise and universal conformity of facts
to law is clearly proved, or even rendered particularly probable, by
any observations hitherto made. In this way, the determined advocate
of exact regularity will soon find himself driven to a priori reasons to
support his thesis. These received such a socdolager from Stuart M ill
in his Examination o fHamilton, 7 that holding to them now seems to me
to denote a high degree of imperviousness to reason; so that I shall pass
them by with little notice.
T o say that we cannot help believing a given proposition is no
argument, but it is a conclusive fact if it be true; and with the substitu­
tion of “ I” for “ we,” it is true in the mouths of several classes of minds,
the blindly passionate, the unreflecting and ignorant, and the person
who has overwhelming evidence before his eyes. But that which has
been inconceivable to-day has often turned out indisputable on the
morrow. Inability to conceive is only a stage through which every man
must pass in regard to a number of beliefs,—unless endowed with
extraordinary obstinacy and obtuseness. His understanding is en­
slaved to some blind compulsion which a vigorous mind is pretty sure
soon to cast off.
Some seek to back up the a priori position with empirical argu­
ments. They say that the exact regularity of the world is a natural
belief, and that natural beliefs have generally been confirmed by expe­
rience. There is some reason in this. Natural beliefs, however, if they
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 306]

306 I The Essential Peirce
generally have a foundation of truth, also require correction and
purification from natural illusions. The principles of mechanics are
undoubtedly natural beliefs; but, for all that, the early formulations of
them were exceedingly erroneous. The general approximation to truth
in natural beliefs is, in fact, a case of the general adaptation of genetic
products to recognisable utilities or ends. Now, the adaptations of
nature, beautiful and often marvellous as they verily are, are never
found to be quite perfect; so that the argument is quite against the
absolute exactitude of any natural belief, including that of the princi­
ple of causation.
Another argument, or convenient commonplace, is that absolute
chance is inconceivable. This word has eight current significations. The
Century Dictionary enumerates six.8 Those who talk like this will
hardly be persuaded to say in what sense they mean that chance is
inconceivable. Should they do so, it would easily be shown either that
they have no sufficient reason for the statement or that the inconceiva­
bility is of a kind which does not prove that chance is non-existent.
Another a priori argument is that chance is unintelligible; that is
to say, while it may perhaps be conceivable, it does not disclose to the
eye of reason the how or why of things; and since a hypothesis can only
be justified so far as it renders some phenomenon intelligible, we never
can have any right to suppose absolute chance to enter into the produc­
tion of anything in nature. This argument may be considered in con­
nection with two others. Namely, instead of going so far as to say that
the supposition of chance can never properly be used to explain any
observed fact, it may be alleged merely that no facts are known which
such a supposition could in any way help in explaining. Or again, the
allegation being still further weakened, it may be said that since depar­
tures from law are not unmistakably observed, chance is not a vera
causa, and ought not unnecessarily to be introduced into a hypothesis.
These are no mean arguments, and require us to examine the mat­
ter a little more closely. Come, my superior opponent, let me learn
from your wisdom. It seems to me that every throw of sixes with a pair
of dice is a manifest instance of chance.
“ While you would hold a throw of deuce-ace to be brought about
by necessity?” [The opponent’s supposed remarks are placed in quota­
tion marks.]
Clearly one throw is as much chance as another.
“ Do you think throws of dice are of a different nature from other
events?”
I see that I must say that all the diversity and specificalness of
events is attributable to chance.
“ Would you, then, deny that there is any regularity in the world?”
That is clearly undeniable. I must acknowledge there is an approxi­
mate regularity, and that every event is influenced by it. But the
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 307]

The Doctrine of Necessity Examined I 307
diversification, specificalness, and irregularity of things I suppose is
chance. A throw of sixes appears to me a case in which this element
is particularly obtrusive.
“ If you reflect more deeply, you will come to see that chance is only
a name for a cause that is unknown to us.”
Do you mean that we have no idea whatever what kind of causes
could bring about a throw of sixes?
“ On the contrary, each die moves under the influence of precise
mechanical laws.”
But it appears to me that it is not these laws which made the die
turn up sixes; for these laws act just the same when other throws come
up. The chance lies in the diversity of throws; and this diversity cannot
be due to laws which are immutable.
“ The diversity is due to the diverse circumstances under which the
laws act. The dice lie differently in the box, and the motion given to
the box is different. These are the unknown causes which produce the
throws, and to which we give the name of chance; not the mechanical
law which regulates the operation of these causes. You see you are
already beginning to think more clearly about this subject.”
Does the operation of mechanical law not increase the diversity?
“ Properly not. You must know that the instantaneous state of a
system of particles is defined by six times as many numbers as there
are particles, three for the coordinates of each particle’s position, and
three more for the components of its velocity. This number of num­
bers, which expresses the amount of diversity in the system, remains
the same at all times. There may be, to be sure, some kind of relation
between the coordinates and component velocities of the different
particles, by means of which the state of the system might be expressed
by a smaller number of numbers. But, if this is the case, a precisely
corresponding relationship must exist between the coordinates and
component velocities at any other time, though it may doubtless be a
relation less obvious to us. Thus, the intrinsic complexity of the system
is the same at all times.”
V ery well, my obliging opponent, we have now reached an issue.
You think all the arbitrary specifications of the universe were intro­
duced in one dose, in the beginning, if there was a beginning, and that
the variety and complication of nature has always been just as much
as it is now. But I, for my part, think that the diversification, the
specification, has been continually taking place. Should you conde­
scend to ask me why I so think, I should give my reasons as follows:
i) Question any science which deals with the course of time. Con­
sider the life of an individual animal or plant, or of a mind. Glance at
the history of states, of institutions, of language, of ideas. Examine the
successions of forms shown by paleontology, the history of the globe
as set forth in geology, of what the astronomer is able to make out
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 308]

308 I The Essential Peirce
concerning the changes of stellar systems. Everywhere the main fact
is growth and increasing complexity. Death and corruption are mere
accidents or secondary phenomena. Among some of the lower orga­
nisms, it is a moot point with biologists whether there be anything
which ought to be called death. Races, at any rate, do not die out except
under unfavorable circumstances. From these broad and ubiquitous
facts we may fairly infer, by the most unexceptionable logic, that there
is probably in nature some agency by which the complexity and diver­
sity of things can be increased; and that consequently the rule of
mechanical necessity meets in some way with interference.
2) By thus admitting pure spontaneity or life as a character of the
universe, acting always and everywhere though restrained within nar­
row bounds by law, producing infinitesimal departures from law con­
tinually, and great ones with infinite infrequency, I account for all the
variety and diversity of the universe, in the only sense in which the
really suigeneris and new can be said to be accounted for. The ordinary
view has to admit the inexhaustible mulitudinous variety of the world,
has to admit that its mechanical law cannot account for this in the least,
that variety can spring only from spontaneity, and yet denies without
any evidence or reason the existence of this spontaneity, or else shoves
it back to the beginning of time and supposes it dead ever since. The
superior logic of my view appears to me not easily controverted.
3) When I ask the necessitarian how he would explain the diversity
and irregularity of the universe, he replies to me out of the treasury
of his wisdom that irregularity is something which from the nature of
things we must not seek to explain. Abashed at this, I seek to cover my
confusion by asking how he would explain the uniformity and regular­
ity of the universe, whereupon he tells me that the laws of nature are
immutable and ultimate facts, and no account is to be given of them.
But my hypothesis of spontaneity does explain irregularity, in a cer­
tain sense; that is, it explains the general fact of irregularity, though
not, of course, what each lawless event is to be. At the same time, by
thus loosening the bond of necessity, it gives room for the influence
of another kind of causation, such as seems to be operative in the mind
in the formation of associations, and enables us to understand how the
uniformity of nature could have been brought about. That single
events should be hard and unintelligible, logic will permit without
difficulty: we do not expect to make the shock of a personally experi­
enced earthquake appear natural and reasonable by any amount of
cogitation. But logic does expect things general to be understandable.
To say that there is a universal law, and that it is a hard, ultimate,
unintelligible fact, the why and wherefore of which can never be
inquired into, at this a sound logic will revolt; and will pass over at
once to a method of philosophising which does not thus barricade the
road of discovery.
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 309]

The Doctrine of Necessity Examined I 309
4) Necessitarianism cannot logically stop short of making the
whole action of the mind a part of the physical universe. Our notion
that we decide what we are going to do, if as the necessitarian says, it
has been calculable since the earliest times, is reduced to illusion.
Indeed, consciousness in general thus becomes a mere illusory aspect
of a material system. What we call red, green, and violet are in reality
only different rates of vibration. The sole reality is the distribution of
qualities of matter in space and time. Brain-matter is protoplasm in a
certain degree and kind of complication,— a certain arrangement of
mechanical particles. Its feeling is but an inward aspect, a phantom.
For, from the positions and velocities of the particles at any one in­
stant, and the knowledge of the immutable forces, the positions at all
other times are calculable; so that the universe of space, time, and
matter is a rounded system uninterfered with from elsewhere. But
from the state of feeling at any instant, there is no reason to suppose
the states of feeling at all other instants are thus exactly calculable; so
that feeling is, as I said, a mere fragmentary and illusive aspect of the
universe. This is the way, then, that necessitarianism has to make up
its accounts. It enters consciousness under the head of sundries, as a
forgotten trifle; its scheme of the universe would be more satisfactory
if this little fact could be dropped out of sight. On the other hand, by
supposing the rigid exactitude of causation to yield, I care not how
little,— be it but by a strictly infinitesimal amount,—we gain room to
insert mind into our scheme, and to put it into the place where it is
needed, into the position which, as the sole self-intelligible thing, it is
entitled to occupy, that of the fountain of existence; and in so doing
we resolve the problem of the connection of soul and body.
5) But I must leave undeveloped the chief of my reasons, and can
only adumbrate it. The hypothesis of chance-spontaneity is one whose
inevitable consequences are capable of being traced out with mathe­
matical precision into considerable detail. Much of this I have done
and find the consequences to agree with observed facts to an extent
which seems to me remarkable. But the matter and methods of reason­
ing are novel, and I have no right to promise that other mathematicians
shall find my deductions as satisfactory as I m yself do, so that the
strongest reason for my belief must for the present remain a private
reason of my own, and cannot influence others. I mention it to explain
my own position; and partly to indicate to future mathematical specu­
lators a veritable gold-mine, should time and circumstances and the
abridger of all joys prevent my opening it to the world.
If now I, in my turn, inquire of the necessitarian why he prefers
to suppose that all specification goes back to the beginning of things,
he will answer me with one of those last three arguments which I left
unanswered.
First, he may say that chance is a thing absolutely unintelligible,
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 310]

310 I The Essential Peirce
and therefore that we never can be entitled to make such a supposition.
But does not this objection smack of naïve impudence? It is not mine,
it is his own conception of the universe which leads abruptly up to
hard, ultimate, inexplicable, immutable law, on the one hand, and to
inexplicable specification and diversification of circumstances on the
other. M y view, on the contrary, hypothetises nothing at all, unless it
be hypothesis to say that all specification came about in some sense,
and is not to be accepted as unaccountable. To undertake to account
for anything by saying baldly that it is due to chance would, indeed,
be futile. But this I do not do. I make use of chance chiefly to make
room for a principle of generalisation, or tendency to form habits,
which I hold has produced all regularities. The mechanical philoso­
pher leaves the whole specification of the world utterly unaccounted
for, which is pretty nearly as bad as to boldly attribute it to chance.
I attribute it altogether to chance, it is true, but to chance in the form
of a spontaneity which is to some degree regular. It seems to me clear
at any rate that one of these two positions must be taken, or else
specification must be supposed due to a spontaneity which develops
itself in a certain and not in a chance way, by an objective logic like
that of Hegel. This last way I leave as an open possibility, for the
present; for it is as much opposed to the necessitarian scheme of exis­
tence as my own theory is.
Secondly, the necessitarian may say there are, at any rate, no ob­
served phenomena which the hypothesis of chance could aid in ex­
plaining. In reply, I point first to the phenomenon of growth and
developing complexity, which appears to be universal, and which
though it may possibly be an affair of mechanism perhaps, certainly
presents all the appearance of increasing diversification. Then, there
is variety itself, beyond comparison the most obtrusive character of the
universe: no mechanism can account for this. Then, there is the very
fact the necessitarian most insists upon, the regularity of the universe
which for him serves only to block the road of inquiry. Then, there
are the regular relationships between the laws of nature,— similarities
and comparative characters, which appeal to our intelligence as its
cousins, and call upon us for a reason. Finally, there is consciousness,
feeling, a patent fact enough, but a very inconvenient one to the
mechanical philosopher.
Thirdly, the necessitarian may say that chance is not a vera causa,
that we cannot know positively there is any such element in the uni­
verse. But the doctrine of the vera causa has nothing to do with elemen­
tary conceptions. Pushed to that extreme, it at once cuts off belief in
the existence of a material universe; and without that necessitarianism
could hardly maintain its ground. Besides, variety is a fact which must
be admitted; and the theory of chance merely consists in supposing
this diversification does not antedate all time. Moreover, the avoidance
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 311]

The Doctrine of Necessity Examined I 311
of hypotheses involving causes nowhere positively known to act— is
only a recommendation of logic, not a positive command. It cannot be
formulated in any precise terms without at once betraying its untena­
ble character,— I mean as rigid rule, for as a recommendation it is
wholesome enough.
I believe I have thus subjected to fair examination all the important
reasons for adhering to the theory of universal necessity, and have
shown their nullity. I earnestly beg that whoever may detect any flaw
in my reasoning will point it out to me, either privately or publicly;
for if I am wrong, it much concerns me to be set right speedily.9If my
argument remains unrefuted, it will be time, I think, to doubt the
absolute truth of the principle of universal law; and when once such
a doubt has obtained a living root in any man’s mind, my cause with
him, I am persuaded, is gained.
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
