[page 334]

24
Mans Glassy Essence
P 480: The Monist j (October 1892)11-22. [Also published in
CP 6.238-yi.] In thispaper, Peirce applies his synechistic phi­
losophy to the mind-bodyproblem or “the relation between the
psychical and physical aspects o f a substance. ” In order to
carry out his purpose of developing a philosophy that ade­
quately represents the state of knowledge in the nineteenth
century, he discusses at length, and in elaborate technical
detail, the constitution of matter and the molecular theory of
protoplasm. He associates the main physical properties of
protoplasm with the three main types of mental action, and
he suggests that—as “matter is effete mind, ” as “physical
events are but degraded or undeveloped forms o f psychical
events, ” and as “mechanical laws are nothing but acquired
habits, like all the regularities o f mind”— uthe idealist has no
need to dread a mechanical theory o f life. ” Peirce ends his
paper with a discussion o f the life o f ideas and the self-
consciousness of groups o f individuals.
In The Monist for January 1891, I tried to show what conceptions
ought to form the brick and mortar of a philosophical system. Chief
among these was that of absolute chance for which I argued again in
last A pril’s number.* In July, I applied another fundamental idea, that
of continuity, to the law of mind.2 N ext in order, I have to elucidate,
from the point of view chosen, the relation between the psychical and
physical aspects of a substance.
The first step towards this ought, I think, to be the framing of a
molecular theory of protoplasm. But before doing that, it seems indis-
pensible to glance at the constitution of matter, in general. We shall,
thus, unavoidably make a long detour; but, after all, our pains will not
*1 am rejoiced to find, since my last paper was printed, that a philosopher as subtle
and profound as Dr. Edmund Montgomery has long been arguing for the same element
in the universe. Other world-renowned thinkers, as M. Renouvier and M. Delboeuf,
appear to share this opinion.1

[page 335]

Man's Glassy Essence I 335
be wasted, for the problems of the papers that are to follow in the series
w ill call for the consideration of the same question.
All physicists are rightly agreed the evidence is overwhelming
which shows all sensible matter is composed of molecules in swift
motion and exerting enormous mutual attractions, and perhaps repul­
sions, too. Even Sir William Thomson, Lord Kelvin, who wishes to
explode action at a distance and return to the doctrine of a plenum,
not only speaks of molecules, but undertakes to assign definite magni­
tudes to them.3 The brilliant Judge Stallo, a man who did not always
rightly estimate his own qualities in accepting talks for himself, de­
clared war upon the atomic theory in a book well worth careful
perusal.4 To the old arguments in favor of atoms which he found in
Fechner’s monograph,5 he was able to make replies of considerable
force, though they were not sufficient to destroy those arguments. But
against modern proofs he made no headway at all. These set out from
the mechanical theory of heat. Rum ford’s experiments showed that
heat is not a substance.6 Joule demonstrated that it was a form of
energy.7 The heating of gases under constant volume, and other facts
instanced by Rankine, proved that it could not be an energy of strain.8
This drove physicists to the conclusion that it was a mode of motion.
Then it was remembered that John Bernoulli had shown that the
pressure of gases could be accounted for by assuming their molecules
to be moving uniformly in rectilinear paths.9The same hypothesis was
now seen to account for Avogadro’s law, that in equal volumes of
different kinds of gases exposed to the same pressure and temperature
are contained equal numbers of molecules.10 Shortly after, it was
found to account for the laws of diffusion and viscosity of gases, and
for the numerical relation between these properties. Finally, Crookes’s
radiometer furnished the last link in the strongest chain of evidence
which supports any physical hypothesis.11
Such being the constitution of gases, liquids must clearly be bodies
in which the molecules wander in curvilinear paths, while in solids
they move in orbits or quasi-orbits. (See my definition solid II, i, in the
Century Dictionary.)12
We see that the resistance to compression and to interpenetration
between sensible bodies is, by one of the prime propositions of the
molecular theory, due in large measure to the kinetical energy of the
particles, which must be supposed to be quite remote from one an­
other, on the average, even in solids. This resistance is no doubt in­
fluenced by finite attractions and repulsions between the molecules.
All the impenetrability of bodies which we can observe is, therefore,
a limited impenetrability due to kinetic and positional energy. This
being the case, we have no logical right to suppose that absolute im­
penetrability, or the exclusive occupancy of space, belongs to mole­

[page 336]

336 I The Essential Peirce
cules or iitnms. Tt is an unwarranted hvoothesis. not a vera causa. *
Unless ® ne’ *s generally a dualistic philosophy in which the conception of
tions aSecond receives exaggerated attention; for this One (though of course
impen *nvo^
ving r^e ic*ea °** F irst) is always the other of a manifold which is
distantnot one* t*ie Many, because variety is arbitrariness and
wanto arbitrariness is repudiation of any Secondness, has for its principal
In shocomPonent in cep tio n of First. In psychology Feeling is First,
an atc^ense react^
on Second, General conception Third, or mediation. In
througbiol° ^ ’ the idea arbitrary sporting is First, heredity is Second, the
with inertia.13 The potential energy belongs to two molecules, and is
to be conceived as different between molecules A and B from what it
is between molecules A and C. The distribution of energy is not
necessarily spherical. N ay, a molecule may conceivably have more
than one centre; it may even have a central curve, returning into itself.
But I do not think there are any observed facts pointing to such
multiple or linear centres. On the other hand, many facts relating to
crystals, especially those observed by Voigt,t go to show that the
distribution of energy is harmonical but not concentric. We can easily
calculate the forces which such atoms must exert upon one another by
considering! that they are equivalent to aggregations of pairs of elec­
trically positive and negative points infinitely near to one another.
About such an atom there would be regions of positive and of negative
potential, and the number and distribution of such regions would
determine the valency of the atom, a number which it is easy to see
would in many cases be somewhat indeterminate. I must not dwell
further upon this hypothesis, at present. In another paper, its conse­
quences will be further considered.14
I cannot assume that the students of philosophy who read this
magazine are thoroughly versed in modern molecular physics, and
therefore it is proper to mention that the governing principle in this
branch of science is Clausius’s law of the virial. I will first state the law,
and then explain the peculiar terms of the statement. This statement
is that the total kinetic energy of the particles of a system in stationary
motion is equal to the total virial. By a system is here meant a number
of particles acting upon one another.** Stationary motion is a quasi-
*By a vera causa, in the logic of science, is meant a state of things known to exist
in some cases and supposed to exist in other cases, because it would account for observed
phenomena.
tWiedemann, Annalen, 1887-1889 [30:190; 31:141, 544; 32:526; 34:981; 35:76, 370; 36:743;
38:573]-
+See Maxwell on Spherical Harmonics, in his Electricity and Magnetism [2:179].
**The word system has three peculiar meanings in mathematics. (A.) It means an
orderly exposition of the truths of astronomy, and hence a theory of the motions of the
stars; as the Ptolemaic system; the Copernican system. This is much like the sense in
which we speak of the Calvinistic system of theology, the Kantian system of philosophy,
etc. (B.) It means the aggregate of the planets considered as all moving in somewhat the

[page 337]

Man > Glassy Essence I 337
orbital motion among a system of particles so that none of them are
removed to indefinitely great distances nor acquire indefinitely great
velocities. The kinetic energy of a particle is the work which would
be required to bring it to rest, independently of any forces which may
be acting upon it. The virial of a pair of particles is half the work which
the force which actually operates between them would do if, being
independent of the distance, it were to bring them together. The
equation of the virial is
\^m v2 = \ ^ R r .
Here m is the mass of a particle, v its velocity, R is the attraction
between two particles, and r is the distance between them. The sign
2 on the left-hand side signifies that the values of m v2 are to be
summed for all the particles, and 2 2 on the right-hand side signifies
that the values of Rr are to be summed for all the pairs of particles. If
there is an external pressure P (as from the atmosphere) upon the
system, and the volume of vacant space within the boundary of that
pressure is V, then the virial must be understood as including \PV, so
that the equation is
¡ I m v 2 = \ P V + ¡ l l R r .
There is strong (if not demonstrative) reason for thinking that the
temperature of any body above the absolute zero (—2jfC.), is propor­
tional to the average kinetic energy of its molecules, or say aO, where
a is a constant and 6 is the absolute temperature. Hence, we may write
the equation
ad = Itm ? = \ P V + frR r
where the heavy lines above the different expressions signify that the
average values for single molecules are to be taken. In 1872, a student
in the University of Leyden, Van der Waals, propounded in his thesis
for the doctorate a specialisation of the equation of the virial which has
since attracted great attention.15 Namely, he writes it
The quantity b is the volume of a molecule, which he supposes to be
an impenetrable body, and all the virtue of the equation lies in this
term which makes the equation a cubic in F, which is required to
same way, as the solar system; and hence any aggregate of particles moving under mutual
forces. (C.) It means a number of forces acting simultaneously upon a number of parti­
cles.

[page 338]

338 I The Essential Peirce
account for the shape of certain isothermal curves.* But if the idea of
an impenetrable atom is illogical, that of an impenetrable molecule is
almost absurd. For the kinetical theory of matter teaches us that a
molecule is like a solar system or star-cluster in miniature. Unless we
suppose that in all heating of gases and vapors internal work is per­
formed upon the molecules, im plying that their atoms are at considera­
ble distances, the whole kinetical theory of gases falls to the ground.
As for the term added to P, there is no more than a partial and roughly
approximative justification for it. Nam ely, let us imagine two spheres
described round a particle as their centre, the radius of the larger being
so great as to include all the particles whose action upon the centre is
sensible, while the radius of the smaller is so large that a good many
molecules are included within it. The possibility of describing such a
sphere as the outer one implies that the attraction of the particles
varies at some distances inversely as some higher power of the distance
than the cube, or, to speak more clearly, that the attraction multiplied
by the cube of the distance diminishes as the distance increases; for the
number of particles at a given distance from any one particle is propor­
tionate to the square of that distance and each of these gives a term of
the virial which is the product of the attraction into the distance.
Consequently unless the attraction multiplied by the cube of the dis­
tance diminished so rapidly with the distance as soon to become insen­
sible, no such outer sphere as is supposed could be described. H ow­
ever, ordinary experience shows that such a sphere is possible; and
consequently there must be distances at which the attraction does thus
rapidly diminish as the distance increases. The two spheres, then,
being so drawn, consider the virial of the central particle due to the
particles between them. Let the density of the substance be increased,
say, N times. Then, for every term, i?r, of the virial before the conden­
sation, there will be N terms of the same magnitude after the condensa­
tion. Hence, the virial of each particle will be proportional to the
density, and the equation of the virial becomes
ad = P V +
V
This omits the virial within the inner sphere, the radius of which is
so taken that within that distance the number of particles is not pro­
portional to the number in a large sphere. For Van der Waals this
radius is the diameter of his hard molecules, which assumption gives
his equation. But it is plain that the attraction between the molecules
must to a certain extent modify their distribution, unless some pecu­
*But, in fact, an inspection of these curves is sufficient to show that they are of a
higher degree than the third. For they have the line V — o, or some line V a constant
for an asymptote, while for small values of P, the values of d 2P/(dV)2 are positive.

[page 339]

Man's Glassy Essence I 339
liar conditions are fulfilled. The equation of Van der Waals can be
approximately true therefore only for a gas. In a solid or liquid condi­
tion, in which the removal of a small amount of pressure has little
effect on the volume, and where consequently the virial must be much
greater than PV, the virial must increase with the volume. For suppose
we had a substance in a critical condition in which an increase of the
volume would diminish the virial more than it would increase \PV. If
we were forcibly to diminish the volume of such a substance, when the
temperature became equalised, the pressure which it could withstand
would be less than before, and it would be still further condensed, and
this would go on indefinitely until a condition were reached in which
an increase of volume would increase \PV more than it would decrease
the virial. In the case of solids, at least, P may be zero; so that the state
reached would be one in which the virial increases with the volume,
or the attraction between the particles does not increase so fast with
a diminution of their distance as it would if the attraction were in­
versely as the distance.
Almost contemporaneously with Van der Waals’s paper, another
remarkable thesis for the doctorate was presented at Paris by Ama-
gat.16 It related to the elasticity and expansion of gases, and to this
subject the superb experimenter, its author, has devoted his whole
subsequent life. Especially interesting are his observations of the
volumes of ethylene and of carbonic acid at temperatures from 20° to
ioo° and at pressures ranging from an ounce to 5000 pounds to the
square inch. As soon as Amagat had obtained these results, he re­
marked that the “ coefficient of expansion at constant volume,” as it is
absurdly called, that is, the rate of variation of the pressure with the
temperature, was very nearly constant for each volume. This accords
with the equation of the virial, which gives
dp _ a d'IRr
J e ~ ' v ~ d6 '
N ow, the virial must be nearly independent of the temperature, and
therefore the last term almost disappears. The virial would not be
quite independent of the temperature, because if the temperature (i.e.
the square of the velocity of the molecules) is lowered, and the pressure
correspondingly lowered, so as to make the volume the same, the
attractions of the molecules will have more time to produce their
effects, and consequently, the pairs of molecules the closest together
w ill be held together longer and closer; so that the virial w ill generally
be increased by a decrease of temperature. Now, Amagat’s experi­
ments do show an excessively minute effect of this sort, at least, when
the volumes are not too small. However, the observations are well
enough satisfied by assuming the “ coefficient of expansion at constant
volume” to consist wholly of the first term, a/V. Thus, Amagat’s

[page 340]

340 I The Essential Peirce
experiments enable us to determine the values of a and thence to
calculate the virial; and this.we find varies for carbonic acid gas nearly
inversely to V 09. There is, thus, a rough approximation to satisfying
Van der Waals’s equation. But the most interesting result of Amagat’s
experiments, for our purpose at any rate, is that the quantity a, though
nearly constant for any one volume, differs considerably with the
volume, nearly doubling when the volume is reduced five-fold. This
can only indicate that the mean kinetic energy of a given mass of the
gas for a given temperature is greater the more the gas is compressed.
But the laws of mechanics appear to enjoin that the mean kinetic
energy of a moving particle shall be constant at any given temperature.
The only escape from contradiction, then, is to suppose that the mean
mass of a moving particle diminishes upon the condensation of the gas.
In other words, many of the molecules are dissociated, or broken up
into atoms or sub-molecules. The idea that dissociation should be
favored by diminishing the volume will be pronounced by physicists,
at first blush, as contrary to all our experience. But it must be remem­
bered that the circumstances we are speaking of, that of a gas under
fifty or more atmospheres pressure, are also unusual. That the “ coef­
ficient of expansion under constant volume” when multiplied by the
volumes should increase with a decrement of the volume is also quite
contrary to ordinary experience; yet it undoubtedly takes place in all
gases under great pressure. Again, the doctrine of Arrhenius* is now
generally accepted, that the molecular conductivity of an electrolyte
is proportional to the dissociation of ions. N ow the molecular conduc­
tivity of a fused electrolyte is usually superior to that of a solution.
Here is a case, then, in which diminution of volume is accompanied
by increased dissociation.
The truth is that several different kinds of dissociation have to be
distinguished. In the first place, there is the dissociation of a chemical
molecule to form chemical molecules under the regular action of
chemical laws. This may be a double decomposition, as when iodhy-
dric acid is dissociated, according to the formula
/ / / + / / / = / / / / + / / ;
or, it may be a simple decomposition, as when pentachloride of phos­
phorus is dissociated according to the formula
p c i 5 = PCl3 + CICL
All these dissociations require, according to the laws of thermochemis­
try, an elevated temperature. In the second place, there is the dissocia­
tion of a physically polymerous molecule, that is, of several chemical
*Anticipated by Clausius as long ago as 1857; and by Williamson in 1851.17

[page 341]

Man's Glassy Essence I 341
molecules joined by physical attractions. This I am inclined to suppose
is a common concomitant of the heating of solids and liquids; for in
these bodies there is no increase of compressibility with the tempera­
ture at all comparable with the increase of the expansibility. But, in
the third place, there is the dissociation with which we are now con­
cerned, which must be supposed to be a throwing off of unsaturated
sub-molecules or atoms from the molecule. The molecule may, as I
have said, be roughly likened to a solar system. As such, molecules are
able to produce perturbations of one another’s internal motions; and
in this way a planet, i.e. a sub-molecule, will occasionally get thrown
off and wander about by itself, till it finds another unsaturated sub­
molecule with which it can unite. Such dissociation by perturbation
will naturally be favored by the proximity of the molecules to one
another.
Let us now pass to the consideration of that special substance, or
rather class of substances, whose properties form the chief subject of
botany and of zoology, as truly as those of the silicates form the chief
subject of mineralogy: I mean the life-slimes, or protoplasm. Let us
begin by cataloguing the general characters of these slimes. They one
and all exist in two states of aggregation, a solid or nearly solid state
and a liquid or nearly liquid state; but they do not pass from the former
to the latter by ordinary fusion. They are readily decomposed by heat,
especially in the liquid state; nor will they bear any considerable
degree of cold. All their vital actions take place at temperatures very
little below the point of decomposition. This extreme instability is one
of numerous facts which demonstrate the chemical complexity of pro­
toplasm. Every chemist will agree that they are far more complicated
than the albumens. Now, albumen is estimated to contain in each
molecule about a thousand atoms; so that it is natural to suppose that
the protoplasms contain several thousands. We know that while they
are chiefly composed of oxygen, hydrogen, carbon, and nitrogen, a
large number of other elements enter into living bodies in small pro­
portions; and it is likely that most of these enter into the composition
of protoplasms. N ow, since the numbers of chemical varieties increase
at an enormous rate with the number of atoms per molecule, so that
there are certainly hundreds of thousands of substances whose mole­
cules contain twenty atoms or fewer, we may well suppose that the
number of protoplasmic substances runs into the billions or trillions.
Professor Cayley has given a mathematical theory of “ trees,” with a
view of throwing a light upon such questions;18 and in that light the
estimate of trillions (in the English sense) seems immoderately moder­
ate. It is true that an opinion has been emitted, and defended among
biologists, that there is but one kind of protoplasm; but the observa­
tions of biologists, themselves, have almost exploded that hypothesis,
which from a chemical standpoint appears utterly incredible. The

[page 342]

342 I The Essential Peirce
anticipation of the chemist would decidedly be that enough different
chemical substances having protoplasmic characters might be formed
to account, not only for the differences between nerve-slime and mus-
cle-slime, between whale-slime and lion-slime, but also for those
minuter pervasive variations which characterise different breeds and
single individuals.
Protoplasm, when quiescent, is, broadly speaking, solid; but when
it is disturbed in an appropriate way, or sometimes even spontane­
ously without external disturbance, it becomes, broadly speaking, liq­
uid. A moner in this state is seen under the microscope to have streams
within its matter; a slime-mold slowly flows by force of gravity. The
liquefaction starts from the point of disturbance and spreads through
the mass. This spreading, however, is not uniform in all directions; on
the contrary it takes at one time one course, at another another,
through the homogeneous mass, in a manner that seems a little myste­
rious. The cause of disturbance being removed, these motions gradu­
ally (with higher kinds of protoplasm, quickly) cease, and the slime
returns to its solid condition.
The liquefaction of protoplasm is accompanied by a mechanical
phenomenon. Namely, some kinds exhibit a tendency to draw them­
selves up into a globular form. This happens particularly with the
contents of muscle-cells. The prevalent opinion, founded on some of
the most exquisite experimental investigations that the history of sci­
ence can show, is undoubtedly that the contraction of muscle-cells is
due to osmotic pressure; and it must be allowed that that is a factor in
producing the effect. But it does not seem to me that it satisfactorily
accounts even for the phenomena of muscular contraction; and be­
sides, even naked slimes often draw up in the same way. In this case,
we seem to recognise an increase of the surface-tension. In some cases,
too, the reverse action takes place, extraordinary pseudopodia being
put forth, as if the surface-tension were diminished in spots. Indeed,
such a slime always has a sort of skin, due no doubt to surface-tension,
and this seems to give way at the point where a pseudopodium is put
forth.
Long-continued or frequently repeated liquefaction of the proto­
plasm results in an obstinate retention of the solid state, which we call
fatigue. On the other hand repose in this state, if not too much pro­
longed, restores the liquefiability. These are both important functions.
The life-slimes have, further, the peculiar property of growing.
Crystals also grow; their growth, however, consists merely in attract­
ing matter like their own from the circumambient fluid. To suppose
the growth of protoplasm of the same nature, would be to suppose this
substance to be spontaneously generated in copious supplies wherever
food is in solution. Certainly, it must be granted that protoplasm is but
a chemical substance, and that there is no reason why it should not be

[page 343]

Man !r Glassy Essence I 343
formed synthetically like any other chemical substance. Indeed, Clif­
ford has clearly shown that we have overwhelming evidence that it is
so form ed.19 But to say that such formation is as regular and frequent
as the assimilation of food is quite another matter. It is more consonant
with the facts of observation to suppose that assimilated protoplasm
is formed at the instant of assimilation, under the influence of the
protoplasm already present. For each slime in its growth preserves its
distinctive characters with wonderful truth, nerve-slime growing
nerve-slime and muscle-slime muscle-slime, lion-slime growing lion-
slime, and all the varieties of breeds and even individual characters
being preserved in the growth. N ow it is too much to suppose there
are billions of different kinds of protoplasm floating about wherever
there is food.
The frequent liquefaction of protoplasm increases its power of
assimilating food; so much so, indeed, that it is questionable whether
in the solid form it possesses this power.
The life-slime wastes as well as grows; and this too takes place
chiefly if not exclusively in its liquid phases.
Closely connected with growth is reproduction; and though in
higher forms this is a specialised function, it is universally true that
wherever there is protoplasm, there is, will be, or has been a power of
reproducing that same kind of protoplasm in a separated organism.
Reproduction seems to involve the union of two sexes; though it is not
demonstrable that this is always requisite.
Another physical property of protoplasm is that of taking habits.
The course which the spread of liquefaction has taken in the past is
rendered thereby more likely to be taken in the future; although there
is no absolute certainty that the same path will be followed again.
V ery extraordinary, certainly, are all these properties of proto­
plasm; as extraordinary as indubitable. But the one which has next to
be mentioned, while equally undeniable, is infinitely more wonderful.
It is that protoplasm feels. We have no direct evidence that this is true
of protoplasm universally, and certainly some kinds feel far more than
others. But there is a fair analogical inference that all protoplasm feels.
It not only feels but exercises all the functions of mind.
Such are the properties of protoplasm. The problem is to find a
hypothesis of the molecular constitution of this compound which will
account for these properties, one and all.
Some of them are obvious results of the excessively complicated
constitution of the protoplasm molecule. All very complicated sub­
stances are unstable; and plainly a molecule of several thousand atoms
may be separated in many ways into two parts in each of which the
polar chemical forces are very nearly saturated. In the solid proto­
plasm, as in other solids, the molecules must be supposed to be moving
as it were in orbits, or, at least, so as not to wander indefinitely. But

[page 344]

344 I The Essential Peirce
this solid cannot be melted, for the same reason that starch cannot be
melted; because an amount of heat insufficient to make the entire
molecules wander is sufficient to break them up completely and cause
them to form new and simpler molecules. But when one of the mole­
cules is disturbed, even if it be not quite thrown out of its orbit at first,
sub-molecules of perhaps several hundred atoms each are thrown off
from it. These will soon acquire the same mean kinetic energy as the
others, and therefore velocities several times as great. They will natu­
rally begin to wander, and in wandering will perturb a great many
other molecules and cause them in their turn to behave like the one
originally deranged. So many molecules will thus be broken up, that
even those that are intact will no longer be restrained within orbits,
but w ill wander about freely. This is the usual condition of a liquid,
as modern chemists understand it; for in all electrolytic liquids there
is considerable dissociation.
But this process necessarily chills the substance, not merely on
account of the heat of chemical combination, but still more because the
number of separate particles being greatly increased, the mean kinetic
energy must be less. The substance being a bad conductor, this heat
is not at once restored. N ow the particles moving more slowly, the
attractions between them have time to take effect, and they approach
the condition of equilibrium. But their dynamic equilibrium is found
in the restoration of the solid condition, which therefore takes place,
if the disturbance is not kept up.
When a body is in the solid condition, most of its molecules must
be moving at the same rate, or, at least, at certain regular sets of rates;
otherwise the orbital motion would not be preserved. The distances of
neighboring molecules must always be kept between a certain maxi­
mum and a certain minimum value. But if, without absorption of heat,
the body be thrown into a liquid condition, the distances of neighbor­
ing molecules will be far more unequally distributed, and an effect
upon the virial will result. The chilling of protoplasm upon its lique­
faction must also be taken into account. The ordinary effect will no
doubt be to increase the cohesion and with that the surface-tension, so
that the mass will tend to draw itself up. But in special cases, the virial
will be increased so much that the surface-tension will be diminished
at points where the temperature is first restored. In that case, the outer
film will give way and the tension at other places will aid in causing
the general fluid to be poured out at those points, forming pseudo­
podia.
When the protoplasm is in a liquid state, and then only, a solution
of food is able to penetrate its mass by diffusion. The protoplasm is
then considerably dissociated; and so is the food, like all dissolved
matter. If then the separated and unsaturated sub-molecules of the

[page 345]

Man's Glassy Essence I 345
food happen to be of the same chemical species as sub-molecules of the
protoplasm, they may unite with other sub-molecules of the proto­
plasm to form new molecules, in such a fashion that when the solid
state is resumed, there may be more molecules of protoplasm than
there were at the beginning. It is like the jack-knife whose blade and
handle, after having been severally lost and replaced, were found and
put together to make a new knife.
We have seen that protoplasm is chilled by liquefaction, and that
this brings it back to the solid state, when the heat is recovered. This
series of operations must be very rapid in the case of nerve-slime and
even of muscle-slime, and may account for the unsteady or vibratory
character of their action. O f course, if assimilation takes place, the heat
of combination, which is probably trifling, is gained. On the other
hand, if work is done, whether by nerve or by muscle, loss of energy
must take place. In the case of the muscle, the mode by which the
instantaneous part of the fatigue is brought about is easily traced out.
If when the muscle contracts it be under stress, it will contract less
than it otherwise would do, and there will be a loss of heat. It is like
an engine which should work by dissolving salt in water and using the
contraction during the solution to lift a weight, the salt being recov­
ered afterwards by distillation. But the major part of fatigue has noth­
ing to do with the correlation of forces. A man must labor hard to do
in a quarter of an hour the work which draws from him enough heat
to cool his body by a single degree. Meantime, he will be getting
heated, he will be pouring out extra products of combustion, perspira­
tion, etc., and he will be driving the blood at an accelerated rate
through minute tubes at great expense. Yet all this will have little to
do with his fatigue. He may sit quietly at his table writing, doing
practically no physical work at all, and yet in a few hours be terribly
fagged. This seems to be owing to the deranged sub-molecules of the
nerve-slime not having had time to settle back into their proper combi­
nations. When such sub-molecules are thrown out, as they must be
from time to time, there is so much waste of material.
In order that a sub-molecule of food may be thoroughly and firmly
assimilated into a broken molecule of protoplasm, it is necessary not
only that it should have precisely the right chemical composition, but
also that it should be at precisely the right spot at the right time and
should be moving in precisely the right direction with precisely the
right velocity. If all these conditions are not fulfilled, it w ill be more
loosely retained than the other parts of the molecule; and every time
it comes round into the situation in which it was drawn in, relatively
to the other parts of that molecule and to such others as were near
enough to be factors in the action, it will be in special danger of being
thrown out again. Thus, when a partial liquefaction of the protoplasm

[page 346]

346 I The Essential Peirce
takes place many times to about the same extent, it will, each time, be
pretty nearly the same molecules that were last drawn in that are now
thrown out. They will be thrown out, too, in about the same way, as
to position, direction of motion, and velocity, in which they were
drawn in; and this w ill be in about the same course that the ones last
before them were thrown out. Not exactly, however; for the very cause
of their being thrown off so easily is their not having fulfilled precisely
the conditions of stable retention. Thus, the law of habit is accounted
for, and with it its peculiar characteristic of not acting with exactitude.
It seems to me that this explanation of habit, aside from the ques­
tion of its truth or falsity, has a certain value as an addition to our little
store of mechanical examples of actions analogous to habit. All the
others, so far as I know, are either statical or else involve forces which,
taking only the sensible motions into account, violate the law of en­
ergy. It is so with the stream that wears its own bed. Here, the sand
is carried to its most stable situation and left there. The law of energy
forbids this; for when anything reaches a position of stable equilib­
rium, its momentum will be at a maximum, so that it can according
to this law only be left at rest in an unstable situation. In all the statical
illustrations, too, things are brought into certain states and left there.
A garment receives folds and keeps them; that is, its limit of elasticity
is exceeded. This failure to spring back is again an apparent violation
of the law of energy; for the substance will not only not spring back
of itself (which might be due to an unstable equilibrium being reached)
but will not even do so when an impulse that way is applied to it.
Accordingly, Professor James says “ the phenomena of habit... are due
to the plasticity of the . . . materials.” 20 N ow, plasticity of materials
means the having of a low limit of elasticity. (See the Century Dictio­
n a r y under solid.)11 But the hypothetical constitution of protoplasm
here proposed involves no forces but attractions and repulsions strictly
following the law of energy. The action here, that is, the throwing of
an atom out of its orbit in a molecule, and the entering of a new atom
into nearly, but not quite the same orbit, is somewhat similar to the
molecular actions which may be supposed to take place in a solid
strained beyond its limit of elasticity. Namely, in that case certain
molecules must be thrown out of their orbits, to settle down again
shortly after into new orbits. In short, the plastic solid resembles
protoplasm in being partially and temporarily liquefied by a slight
mechanical force. But the taking of a set by a solid body has but a
moderate resemblance to the taking of a habit, inasmuch as the charac­
teristic feature of the latter, its inexactitude and want of complete
determinacy, is not so marked in the former, if it can be said to be
present there, at all.
The truth is that though the molecular explanation of habit is

[page 347]

Man y
s Glassy Essence I 347
pretty vague on the mathematical side, there can be no doubt that
systems of atoms having polar forces would act substantially in that
manner, and the explanation is even too satisfactory to suit the conve­
nience of an advocate of tychism. For it may fairly be urged that since
the phenomena of habit may thus result from a purely mechanical
arrangement, it is unnecessary to suppose that habit-taking is a pri­
mordial principle of the universe. But one fact remains unexplained
mechanically, which concerns not only the facts of habit, but all cases
of actions apparently violating the law of energy; it is that all these
phenomena depend upon aggregations of trillions of molecules in one
and the same condition and neighborhood; and it is by no means clear
how they could have all been brought and left in the same place and
state by any conservative forces. But let the mechanical explanation be
as perfect as it may, the state of things which it supposes presents
evidence of a primordial habit-taking tendency. For it shows us like
things acting in like ways because they are alike. N ow, those who insist
on the doctrine of necessity w ill for the most part insist that the
physical world is entirely individual. Yet law involves an element of
generality. N ow to say that generality is primordial, but generalisation
not, is like saying that diversity is primordial but diversification not.
It turns logic upside down. At any rate, it is clear that nothing but a
principle of habit, itself due to the growth by habit of an infinitesimal
chance tendency toward habit-taking is the only bridge that can span
the chasm between the chance-medley of chaos and the cosmos of
order and law.
I shall not attempt a molecular explanation of the phenomena of
reproduction, because that would require a subsidiary hypothesis, and
carry me away from my main object. Such phenomena, universally
diffused though they be, appear to depend upon special conditions; and
we do not find that all protoplasm has reproductive powers.
But what is to be said of the property of feeling? If consciousness
belongs to all protoplasm, by what mechanical constitution is this to
be accounted for? The slime is nothing but a chemical compound.
There is no inherent impossibility in its being formed synthetically in
the laboratory, out of its chemical elements; and if it were so made, it
would present all the characters of natural protoplasm. N o doubt,
then, it would feel. T o hesitate to admit this would be puerile and
ultra-puerile. By what element of the molecular arrangement, then,
would that feeling be caused? This question cannot be evaded or pooh-
poohed. Protoplasm certainly does feel; and unless we are to accept a
weak dualism, the property must be shown to arise from some pecu­
liarity of the mechanical system. Yet the attempt to deduce it from the
three laws of mechanics, applied to never so ingenious a mechanical
contrivance, would obviously be futile. It can never be explained,

[page 348]

348 I The Essential Peirce
unless we admit that physical events are but degraded or undeveloped
forms of psychical events. But once grant that the phenomena of
matter are but the result of the sensibly complete sway of habits upon
mind, and it only remains to explain why in the protoplasm these
habits are to some slight extent broken up, so that according to the law
of mind, in that special clause of it sometimes called the principle of
accommodation,* feeling becomes intensified. N ow the manner in
which habits generally get broken up is this. Reactions usually termi­
nate in the removal of a stimulus; for the excitation continues as long
as the stimulus is present. Accordingly, habits are general ways of
behavior which are associated with the removal of stimuli. But when
the expected removal of the stimulus fails to occur, the excitation
continues and increases, and non-habitual reactions take place; and
these tend to weaken the habit. If, then, we suppose that matter never
does obey its ideal laws with absolute precision, but that there are
almost insensible fortuitous departures from regularity, these will pro­
duce, in general, equally minute effects. But protoplasm is in an exces­
sively unstable condition; and it is the characteristic of unstable equi­
librium, that near that point excessively minute causes may produce
startlingly large effects. Here then, the usual departures from regular­
ity will be followed by others that are very great; and the large fortui­
tous departures from law so produced, w ill tend still further to break
up the laws, supposing that these are of the nature of habits. Now, this
breaking up of habit and renewed fortuitous spontaneity will, accord­
ing to the law of mind, be accompanied by an intensification of feeling.
The nerve-protoplasm is, without doubt, in the most unstable condi­
tion of any kind of matter; and consequently, there the resulting feel­
ing is the most manifest.
Thus we see that the idealist has no need to dread a mechanical
theory of life. On the contrary, such a theory, fully developed, is bound
to call in a tychistic idealism as its indispensible adjunct. Wherever
chance-spontaneity is found, there, in the same proportion, feeling
exists. In fact, chance is but the outward aspect of that which within
itself is feeling. I long ago showed that real existence, or thing-ness,
consists in regularities.22 So, that primeval chaos in which there was
no regularity was mere nothing, from a physical aspect. Yet it was not
a blank zero; for there was an intensity of consciousness there in
comparison with which all that we ever feel is but as the struggling
of a molecule or two to throw off a little of the force of law to an endless
and innumerable diversity of chance utterly unlimited.
But after some atoms of the protoplasm have thus become partially
emancipated from law, what happens next to them? To understand
*“ Physiologically,. . . accommodation means the breaking up of a habit. . . . Psycho­
logically, it means reviving consciousness.” Baldwin, Psychology, Part III, ch. i., §5.

[page 349]

Man's Glassy Essence I 349
this, we have to remember that no mental tendency is so easily
strengthened by the action of habit as is the tendency to take habits.
N ow , in the higher kinds of protoplasm, especially, the atoms in ques­
tion have not only long belonged to one molecule or another of the
particular mass of slime of which they are parts; but before that, they
were constituents of food of a protoplasmic constitution. During all
this time, they have been liable to lose habits and to recover them
again; so that now, when the stimulus is removed, and the foregone
habits tend to reassert themselves, they do so in the case of such atoms
with great promptness. Indeed, the return is so prompt that there is
nothing but the feeling to show conclusively that the bonds of law have
ever been relaxed.
In short, diversification is the vestige of chance-spontaneity; and
wherever diversity is increasing, there chance must be operative. On
the other hand, wherever uniformity is increasing, habit must be oper­
ative. But wherever actions take place under an established uniform­
ity, there so much feeling as there may be takes the mode of a sense
of reaction. That is the manner in which I am led to define the relation
between the fundamental elements of consciousness and their physical
equivalents.
It remains to consider the physical relations of general ideas. It may
be well here to reflect that if matter has no existence except as a
specialisation of mind, it follows that whatever affects matter accord­
ing to regular laws is itself matter. But all mind is directly or indirectly
connected with all matter, and acts in a more or less regular way; so
that all mind more or less partakes of the nature of matter. Hence, it
would be a mistake to conceive of the psychical and the physical
aspects of matter as two aspects absolutely distinct. View ing a thing
from the outside, considering its relations of action and reaction with
other things, it appears as matter. View ing it from the inside, looking
at its immediate character as feeling, it appears as consciousness. These
two views are combined when we remember that mechanical laws are
nothing but acquired habits, like all the regularities of mind, including
the tendency to take habits, itself; and that this action of habit is
nothing but generalisation, and generalisation is nothing but the
spreading of feelings. But the question is, how do general ideas appear
in the molecular theory of protoplasm?
The consciousness of a habit involves a general idea. In each action
of that habit certain atoms get thrown out of their orbit, and replaced
by others. Upon all the different occasions it is different atoms that are
thrown off, but they are analogous from a physical point of view, and
there is an inward sense of their being analogous. Every time one of
the associated feelings recurs, there is a more or less vague sense that
there are others, that it has a general character, and of about what this
general character is. We ought not, I think, to hold that in protoplasm

[page 350]

350 I The Essential Peirce
habit never acts in any other than the particular way suggested above.
On the contrary, if habit be a prim ary property of mind, it must be
equally so of matter, as a kind of mind. We can hardly refuse to admit
that wherever chance motions have general characters, there is a tend­
ency for this generality to spread and to perfect itself. In that case, a
general idea is a certain modification of consciousness which accompa­
nies any regularity or general relation between chance actions.
The consciousness of a general idea has a certain “ unity of the ego”
in it, which is identical when it passes from one mind to another. It
is, therefore, quite analogous to a person; and, indeed, a person is only
a particular kind of general idea. Long ago, in the Journal o f Speculative
Philosophy (Vol. II, p. 156), I pointed out that a person is nothing but
a symbol involving a general idea;23 but my views were, then, too
nominalistic to enable me to see that every general idea has the unified
living feeling of a person.
All that is necessary, upon this theory, to the existence of a person
is that the feelings out of which he is constructed should be in close
enough connection to influence one another. Here we can draw a
consequence which it may be possible to submit to experimental test.
Namely, if this be the case, there should be something like personal
consciousness in bodies of men who are in intimate and intensely
sympathetic communion. It is true that when the generalisation of
feeling has been carried so far as to include all within a person, a
stopping-place, in a certain sense, has been attained; and further
generalisation will have a less lively character. But we must not think
it will cease. Esprit de corps, national sentiment, sym-pathy, are no mere
metaphors. None of us can fully realise what the minds of corporations
are, any more than one of my brain-cells can know what the whole
brain is thinking. But the law of mind clearly points to the existence
of such personalities, and there are many ordinary observations which,
if they were critically examined and supplemented by special experi­
ments, might, as first appearances promise, give evidence of the influ­
ence of such greater persons upon individuals. It is often remarked
that on one day half a dozen people, strangers to one another, will take
it into their heads to do one and the same strange deed, whether it be
a physical experiment, a crime, or an act of virtue. When the thirty
thousand young people of the society for Christian Endeavor were in
N ew York, there seemed to me to be some mysterious diffusion of
sweetness and light.24 If such a fact is capable of being made out
anywhere, it should be in the church. The Christians have always been
ready to risk their lives for the sake of having prayers in common, of
getting together and praying simultaneously with great energy, and
especially for their common body, for “ the whole state of Christ’s
church militant here in earth,” as one of the missals has it. This
practice they have been keeping up everywhere, weekly, for many

[page 351]

Man VGlassy Essence I 351
centuries. Surely, a personality ought to have developed in that
church, in that “ bride of Christ,” as they call it, or else there is a
strange break in the action of mind, and I shall have to acknowledge
my views are much mistaken. Would not the societies for psychical
research be more likely to break through the clouds, in seeking evi­
dences of such corporate personality, than in seeking evidences of
telepathy, which, upon the same theory, should be a far weaker phe­
nomenon?
