YALE UNIVERSITY MRS. HEPSA ELY SILLIMAN MEMORIAL LECTURES





The Origins of Knowledge and Imagination


JACOB BRONOWSKI





Copyright © 1978 by Yale University.

Fifth printing, 1979.

All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced, in whole or in part, in any form (beyond that copying permitted by Sections 107 and 108 of the U.S. Copyright Law and except by reviewers for the public press), without written permission from the publishers.

Designed by Sally Sullivan Harris and set in Times Roman type.

Printed in the United States of America.

Published in Great Britain, Europe, Africa, and Asia (except Japan) by Yale University Press, Ltd., London. Distributed in Australia and New Zealand by Book & Film Services, Artarmon, N.S.W., Australia; and in Japan by Harper & Row, Publishers, Tokyo Office.

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Bronowski, Jacob, 1908–

The origins of knowledge and imagination.

(Mrs. Hepsa Ely Silliman memorial lectures) Includes index.

1. Knowledge, Theory of—Addresses, essays, lectures. 2. Imagination—Addresses, essays, lectures. 3. Languages—Philosophy—Addresses, essays, lectures. 4. Science—Philosophy—Addresses, essays, lectures. I. Title. II. Series: Hepsa Ely Silliman memorial lectures, Yale University.

BD181.B76 121 77-13209

ISBN 978-0-300-02409-8

Grateful acknowledgment is made to M. B. Yeats, Miss Anne Yeats, and the Macmillan Co. of London and Basingstoke and to the Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc., New York, for permission to reprint “For Anne Gregory,” by W. B. Yeats, from The Collected Poems, copyright 1933 by Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc., renewed 1961 by Bertha Georgie Yeats.





THE SILLIMAN FOUNDATION LECTURES

On the foundation established in memory of Mrs. Hepsa Ely Silliman, the President and Fellows of Yale University present an annual course of lectures designed to illustrate the presence and providence of God as manifested in the natural and moral world. It was the belief of the testator that any orderly presentation of the facts of nature or history contributed to this end more effectively than dogmatic or polemical theology, which should therefore be excluded from the scope of the lectures. The subjects are selected rather from the domains of natural science and history, giving special prominence to astronomy, chemistry, geology, and anatomy. The present work constitutes the forty-fourth volume published on this foundation.





CONTENTS


Foreword, by S. E. Luria

1. The Mind as an Instrument for Understanding

2. The Evolution and Power of Symbolic Language

3. Knowledge as Algorithm and as Metaphor

4. The Laws of Nature and the Nature of Laws

5. Error, Progress, and the Concept of Time

6. Law and Individual Responsibility

Index
