FOREWORD


A physiologist friend of mine once recounted how, as a refugee from Germany studying in a British country school during World War II, he was cruelly teased for his bookishness and Jewishness by the schoolmates, until a sudden change took place. One evening the students were taken to a neighboring town for a public lecture on science in the modern world, and from then on the students treated their refugee colleague with a new respect. The lecturer who in one hour had made both culture and Jewishness respectable and even glamorous to his youthful audience was Jacob Bronowski.

I choose this anecdote because it illustrates one aspect of Bronowski’s protean personality, his role as educator, a role that throughout his life he performed not so much in the classroom as in a variety of other situations: in his stimulating conversation, fed by an immense store of knowledge; in his scholarly lectures in which he always strove, as he put it, to reveal “the hidden likeness in diversity”; and finally in his approach to the mass audience in the monumental achievement of “The Ascent of Man.”

Two of Bronowski’s earlier books, Science and Human Values(1956) and The Identity of Man(1965), are particularly relevant to the present context. Both were, like the book presented here, the texts of series of public lectures delivered in academic settings. Both represented audacious leaps from the domain of science into explorations of central aspects of the human condition: What message does science have for human conduct? How does human experience become transformed and integrated into the personality of the individual, into what Bronowski called a human “self”?

In those books Bronowski outlined an approach to scientific psychology based on an analysis of the structure of the two creative activities, science and art. The interpretation of these two activities within the intellectual enterprise and the impossibility of any artificial separation of them from one another are themes that consistently recur in Bronowski’s teaching.

The roots of these themes are made more explicit in the Silliman Lectures. Knowledge and imagination, according to the author, are two inseparable aspects of the intellectual experience. The imaginative moment is as creatively central to science as to poetry or to figurative art. The mind acts upon the natural world in the creation of knowledge in the same way as it acts on the elements of human sensibility in bringing forth a poem or a painting or a symphony.

Bronowski’s wish to define and clarify the role of imagination as the unifying element in the variety of intellectual activities—in fact, as the creative element in human psychology—was indirectly responsible for the fact that the Silliman Lectures appear only now in the form of a transcript of the lectures as delivered at Yale in 1967. It had been his hope to have these lectures appear as one of a pair of books, the subject of the other being the nature of the artistic enterprise. This plan did not materialize. The stupendous effort of preparing the series of television programs for “The Ascent of Man” demanded all his energies. And death made nought of further plans.

The structure of The Origins of Knowledge and Imagination is different from that of other books by Bronowski. The lectures are both more technical and more openly didactic. A deceptive beginning, introducing the theme of appearance versus essence by way of a charming poem by Yeats, promptly leads into a discussion of some of the most complex areas of knowledge, where the scholar—the “natural philosopher,” as Bronowski chooses to call himself—comes to grips with the epistemological questions that concern the nature of limits to human understanding. It is a tribute to Bronowski’s brilliancy as a scholar and an interpreter that he can make his discussion of such questions understandable and often fascinating.

The nature and power of human language as a creative instrument for ordering and giving structure to human experience; the nature of time and the meaning of relativity; the limits of physical measurements as interpreted by quantum mechanics; the boundaries to formalization of knowledge inherent in the axiomatic structure of mathematics—these and other topics become accessible, indeed humanized, by the author’s insistence that they should be looked at not just as constructions within science but as expressions of the human mind defining itself in action. Throughout the book the interest of the reader is stimulated by the interplay of two themes that recur almost like melodies in a sonata and give the text its intellectual unity. These themes are the role of conscious human activity in the creation of knowledge and the imaginative content of that knowledge.

It will not surprise the readers of these lectures to learn (should they be unaware of it) that besides his many accomplishments as mathematician, philosopher, linguist, and educator, Bronowski was also a prominent Blake scholar, the author of the seminal book William Blake and the Age of Revolution (1965). Blake, artisan, painter, print-maker, poet, and political visionary, had in his own time something to say that was not so different from what Bronowski wants us to learn from his lectures: that the integrity of the doer should be matched by the vision of the thinker; that such vision consists as much as of what the viewer projects outward as of what it receives; that passivity before the supposedly inexorable march of events—whether the Industrial Revolution or the mechanization of society—can only lead to slavery; and that freedom must be created by the interaction between human wisdom and the physical world.

Like his great contemporary Goya, Blake was an artist who viewed the human condition with strength, compassion, and imagination. Both artists pictured human folly as the stuff of nightmares, to be dissipated by the light of reason. Bronowski has confidence in human reason. His lectures breathe optimism, an optimism not unlike that of the thinkers of the Enlightenment, but sobered and refined by the modern view of nature and of the place of the human mind within it. Whether or not one shares Bronowski’s optimism, one must be grateful to him for proposing it. Once again, as in that provincial English town where he lectured one evening thirty-five years ago, Bronowski brings to his audience a message of human harmony.

S. E. Luria

Cambridge, Mass.

1977
