1

The Mind as an Instrument for Understanding


I will start by reading a poem by W. B. Yeats called “For Anne Gregory.” It is a conversation between a man who asks her questions and herself. The first verse is by the interrogator who says to her,

“Never shall a young man,

Thrown into despair

By those great honey-coloured

Ramparts at your ear,

Love you for yourself alone

And not your yellow hair.”

To this Anne Gregory replies,

“But I can get a hair-dye

And set such colour there,

Brown, or black, or carrot,

That young men in despair

May love me for myself alone

And not my yellow hair.”

And the interrogator then has the last verse and the last word; he says in answer,

“I heard an old religious man

But yesternight declare

That he had found a text to prove

That only God, my dear,

Could love you for yourself alone

And not your yellow hair.”

I choose to introduce this lecture and the series with that poem because it states a perennial theme in Yeats and the underlying theme of these lectures: how we get experience which is not directly physical through physical means. For “yellow hair,” you will have to read “human vision,” “speech,” or any of the other fundamental human abilities which are mediated by the physical senses or by physical capacities, and which nevertheless we believe give us knowledge of the outside world.

Since the word “knowledge” occurs in my general title, “The Origins of Knowledge and Imagination,” I ought to begin by saying that I am going to be talking about epistemology, although I prefer to use an eighteenth-century, indeed, a medieval phrase, “natural philosophy.” By natural philosophy I mean that enterprise of the human mind which attempts to trace lawfulness in nature, dead and living, but which is not directed to specific inquiries into how this or that law works. Philosophy in the sense in which I practice it, natural philosophy, is concerned with lawfulness rather than with laws and with the general nature of laws rather than with the specific structure of this or that law. Natural philosophy was one of the three topics (moral philosophy and metaphysical philosophy were the others) to which one graduated in medieval universities after having studied the seven liberal arts. I shall be talking about natural philosophy most of the time, though the last of my lectures is obviously concerned also with moral philosophy.

I believe that we need to review the whole of our natural philosophy in the light of scientific knowledge that has arisen in the last fifty years. It really is pointless to go on talking about what the world is like (as much of philosophy does) when the modes of perception of the world which are accessible to us have so changed in character. And we become more and more aware that what we think about the world is not what the world is but what the human animal sees of the world. My program in these lectures, therefore, is the program which Immanuel Kant proposed back in the 1760s, when he was still a practicing scientist and had only just begun to venture into philosophy. He wrote a number of books and papers whose basic message was this: our knowledge of the outside world depends on our modes of perception, and I am going to write philosophy as a description of the structure of the world as seen by man.1

Unfortunately, a great revolution took place in Kant’s life in or about the year 1768, when he read a paper by Euler which was intended to show that space was indeed absolute as Newton had suggested and not relative as Leibnitz suggested.2 (You must remember that the eighteenth century was still full of this enormous sense of world division between Newton and Leibnitz. It was impossible to discuss philosophic doctrines without including them, just as impossible as it is at this moment to talk about Marxism in the same terms in Moscow and in London. So in the eighteenth century the question of whether Newton’s view of the world or Leibnitz’s view of the world was right profoundly affected all philosophy.) After reading Euler’s argument about the nature of space in 1768 Immanuel Kant published a book which for the first time proposed that there must indeed be such a thing as space, that events must fit into it, and that we must be conscious of it a priori.3 And since Kant died in 1804, long before new ideas about space—I was going to say, had been thought of, but that is not true, they had been thought of—but long before they had been published, we have all been hagridden with this idea that the world is there and that our modes of perception do not much influence how we interpret it; that we can get at the nature of the world without much bothering about the apparatus that we use.

I think that is wrong. And since one of the things that happened in your lifetime and mine has been the substitution of what you might call a Leibnitz universe, the universe of relativity, for Newton’s universe, it seems to me very appropriate that we should think that out again. Just as, in the poem, you cannot love the girl without being conscious of the fact that she has yellow hair, you cannot see the world without the intervention of the physical senses.

So much for the word “knowledge” in my title. I should also explain to you that I have used the words “the origins of knowledge” rather than the “grounds” of knowledge or the “nature” of knowledge because I want in particular to take us through the biology of the modes of perception, of speech, and of symbolization and therefore, of the evolutionary steps by which man has reached his biological situation.

As soon as we talk about the perception of the outside world, we are in fact doing philosophy as if we were an engine and as if the modes of perception of the engine were essential to our interpretation. Now, I do not think that it is disgraceful to talk of human beings as biological engines, provided that we are very clear both about what “biological” means and about what “engine” means. And that is why in my fourth lecture I shall be talking about what engines can and cannot do, in particular what computing engines can and cannot do; and why in this lecture and in the next I shall be talking about what animals can and cannot do. So you might say that these are lectures about how the world looks, seems, and behaves to human beings, thinking of the human being as a special kind of animal and of the animal as a special kind of engine.

Running all through these lectures and underlying my interest in these problems is a quite simple question: What kind of an animal is a man? I am going to propose one clue to the answer in a moment or two, but I want to introduce it by saying something about the relation of the view of man as an animal and the view of man as a spirit.

All animals are very special. They are certainly not simple engines. And man is a very special kind of animal. At the moment, there is a fashion in talking about man and animals that I suppose was begun by Konrad Lorenz and that has been made popular in this country recently by Robert Ardrey,4 which seems to me to be, if I may say so, oddly childish. It takes us right back to all the quarrels about evolution in which Darwin and Huxley and Bishop Wilberforce were engaged just over a hundred years ago. Let us take Lorenz’s last book, On Aggression.5 Well, the book is really quite simple—indeed, since you could write it all on a small postcard, I naturally was impatient at going through it at great length. What it has to say is that you only have to look at mammals in general in order to see that most of them require some built-in aggressive behavior in order to maintain themselves. Therefore, the conclusion is that human beings, who are obviously mammals, display aggressive behavior and therefore it is very important in their lives; it is very important for us not to forget it; wars are expressions of this kind of behavior—you can fill in the rest for yourselves.

Now I do not at all deny that rats are rather aggressive animals. But it seems to me strange to say that this proves something about human beings, when the obvious thing is that rats are all down in the skirtingboard somewhere whereas we are all sitting up here. If everything that we have to know about ourselves is stuff that we can get from the rats, why aren’t the rats in here and why aren’t we scurrying in the wainscoting?

People have been very impressed by the fact that many animals, not only mammals but birds and fish as well, display territorial behavior. That is, there is a piece of territory which they regard as their own and from which they chase others of their kind. And so, everybody says territorial behavior is important to human beings and Robert Ardrey has written a book about it. Now the point about territorial behavior is very clear. It is that the robin redbreast sings in a loud clear voice in order to keep other robin red-breasts away from the bit of territory that he is on. But except for singing in the morning in the shower, I have never known a human being to utter sounds for this purpose.

I give you these examples only in order to make the very clear-cut point that, while we shall be talking in these lectures about human beings as a special kind of animal, what we are interested in is the word “special.” Of course it is terribly important that we should share a lot of features with other animals. But it is of critical importance to ask ourselves what features which other animals do not possess have given human beings the very special capacities with which we are concerned in these lectures: the ability to utter cognitive sentences (which no other animal can do) and the ability therefore to exercise knowledge and imagination. There are extremely rudimentary societies, like that of Tierra del Fuego when Darwin visited there, where there is virtually no science, even in the sense of magic and prediction, and virtually no art. But “virtually no” and “no” are as different as cheese and chalk. So let me say at once that to me the most interesting thing about man is that he is an animal who practices art and science and, in every known society, practices both together.

That is not the only thing that differentiates man from the other animals, of course. Man alone adopts the frontal attitude in sexual intercourse; only women in any of the primates have breasts permanently; we are almost the only primates that do not have a bone in the penis. We could go on in a hundred and one details, all of which are extraordinarily interesting, all of which no doubt have their place in human evolution, both in what they have done and in why they have come about. Although we could spend the rest of the day talking about such facts, I will have to leave you to read up on them for yourselves.

The word “imagination” is also in my title. I want you to think of the following words: visual, vision, and visionary; and image, imagery, imagination. My reason for choosing these words is of course that I want to come to the word “imagination.” But I want you to see what always strikes one with surprise in looking at this kind of word. Almost all the words that we use about experiences of the kind that go into visions or images are words connected with the eye and with the sense of sight. “Imagination” is a word which derives from the making of images in the mind, from what Wordsworth called “the inward eye.” But the very fact that Wordsworth could use such a phrase makes it very clear how much the intellectual activities of man are eye-conditioned.

If you think of it, there are essentially only two groups of arts that human beings practice. One group includes arts which are mediated by the sense of sight, like sculpture and painting; the other group includes arts which are mediated by speech and sound, like the poem and the novel and the drama and music. Of the human senses these two dominate our outlook. The sense of sight dominates our outlook on the outside world, whereas the sense of hearing is used by us largely in order to make contact with other people or with other living things. There is a very clear distinction in the way in which most of the time we use vision to give us information about the world and sound to give us information about other people in the world.

I should just say in passing that, of course, other senses enter the picture. For example, it is said that Eskimos make those very small sculptures because they carry them and feel them. And one of the senses which is not even one of the five classical senses, the kinesthetic sense, is obviously part of our appreciation of dancing or moving. But by and large, this division between the arts of sight and the arts of sound (including music) is clear cut.

The world of science, however, is wholly dominated by the sense of sight. If you were to say to yourself, suppose that Newton had been born blind and that all science since then had been carried out by blind men, would our knowledge of the world be anything like it is today? The answer is patently no.

The place of the sense of sight in human evolution is cardinal. Human beings have evolved, we now believe with confidence, along a line which goes back from us to the most primitive and unspecialized of the primates. Among the living primates, our closest relatives are the great apes, then, more distantly related, the old world monkeys, then tarsiers, then lemurs, and finally the tree shrews, animals which may not be true primates at all, but which share the way of life of our earliest ancestors at the beginning of the primate line. The evolutionary gap from that tree-shrewish ancestor to ourselves is of the order of seventy-five million years.

Now these are all animals that have lived in trees, indeed, the tree shrew looks very much like the squirrels that run around on the lawns here at Yale. And the interesting thing about them is that they require those special senses that animals need in order to live in trees. And the sense of sight plays a radical part in the whole of this evolutionary scheme. An animal was not a success in the trees if it did not have good eyesight. It is extraordinary to look at modern representatives of all these species and observe how large an area of their brains is occupied by the visual cortex, how dependent they are on the sense of sight. However, if we take the living primates as clues to our common ancestors, we can trace the evolutionary development of vision. For instance, the apes and the old world monkeys have color vision; some new world monkeys may not. The nearer we come to man, the more animals depend on stereoscopic vision, that is, their two eyes are fixed in such a way that the fields of vision overlap. This is only possible by rotating the face so that the eyes come forward. To be sure, some long-snouted animals, like lemurs and dog-faced baboons, manage to have stereoscopic vision by looking out over the tops of their muzzles. But taking primates as a whole we can see how the face has developed from the funny little squirrel-like tree shrew (and its fossil ancestors), whose eyes stare out on either side of its sharp nose, to the flattened visage of ape or human.

But if you compare a human being with even the most sharp-eyed of the great apes, say with a chimpanzee, our vision is incredibly more delicate. These are all animals that see very well, their visual fields tend to overlap, they tend to have stereoscopic vision, as you go up the scale they tend to see in color, but their ability to discriminate fine detail (which can be tested in a very simple way) is not comparable with that of human beings. You will see now why I attach so much importance to the sense of vision, because we have become almost wholly dependent on it, and its emergence as the major mode of perception of the outside world has undoubtedly been the great culturally formative ability for human beings.

Now how does the sense of vision work? Well, it is really not very long ago that people used to think that the eye worked like a television camera: it scanned the scene, it produced a lot of dots, it shot them to the back of the head and then the brain got to work and saw what went on. The sense of vision is not remotely like that, however, and the human brain does not work like that at all. And we cannot really do better than to say at this stage how it works in order to show you how complex a mechanism the human brain is and what strange problems it has had to solve.

I have already said that even the great apes are not able to exercise fine discrimination in the way that we are. And, therefore, you would suppose that, if you are going to have an animal like man which is bent hell for leather on getting fine discrimination, the optical apparatus of the eye must be improved, a better lens must be developed, the retina must be divided more finely, and so on. Nothing of the kind. The most interesting thing about the whole physiological development of the human eye and brain is that fine discrimination is not achieved in that way.

I shall come to this point again and again, particularly when I talk about brains and machines in the fourth lecture. The brain does not achieve fine discrimination by pushing fine discrimination forward in the senses and by producing a more sensitive physical apparatus. If I may anthropomorphize the brain for a moment, the brain has had to solve the problem of achieving fine discrimination with a coarse apparatus. And in many ways you can say about all human problems, whether in science or in literature, whether physical or psychological, that they always center around the same problem: How do you refine the detail with an apparatus which remains at bottom grainy and coarse?

Well, George Wald has just won the Nobel Prize for step number one in this. He showed that when a single quantum of light strikes a rod or a cone in the eye it untwists the visual purple that has been wound up by the body and makes it fall back to the lower energy state of, roughly speaking, the Vitamin A molecule. (That is not precisely true, but it is sufficiently true to give you a clear picture of what happens.) The eye is full of rods and cones, and in each of them there is a fluid called visual purple which is bleached when light strikes it. Once it has been bleached a rod or cone cannot see again until it has been revivified. The step from purple to colorless (like all steps from any color to no color) represents a lowering of energy; a single photon of light untwists the molecule of visual purple and lets it fall back into the state which approximates that of normal Vitamin A. It is a beautiful piece of work. I am happy to say that when I introduced George Wald two years ago when he gave the Man and Nature Lectures in New York, I said that everybody ought to know about this piece of work because it was in the Nobel Prize class. And I am glad that people in Scandinavia were listening.

Now this short description tells you enough to make it clear that the eye does not form a continuous picture. Because if it is full of rods and cones and if single photons of light activate them, then the thing must be jumping about like mad with spots of light here and there. Moreover, it does no good for a photon to hit a rod or cone that has just been struck—they must be rewound before they can receive again. So we have a very coarse, grainy surface, which is rather like that of old-fashioned newspaper photographs. In addition, there must also be a substratum of noise because you cannot have an eyeful of over a million of these units without some of them going off wrong, even in total darkness. You must realize that not only does a machine go wrong every so often, but so does any apparatus that man or God can devise. Therefore, there are always quite a number of rods and cones in the eye which are giving up a bleaching signal, an electric signal, saying “we have been struck by a photon,” when, as a matter of fact, it is a lie, they have not been struck. So one of the problems is to get rid of this noise.

In that respect the eye is a delicate instrument. The noise level at any given instance is only of the order of five photons, and ten photons is more than enough to tell you that a real signal exists. That is really a very delicate response. In fact the eye overcomes these difficulties by sending back into the brain signals which contain all kinds of safety devices.

Think of the sharp outline of this piece of paper that I am holding, and ask yourself if it is going to appear sharp on an eye which is being triggered off by the rain of photons I described. The answer is: of course not. There must be an extremely wavy edge of shadow against light in my eye which somehow goes to the brain as a straight edge. There must be many errors according to what photon comes through at this moment, what part of the eye has already been struck, and so on. The very grainy nature of both energy and matter makes this certain. Now there is nothing at the back of the head which acts like a kind of screen on which this information falls. And yet somewhere in the brain there arrives at this moment a hail of electrical blips which says “that’s a straight edge.” And the reason it does this is because the eye is so wired up among the rods and cones that it actually looks for straight edges.

The very odd thing about the eye of the frog, the cat, the rabbit (the ones which have been studied most carefully) is that the signaling of boundaries to the brain is the main thing that they are wired up to do. And indeed in the frog’s eye it looks as if there is actually a mechanism which signals whether the boundary that is now crossing the eye is straight or curved (which is important for frogs).

This is a very strange form of machinery. It does not send back simple signals; the back of the retina has an elaborate wiring circuit which picks out conjunctions which are meaningful in the outside world. Boundaries are such conjunctions. So are differences in color. The eye never sends back a spot saying “that seat is red.” It essentially sends back this kind of information as I move the eye across: “All the red spots surrounded by green boundaries are not being activated but the green spots surrounded by red boundaries are being activated—and that means red.”

This is the way in which precise information from coarse units is reached by elaborate wiring systems among the units. There are two very interesting things to be said about this. (Let me say that this is largely the work which Hartline pioneered and for which he, Granit, and Wald won the Nobel Prize.)6 One is that we know from experiments with kittens (who also have stereoscopic vision) that you are born with some of the connections which are wired in the eye. But it is also clear that, even though a kitten is born, for instance, with a mechanism which makes it focus both eyes at the same time, unless the kitten practices this mechanism from the moment it opens its eyes, the mechanism will not work. So you have a very extraordinary biological phenomenon: even prewired circuits in our sense organs have to be kept alive and tuned by use, at least by use in early childhood. This is, no doubt, one of the ground reasons why deprivation of any kind in early childhood is so catastrophic both in animals and in human beings.

The other thing that I want to make clear is this. It may seem very smart that the eye is ready-wired to see straight boundaries or curved boundaries, contrasts of light, and so on. But you must also realize that every machine of this sort always pays a price for the things it can do very cleverly—namely, by not being able to do other things. And one of the things that the eye is not able to do is to look at nature with a fresh, open vision as if it were not looking for straight edges and contrasts of color. Exactly because search mechanisms for these things are built into the eye, we are constantly deceived about the nature of the outside world because we interpret it in terms of the built-in search mechanism.

I made this excursion into the mechanism of the eye in order to say how central it has been to the evolution of human beings. We stand at a peak in visual discrimination; we are utterly dependent on it. And I want to end by saying we are dependent on it not only in looking outward but in looking inward.

The abilities that we have in the way of memory and imagination, of symbolism and emblem, are all conditioned by the sense of sight. It is sight which dominates this kind of sequence, how we think of things that appear in the mind. And I come back to saying “visual,” “vision,” and “visionary”; “image,” “imagery,” “imagination.” Now imagination is a much less mechanical gift than that of the eye as I have described it. But because it is squarely rooted in that, it is an ability which human beings possess and which no other animal shares with them. We cannot separate the special importance of the visual apparatus of man from his unique ability to imagine, to make plans, and to do all the other things which are generally included in the catchall phrase “free will.” What we really mean by free will, of course, is the visualizing of alternatives and making a choice between them. In my view, which not everyone shares, the central problem of human consciousness depends on this ability to imagine.
