2

The Evolution and Power of Symbolic Language


I will recapitulate in the briefest way what I said in my first lecture. I said that my program was the program in natural philosophy which Immanuel Kant had set himself when he left physics to begin to write about philosophy. He abandoned that program in 1768; it seems to me high time to carry it through. The program is to ask what our knowledge of the external world rests on when we think of ourselves not as having God-given insight into it, but as being human animals penetrating it with the physical gifts we possess.

As an example of how we sense the world, and how we communicate that information to the brain, I took the sense of sight. I chose it, first, because it is of dominant importance in all the primates and in man specifically, and, second, because it is a typical but very well worked out example of how the impressions of the outside world reach us. Even when we think about the inside of our consciousness rather than the outside world, we use the metaphors of the eye, of what Wordsworth called “the inward eye.” We do that whether we are thinking about strictly scientific descriptions, like “vision” and “image,” or highly poetic ones like “visionary” and “imagery.”

I demonstrated that the eye works subject to the handicap of all cellular systems; namely, that it has to exercise fine discrimination using very coarse units. That is a wonderful problem. It is really the problem of the end of the twentieth century for anyone who seeks to examine all aspects of nature. How are we able to exercise fine discrimination when the units with which we work (like the rods and cones in the eye, like the neurons that lead back to the brain) are so coarse? This kind of discrimination can be achieved because the system of interconnection is such that a great deal of overlap is created, and as a result not only the brain but the eye itself makes inferences about the world. We are not able even to receive visual impressions except by a process of indirect inference. Inferences are, therefore, at the root of all our mental processes, even those exercised directly through the senses. To understand inference in its logical implications is of the greatest importance, and my next lecture in particular will be much concerned with what one might call the logical formalization of inference.

Today, however, I want to talk, as the title says, about “the evolution and power of symbolic language.” The word “evolution” will occur again and again in what I have to say. When Kant wrote his program evolution was an idea barely in the head of Charles Darwin’s grandfather, Erasmus. Kant died in 1804; Charles Darwin was born in 1809. It is thus natural that nowhere in Kant’s idea of how knowledge is based on the human senses is there a conception that the evolution from animal to man might provide a clue. In fact, what I have to say about human evolution really has only been known in the last twenty years.

The fact that natural selection in human societies has been so largely dominated by human cultures themselves for at least the last million years is a fundamentally new idea. I am going to be talking about language and speech, and the most obvious way to begin is to say again “visual,” “vision,” “visionary.” These are three words which visibly have the same root (that was not intended to be a joke; it was merely meant to demonstrate how much such vision words stay in one’s mind) and yet in which there has been an enormous shift of context and application. Now everybody knows that human beings can do that, that they can shift the contexts and applications of words, and everybody knows that there is not the slightest evidence that animals can do anything like that. Yet it is unlikely that human speech as we know it is even as old as half a million years. How did we progress so incredibly swiftly from making the kind of noise that a chimpanzee makes to making the kind of noise that a human being makes?

Well, so far as physical equipment is concerned, the transformation is easy to understand. Roughly in the last half million years, beginning at most about a million years ago (which is absolutely no time at all on the evolutionary scale) the brain of human beings and their immediate ancestors enlarged at a prodigious rate. So far as we can tell, the brain of Australopithecus, a human precursor who lived roughly a million years ago, weighed about a pound to a pound and a half. He was small by our standards (though not much smaller than I) and therefore his brain to body weight ratio should be interpreted with a certain generosity; let us say that if he were brought up to full size now his brain might be regarded as weighing one and a half to two pounds. The average weight of brain in this audience is three pounds, and there are certainly several people here whose brains weigh more than four pounds. However, brain weight (yesterday I heard it called, enchantingly, “biomass”) is really not the critical issue.

The crucial change in the human brain in this million years or so has been not so much the increase in size by a factor of three, but the concentration of that increase in three or four main areas. The visual area has increased considerably, and, compared with the chimpanzee, the actual density of human brain cells is at least 50 percent greater. A second increase has taken place in the area of manipulation of the hand, which is natural since we are much more hand-driven animals than monkeys and apes. Another main increase has taken place in the temporal lobe, in which visual memory, integration, and speech all lie fairly close together. And the fourth great increase has taken place in the frontal lobes. Their function is extremely difficult to understand (nothing that I say today will be right in ten years time); but it is clear that they are largely responsible for the ability to initiate a task, to be attentive while it is being done, and to persevere with it.

The speech area just over the temporal lobe does not exist in any other animal. That puts the discussion of speech into a quite peculiar category, because there are no experiments you can do with animals which give you any information about speech. Almost all the information that we have comes from the study of human beings who have suffered brain injury of some sort. And, of course, that kind of work is always extremely suspect because you never see a normal brain. People like Penfield and Roberts in Canada and Luria in Russia have worked with literally hundreds of cases, but they have never had a whole, well-integrated, normal man under the knife.1

Study of the speech area, therefore, has to be pursued through methods which fifty years ago would have been regarded as highly speculative. But these methods have become very respectable now because they are exactly like the kind of reasoning that is used in astrophysics. And when we talk about the evolution of, say, the speech area, most of our guesswork is of the same kind as the conjectures about whether or not the universe originated fifteen billion years ago with a big bang. In almost all right-handed people the speech area lies on the left. That is true for certainly over 95 percent of right-handed people. It is also true for the great majority of left-handed people. Such human anatomical peculiarities suggest that language and speech as human beings possess it is in some way different from animal communication.

Now I would like to forget about anatomy and function and settle down to the question of how this has come about. There are two schools of thought. There are those who think that obviously evolution has been continuous and therefore the speech area and the gift of speech must be continuous with animal sounds. Then there are others, like Noam Chomsky and in particular Eric Lenneberg, who think that human speech is an altogether specific gift discontinuous from any animal function.2 I do not think that they are right. I think that their view is a misinterpretation which largely rests on a misunderstanding of the way evolution has worked in man. It misses, in my opinion, the fact that human evolution has, I repeat the phrase, been dominated so completely by human culture itself. For the past million years, human culture has been the most important selective influence in making men what they are. So I think that human speech is indeed a continuation of animal communication, and the interesting thing therefore is to see where it differs.

It would be delightful to spend a long time on the enchanting subject of animal communication. The displays of the bower bird when courting his mate, the dance of the honeybees when directing foragers to sources of nectar, the way in which the great crested grebe picks up bits of weed from the bottom of a lake and presents it to his spouse while preening his feathers and flapping his wings—these are subjects to which I cannot do justice.

The central thing to keep in mind about animal communication is that it is communication: an animal makes a noise or emits some other signal which influences other animals, not itself. It would be pointless to say it is trying to influence other animals. I do not even know what you are trying to do when you communicate, and I certainly do not know what animals are trying to do. But it is clear that, for instance, an animal utters a cry of alarm because natural selection has operated in favor of those animals which uttered the cry of alarm and in favor of those other members of their species which heeded the cry and took cover. It is an obviously well worked out self-correcting survival mechanism. And it does not operate only within a particular species, because Thorpe has observed birds heed the alarm cry of a bird of an entirely different species whose cry has no sound in common with their own alarm cry.3

It is clear that this kind of noise—cries of alarm or hunger, courtship gestures or noises, cries to signal that the individual has found food—form a very restricted vocabulary, which, so far as we know, is built into the animal genetically, both in emission and in response. Sometimes the messages are quite complicated. For instance, according to von Frisch, honeybees signal the location of a rich source of nectar by running a sort of figure eight in which the direction of the main line points to where the food is, and the speed at which the figure is run is an estimate of the distance away.4 And this system seems to work very well. Von Frisch’s most recent work has shown the story to be rather more complicated than this,5 but in effect it is still only a mechanical system. Although only dwarf bees actually run on the flat outside the hive, more sophisticated bees run vertically on the combs. Such bees substitute the direction of gravity for the direction of the sun and they measure this angle by the sun as against the vertical. And when they do not see the sun, because they are sensitive to polarized light, they know where the sun is anyway. Even so, we are in the presence of the transmission of a direct signal, and a direct, entirely mechanized response.

Even quite sophisticated animals like the baboon or the rhesus monkey have a total vocabulary of at most a hundred signals, probably nearer forty. About half of these are sounds, and the other half are gestures. And that is a vocabulary that every member of the tribe knows, and every member interprets the signals in exactly the same way.

The baboons, for instance, send watchers to the outskirts of their colonies because they lead rather complex lives. (Like human beings, they have come down off the trees, and they are not really very suited to running about on land, and so they keep very careful guard.) And when you hear a baboon make that barking sound which says, “Danger,” all the baboons scatter. I have seen a film in which this sound has been reproduced on tape, and the baboons go on scattering without ever any thought. They usually do not say “Oh, Jim’s barking again, he’s always crying wolf. Pay no attention.” It usually wouldn’t be wise to wait and see if a leopard really did appear in order to check up on Jim. However, if the animal giving the alarm is a young one, the troop adults may well check out the source of alarm before running away on the word of an inexperienced youngster. You know, fifty years from now we shall all realize that primates have many rudimentary human attributes. But today we are making simple black and white distinctions, and it is essential to understand that we are in the presence not of a language but of a code of signals. The primates’ code is like the things that the military use which is simply set out in a book, and one five-digit number represents one thing, and another five-digit number represents another thing, and you cannot move them around. Zhinkin in Russia has made a most elaborate attempt to decode the language of the baboon in order to show that a baboon might possibly say the same thing in two different ways.6 And he has written a very weighty paper, full of mathematics, at the end of which the analysis shows that although baboons can say a great many things in a very small number of grunts and cries, they have only one way to say any one thing.

Now human language differs from this in a number of respects. Perhaps I can introduce the first difference by saying something about the most interesting of all animal signals, silence. You will remember a passage from “Silver Blaze,” a Sherlock Holmes story, in which the conversation goes like this: Inspector Gregory says to Holmes, “Is there any other point to which you would wish to draw my attention?” And Holmes says, “To the curious incident of the dog in the night-time.” Gregory, who is an absolute sucker for falling into this kind of trap, replies at once, “The dog did nothing in the night-time.” “That was the curious incident,” remarks Holmes.

Now we know as the result of work which Fabre first published in 1853 that in fact doing nothing is quite an important animal activity.7 When he was observing grasshoppers, Fabre was much struck by the fact that, when he stayed still, they were all dashing about like mad, yet they never seemed to take fright. But whenever he moved, all the grasshoppers in the field started furiously moving about and taking fright. It took him a long time to realize that the reason was this: when a grasshopper is about to jump, he makes a little noise, which for convenience I will call “goodbye.” Then all the other grasshoppers know that he is about to move. If the grasshopper moves without first announcing that he is going to move, that is the curious incident of the dog in the night-time—and the other grasshoppers know that something is wrong. And you can see for yourself that this has an enormous selective advantage because the poor animal that is killed without being able to utter that farewell “goodbye” is in fact alerting all his neighbors to the fact that there is something wrong. Similar signals have been found for rooks and other birds. Now there again you have this mechanical thing, silence as a one-way signal that spells “Danger.” Silence is one of the most interesting of human reactions, and of course among human beings it does not necessarily signify danger. So let us now look at the way in which human language differs.

First of all, the human response to another human signal is rather slow, compared to most animal responses. Unlike the bees that run off to fetch nectar, we do not answer at once. Indeed, we have a rather long delay period. This is certainly something physiological that happened quite early in human evolution, this delay time in the circuit between input through the ear and output through the mouth. It really is the first thing that makes human response possible.

We sometimes teach ourselves how to make this kind of delay. My father used to say to me, “When you are really very angry, count up to twenty before you say anything at all.” And someone to whom I told this recently said that in his household, which was a Roman Catholic one, you were asked to say a paternoster first—a rather more pious version of the same insistence that there shall be a delay after the input in order to avoid uttering a hasty reply. Why? Because you are angry. And that shows you what the delay has done to human speech in general. We are able to separate information from emotional content, or affect, when we interpret or frame messages.

Now that is an enormous evolutionary step. We have no evidence of that in any other animal (except perhaps my friend the chimpanzee whom symbolically you must always think of as grinning over my shoulder and saying, “Well, it is not quite as simple as that”). We are able to get at what the message says and to separate it from the emotional charge which the message also carries. That is not true of animals. For them the message is a unitary signal. And for reasons of natural selection you can see that this has got to be so. This conclusion is fairly recent, however. For instance, when the dancing of the bees was first discovered, people said, “Oh, the bees are just excited.” People knew that the bees danced before they went to a rich source of nectar, but they supposed that this was just the result of general excitement. Bees do dance when they are excited but they also dance when they are not excited. And they are just as accurate in describing their figure eight, in pointing it the right way, and in controlling the speed of the dance which carries the message whether the source of nectar they have discovered is rich or poor. They do not dance so many times when they have discovered a poor source of honey: but whereas in a state of excitement we would go wrong, you and I, pointing the wrong way, going too fast, and so on, they do not.

This extraordinary way in which the code message does not lose its accuracy as the result of its emotional charge is of the first importance. But it is, of course, also an enormous handicap to animals because it really means that they cannot convey information at all. They can really only convey instruction. Information, like the cry of “wolf,” allows you to interpret it. If you cannot separate emotional charge from the information, then you cannot interpret it. This is why I constantly make a distinction between information and instruction, and say that all animal and machine languages are essentially instructions. The subject of my lectures, “the origins of knowledge and imagination,” would be inconceivable in a world of animal or machine languages because you cannot convey knowledge in a language in which these two things are always and indissolubly linked in the message. For the same reason you cannot say that one animal has a good style and the other animal has a bad style, because we put style into what we say by deciding what kind of color or emotional affect to give the statement.

Now this first step in the evolution of human languages is undoubtedly a straightforward physiological one. But the steps from here on are largely dominated by a step that went hand in hand with it, and that is the emergence of foresight in human beings (I mean to say, hominids and prehominids) somewhere between a million and two million years ago.

We have clear evidence that at least half a million years ago (perhaps, as recent discoveries suggest, as much as two million years ago or more8) there were primitive early types of man who not only used stone tools, but actually stored them in advance. And this curious find at Olduvai of pebbles, some of them unworked pebbles, which have been brought a couple of miles from the river bed and kept ready for use in the dwellings is the first and spectacular sign of one of those great developments that is unique to the human race, the ability consistently to foresee a use for things in advance.

Human beings are not the only tool users. Indeed, you have all seen enough photographs by Jane Goodall and her husband to know that chimpanzees use long sticks or stems to poke into ants’ nests. They even prepare the sticks by pulling the leaves off stems, and they go some distance to gather them, but they never lay in a supply in advance. When they see the ants’ nest they start looking round and say, “It would be a good idea to have a stick.” Similarly, members of one species of Darwin’s finches in the Galapagos Islands (which, because they behave like woodpeckers but have only the beaks of finches, require some probe to get at their food) tear off thorns and poke under the bark with them, which is an extraordinary ability. But none of them spends the evening going round and tearing off a nice tidy supply of a dozen probes for tomorrow. Foresight is so obviously of great evolutionary advantage that one would say, “Why haven’t all animals used it and come up with it?” But the fact is that obviously it is a very strange accident. And I guess as human beings we must all pray that it will not strike any other species.

Foresight is tied with the later development of the brain in the second thing that is special to human speech. This is what I call the “prolongation of reference,” the ability to use language so that it applies not only to what is going on now but to what went on or to what will go on. Animal signals naturally do not have this reference. Prolongation of reference is a part of human speech which is connected with the high selective advantage that foresight conferred.

If you will allow me an aside, there is nothing Lamarckian about this conception of cultural selection that I am putting forward; it is quite simple. As soon as foresight occurs, as soon as there are men and women in the species who know how to pick up a stone in advance, then there is an obvious advantage in favor of those who are good at handling stones and in favor of those who have foresight. In no time at all they either get all the girls or all the men; they have many more offspring; and they can keep themselves alive when other people starve. It is the ordinary selective mechanism operating. So although the use of the tools is a cultural phenomenon, that cultural phenomenon imposes itself and causes natural selection in its own favor. And one of its reflections in language is the prolongation of reference into the past and into the future.

The third feature that is unique to human speech is internalization. I said earlier that animals address their species at large, or possibly even members of another species, either to frighten them off or to communicate with them, but they do not, so far as we can tell, address themselves. The internalization of language is a human phenomenon of profound importance.

I believe that it goes hand in hand with these questions about tool use and tool making for the following reasons. Visualize a man who is chipping a stone tool of the kind that we have now found to be at least a million years old. To him every stroke is an experiment, and he can judge its success by looking at the stone. He throws away ones that go wrong (most of those we find, of course, are ones that were thrown away). He also sometimes has models, and the model is not only a record, but a blueprint. A very important aspect of every technological tool is that it is not only a record of how it was made, but a blueprint of how others are to be made. It carries its own prolongation, its own history, and its own look into the future. And in order for the man who is making a tool to ask himself whether he is successful or not he must internalize, he must carry on an interior dialogue with himself of the kind that all of you have carried on when you whittle something or when you have stood over the stove and something has gone wrong.

Human beings have a wholly unique gift in the use of language, and that is that they talk to themselves. Everybody does it, all the time. At this moment every one of you is carrying on an internal dialogue and a considerable part of it is actually taking place in words. You have a lot of irrelevant thoughts about what you are going to wear tonight or where you are going to be or how long the lecture is going to last, but you do not put such thoughts into words because they are not specific, you are just conscious that you are thinking about how much longer without actually saying it to yourself. But as soon as you say to yourself, “I wonder whether the chimpanzee is really exceptional or whether the orangutan is the same,” then at once you are thinking something highly specific, and such things cannot be thought without words.

And that leads me to point number four, which is that gift linguists usually call the productivity or generativity of language. Because of this strange gift one can say “John loves Lucy” and “Lucy loves John” and, at least in a language like English which does not have any exterior signs of cases, they are indistinguishable except that the words are in a different order and the phrases mean different things. Now we know no animal language in which you can rearrange the noises and get a new meaning. (I should warn you there is a small amount of dispute about this. There are bird lovers who say that birds do rearrange their songs and that they do mean something different, and there are even some insect lovers who say the same thing about insect noises.) But by and large and keeping to the simple outline, this structure in human language is unique.

This grammatical structure is called stratification, making layers of language, and it depends essentially on the fact that this message can be broken down into three different concepts, a man called “John,” a girl called “Lucy,” and an action called “love.” No animal does this. Indeed its universe is not of that kind. That is why it is so important to seize this concept. The animal lives in a universe in which the animal and universe are in constant communication, and the animal does not separate any action from the outside universe. You can see for yourself how this would happen. If, like a dog, for instance, you lived wholly by smell, you would find it very difficult to visualize what was going on. Human beings analyze the outside world in a different way. They analyze it into objects and actions. How? It begins in language itself.

You know there is a splendid biblical phrase, “In the beginning was the word.” Now although this is a very important thing to say about human beings, it is quite untrue about the evolution of messages in general. In the beginning was the sentence. An animal utters a cry which is a sentence, and he cannot take it apart and put the back first and the front afterward. Indeed, when you try to do this to birds, for instance, when you try to play their song to them after rephrasing it and arranging the figures differently, they are as distressed as a musician who hears the wrong movement played first. It does not go that way. The animal message is a sentence, and when we started speaking, like the baboons, we must have started in sentences. And the great thing that happened to us was that we learned to take the sentence apart. Nobody knows how this happened, and it is really the great mystery about how human language came to be. Nobody would believe that it could happen, except for the fact that it actually has.

Let me give you an illustration. The chipmunk has three different alarm signals. One of them says that there is danger from a bird, one of them says that there is danger from a snake, and one of them says that there is danger from a largish ground animal. It makes these without error however excited it is; indeed, the greater the danger, the more accurate the signal is. Nothing in the chipmunk’s vocabulary enables it to separate the idea of danger and the personality of the predator. What has happened in human language is that from the multiplicity of signals saying danger from here, danger from there, we have slowly been able to generalize the conception of danger and particularize the conception of the predator. And in that way, by what I call reconstitution, we have built a world of outside objects, a world which does not exist for animals.

Now, both linguists and philosophers (Wittgenstein in his later work, for instance) are full of the miracle that we can arrange words in different ways. But all of them overlook the central problem and point of interest, which is that before you can arrange words in different ways something else must happen. You have got to ask yourself, “How did the words come to fall out of the sentence in the first place?” And that is a real miracle, the one depicted in the Byzantine mosaics in which the Virgin Mary conceives the Christ when a ray of light falling from the star enters her ear and the inscription says, “In the beginning was the word and the word was made flesh,” at least, it is the modern interpretation of that miracle.

Now our consciousness depends wholly on our seeing the outside world in such categories. And the problems of consciousness arise from putting reconstitution beside internalization, from our also being able to see ourselves as if we were objects in the outside world. That is in the very nature of language; it is impossible to have a symbolic system without it.

I shall be speaking in the third and particularly the fourth lecture of all the difficulties that arise from this remarkable and wholly human gift that allows us first of all to separate ourselves from the outside world. We see that there is a world of things; we recognize it as permanent; we move it about; we are able to rearrange it in our heads from “John loves Lucy” to “Lucy loves John,” which no one supposes to be the same statement. And with that goes inevitably a sense of ourselves, sometimes also as an outside person. The Cartesian dualism between mind and body arises directly from this, and so do all the famous paradoxes, both in mathematics and in linguistics, to which I shall return.
