4

The Laws of Nature and the Nature of Laws


In my third lecture I gave an account of science as a language which has been constructed in much the way that I had suggested all human languages have evolved. And I said that on decoding the cryptogram of nature we arrive at a language of true sentences to which three kinds of entities contributed. As a result of decoding, we pick out inferred entities or units or concepts for whose existence we have no direct evidence—gravitation was one example I gave, also mass, the electron, inhibition. Those are the fundamental words which have been evolved in the language exactly as in any human language words for objects and actions have evolved. The sentences are held together by a grammar which tells us what kind of sentence we are allowed to put the unit into. The example that I used was that the gravitational force between two masses is equal to a constant times the product of the masses divided by the square of the distance: that is a sentence that you are allowed to say. You are not allowed to say in the language the same sentence if you put r3 at the bottom. That is the grammar.

The grammar consists of sentences which are explanations. And then those sentences translate into the real world by a dictionary of translation which tells us how we actually test, confirm, and perceive the fact. For instance, in any specific context, such a sentence translates into some action that takes place. You put two charged electric spheres next to one another in a laboratory, and a movement takes place which is the physical translation of that sentence. And there is a dictionary which says how that is to be translated into the actual world. So much for the language.

Then I asked, Are the things in the language real? Do the inferred units exist? Does the electron exist? Let us take a really highly unlikely particle. Does the neutrino exist? And then, are the explanatory sentences true, is the grammar true? Is Newton’s formula a true sentence? Does it really say how masses act? I drew your attention to the fact that though it seemed to be true when it was written (essentially in 1666), it did not seem to be true in 1966 because other explanations had taken its place. How did this come about?

You will recall that I made rather vividly the point that the extraordinary thing that has happened in the last hundred years is that science has kept on revising the explanations and inventing new inferred or fundamental units in the most radical way. I remember Blackett once saying to me when he was reading a paper about a new fundamental particle that something had happened and the paper was now going to be about two new fundamental particles. And he said with some embarrassment, “We really try only to have one new particle per paper.”

You remember that I drew a chemical equation on the board for Glauber’s salts. But let us, in celebration of the fact that Hans Bethe has got the Nobel Prize since I spoke, consider a different sentence:

4H1(hydrogen) → He4(helium) + 2є+ + 2β + 2γ

This is somewhat simplified (do not actually believe it just the way it stands), but it says essentially that hydrogen becomes helium. Now this involves inferred units: no one has seen a helium atom. But in addition a grammar of explanation was invented by Bethe in the 1930s as to how it went; it went by four steps through carbon.1 This grammar of explanation was entirely new, and moreover it is not the main way that we read the grammar now. Now the dominant equation that creates this is written rather differently, and the steps that Bethe portrayed are no longer regarded as the only ones or even as the most important ones. How has this come about?

Well, I made a radical proposal. I said that it is all due to the fact that none of our explanations can be true, that in some sense there is no ultimate truth accessible to us for the simple reason we have to make a cut in the universe in order to do the experiment at all. We have to decide what is relevant and what is irrelevant. Since I hold that the universe is totally connected, that every fact has some influence on every other fact, then it follows that any cut you make at all is a convenient simplification. But in essence it is a distortion, and you are now decoding only a part of the total of sentences. So it is natural that your decoding cannot be right. And it is not surprising that while you keep on getting approximate good answers (the answers are better and better as you progress because you exclude less and less), it is in principle out of the question that we should ever have an ultimate explanation. That would involve setting up experiments in which the whole of the universe was perceived from a God’s eye view.

I do not think that there is a God’s eye view of nature, that there is a truth, an accessible truth of this kind. The words that I used were that, while the universe is totally connected, we cannot extricate ourselves from our own finiteness. And, therefore, we do this decoding by a highly imaginative, creative piece of guesswork. But we finish with something which is only a gigantic metaphor for that part of the universe which we are decoding.

I have said all that again because that is what I have been working up to for three weeks, and today I am going to look at it in a more rigorous context, the context of theorems in mathematics. I am going to be talking about mathematics not as an abstract system, but as a formal language for extracting something from the universe. And the moment I have said that, of course, it is quite clear that we have already made a cut. We are already talking only about things which can be expressed in mathematical equations. But mathematics, of course, has been the most powerful scientific tool ever invented. It has had enormous success, oh, since the time of the Greeks, but especially over the last three hundred years. And if what I have said is true, then it ought to be reflected in the theorems of mathematics. Now mathematics very clearly exhibits this structure: that is, inferred units (for example, ideal points which are not really points) and a grammar of explanation that is called the axiomatic system. It does not exhibit a dictionary of translation, however, unless you decide to apply it to the real world.

Now treating mathematics as if it were made up of concepts or inferred units held together by a grammar is the kind of axiomatic system which originally was invented by the great mathematicians of Greece and of Alexandria. Many of the old difficulties were already known to Euclid. For instance, it was already known in Euclid’s time that there was some doubt about what is called the postulate of parallels. (In England, it is sometimes called Playfair’s axiom.) Although the doubt was not resolved for over two thousand years, the Greeks knew about it. They did not call the axiom of parallels an axiom, they called it a postulate. It is one of the very interesting things embedded in scientific literature that the Greeks believed the status of some mathematical axioms to be less certain than that of others. They were bothered about the completeness and the consistency of the axioms.

However, everything seemed to be going fine. Late in the 1890s Bertrand Russell wrote a splendid book about the foundations of geometry and became a fellow of Trinity as a result. Then in 1900 he started writing the great work on mathematics which has to some extent formed the whole of our outlook in this century. Let me therefore read to you from Bertrand Russell’s autobiography the things he felt in the summer of 1900 when everything seemed wonderful—to be alive was very heaven.2

Russell recounts that in the summer of 1900 he went to a congress at which he got to know Peano. Although Peano’s methods had been known to him, until then he had never really troubled very much about Peano’s logical characters. At that time, however, Russell realized that there was a great clue there, and he just went home and spent that summer reading.

It became clear to me that his [Peano’s] notation afforded an instrument of logical analysis such as I had been seeking for years, and that by studying him I was acquiring a new and powerful technique for the work that I had long wanted to do. By the end of August I had become completely familiar with all the work of his school. I spent September [we’re speaking of September 1900] in extending his methods to the logic of relations. It seems to me in retrospect that, through that month, every day was warm and sunny.

I think that is a marvelous phrase to give you the impression of how well the work was going. Of course, you never noticed the weather but it all seemed tremendous.

The Whiteheads stayed with us at Fernhurst, and I explained my new ideas to him. Every evening the discussion ended with some difficulty, and every morning I found that the difficulty of the previous evening had solved itself while I slept. The time was one of intellectual intoxication. My sensations resembled those one has after climbing a mountain in a mist, when, on reaching the summit, the mist suddenly clears, and the country becomes visible for forty miles in every direction. For years I had been endeavouring to analyse the fundamental notions of mathematics, such as order and cardinal numbers. Suddenly, in the space of a few weeks, I discovered what appeared to be definitive answers to the problems which had baffled me for years. And in the course of discovering these answers, I was introducing a new mathematical technique, by which regions formerly abandoned to the vaguenesses of philosophers were conquered for the precision of exact formulae. Intellectually, the month of September 1900 was the highest point of my life. I went about saying to myself that now at last I had done something worth doing, and I had the feeling that I must be careful not to be run over in the street before I had written it down.

And then he started writing, and he had almost got to the end of the book, which he had hoped to finish by New Year’s Day (he counted 1 January 1901 as the beginning of the century, and he wanted to get the book done in the old century). And then he ran into a difficulty:

At the end of the Lent Term, Alys and I went back to Fernhurst, where I set to work to write out the logical deduction of mathematics which afterwards became Principia Mathematica. I thought the work was nearly finished, but in the month of May I had an intellectual set-back almost as severe as the emotional set-back which I had had in February. Cantor [this is Georg Cantor] had a proof that there is no greatest number, and it seemed to me that the number of all the things in the world ought to be the greatest possible. Accordingly, I examined his proof with some minuteness, and endeavoured to apply it to the class of all the things there are. This led me to consider those classes which are not members of themselves, and to ask whether the class of such classes is or is not a member of itself. I found that either answer implies its contradictory. At first I supposed that I should be able to overcome the contradiction quite easily, and that probably there was some trivial error in the reasoning. Gradually, however, it became clear that this was not the case. Burali-Forti had already discovered a similar contradiction, and it turned out on logical analysis that there was an affinity [with earlier paradoxes] …. It seemed unworthy of a grown man to spend his time on such trivialities, but what was I to do? There was something wrong, since such contradictions were unavoidable on ordinary premises. Trivial or not, the matter was a challenge. Throughout the latter half of 1901 I supposed the solution would be easy, but by the end of that time I had concluded that it was a big job. I therefore decided to finish The Principles of Mathematics, leaving the solution in abeyance. In the autumn Alys and I went back to Cambridge, as I had been invited to give two terms’ lectures on mathematical logic. These lectures contained the outline of Principia Mathematica, but without any method of dealing with the contradictions.

And lest you should think that this disaster in his intellectual life was his only problem, let me read you the next few sentences:

About the time that these lectures finished, when we were living with the Whiteheads at the Mill House in Granchester, a more serious blow fell than those that preceded it. I went out bicycling one afternoon, and suddenly, as I was riding along a country road, I realized that I no longer loved Alys [his wife].

Now I have quoted this fairly extensively because sometimes we think that all the problems in trying to make mathematics exact have arisen in comparatively recent years; say since Gödel in 1931. But of course, Russell’s difficulties in May 1901 prove that this is not so.

What Russell had been trying to do was to show that all mathematics (that is, all the grammatical manipulations that we carry on with figures) can be analyzed as straightforward logical operations. You can deal with infinitesimals, you can deal with classes, you can deal with limits, you can deal with group theory—everything will work out. Now what he found was that this was not so. And though he devised ways round it, the very fact that the passages I have been reading to you concern 1900-01, but the Principia Mathematica with Whitehead did not begin to be published until 1910, shows that the devices that he invented, the theory of types, did not even satisfy him.

Shortly after that David Hilbert put the thing quite squarely. He said, “We really have to answer the following question. Is it or is it not the case that any sensible mathematical proposition that I can write down can or cannot be proved to be true from the mathematical axioms?” Let me give you a very simple example. Suppose I ask the question, “Is every positive number the sum of four or less squares?” The answer to that question is “Yes, and I can prove it.” Supposing I ask the question, “Is every even number the sum of two prime numbers?” The answer to that question is that this was an hypothesis first made by Goldbach more than two hundred years ago, and to this day nobody knows whether it is true or false. Now you might say, “Well, that is ridiculous; you just go on looking at every even number and so you check the theorem.” (That is right! I mean that is absolutely what you do.)

All mathematics consists of doing that, but generally speaking, it involves finding shortcuts to doing it. For instance, if you want to prove that every positive number is the sum of four or less squares, you will very soon find that all you have to do is to classify the numbers into primes and nonprimes, then you show first that it is true of all primes, and then that if it is true of any two numbers it is true of their product. You have found a shortcut.

Now the question which Hilbert raised, and which was answered in the negative by my colleagues in the 1930s is this: Are there general procedures for finding shortcuts? That is a good question. If you look at a map there is a procedure for finding a shortcut, but if you look at mathematics, there is no such procedure. And we might take as typical, for instance, the theorem proved by Turing in 1936 which simply says that you cannot be sure when a proof will turn up.3 You can go on totting up the even numbers, you can go on seeing if they are the sums of two primes, but there is absolutely no way of saying in advance when you are going to come on one which is not, so that you have disproved the theorem, or whether you ever are.

It is therefore certain that Hitler’s … I am so sorry … Hilbert’s (I do apologize to the memory of a very great man, David Hilbert) that Hilbert’s Entscheidungs-problem (in the very simple form in which Turing, Alonzo Church, Kline, and so on answered it) is decisively answered. There is no way of making mathematical decisions; there are always theorems whose proofs may or may not turn up. Turing actually did this by mechanizing it. He loved making little machines, and so he invented a device called a Turing machine, and the most important thing that we know is that all mechanisms which, like science, are of this kind are expressible as Turing machines.

However, long before Turing had actually answered that part of the problem, it had first of all been set as an examination question to me and to Max Black in Cambridge in 1930. We did not answer very satisfactorily. But in 1931 a young Austrian called Kurt Gödel published a very remarkable paper called “Part I,” (“Part II” has never been published) in which he proved something much stronger and which took the Entscheidungsproblem in its stride.4 Gödel proved that if you have an axiomatic system of this sort (a formal system, with formal symbols and formal rules of manipulation), there are two things wrong with it. In the first place, if it is consistent, then there are statements that it cannot prove. And not only are there statements that it cannot prove, but there are also true statements that it cannot prove.

Now that is much more troublesome than just saying you will never come to them if you go on and on, however long. On the contrary, there are statements which human mathematicians can actually exhibit and say to you, “I can prove to you this is true, but the machine cannot.” “All right,” you say, “well, feed it into the machine.” Now the machine has an extra axiom which you could not prove before, and it is well away. No! No! Now I have a machine of one higher order, a system of one higher order, but I can construct a sentence of the next higher order which the machine cannot prove; and so we go on indefinitely. In other words, if an axiomatic system is consistent, then there are perfectly intelligible statements which it cannot prove. We do not know whether Goldbach’s hypothesis about the sum of two primes is or is not such a statement, but there are statements that it cannot prove. And we can actually exhibit such statements.

I said, “If an axiomatic system is consistent …” If the system is inconsistent, of course, we are well away because then it can prove anything. But, unfortunately, it now no longer distinguishes between true and false propositions. An inconsistent system is perfectly all right; it can prove the sentences that I can prove. But since it can prove anything, it is absolutely useless. Let me tell you a little story about this which is always ascribed to Bertrand Russell. I did not actually hear him say this, so it may be a fable. (I do not mean that everything that Bertrand Russell did not say in my presence is a fable. But there is obviously a higher incidence of fables among things he said when I was not there!) Russell is reputed at a dinner party once to have said, “Oh, it is useless talking about inconsistent things, from an inconsistent proposition you can prove anything you like.” Well, it is very easy to show this by mathematical means. But, as usual, Russell was much cleverer than this. Somebody at the dinner table said, “Oh, come on!” He said, “Well, name an inconsistent proposition,” and the man said, “Well, what shall we say, 2 = 1.” “All right,” said Russell, “what do you want me to prove?” The man said, “I want you to prove that you are the pope.” “Why,” said Russell, “the pope and I are two, but two equals one, therefore the pope and I are one.”

So it is useless to deal with inconsistent systems. Yet we have the fact that every closed formal system, if it is consistent, is not able to prove statements that I can prove standing outside the system. And we have the additional fact that if the system is inconsistent, it can prove anything, but it is useless. Now what does this say? It says that the reach of all formal systems is limited. When you axiomatize an arithmetical or mathematical system, you automatically impose a limit on it. In the phrase that I have used earlier, you cut the universe in half.

I have been demonstrating this to you only in the case of mathematics. Of course, it does not follow from what I have said that these theorems are true about the real world. It might be that nature is just clever enough to avoid all the pitfalls of these theorems in her actual activity. I believe that there are good grounds for saying that that is not the case. But there also are forms of mathematics which you could use in nature which are not subject to Gödel’s theorem. This is not a subject that I want to go into (it is a subject I would love to go into, but it is not a subject that I can go into as part of what I am saying today). So you must just take it that it is my view that what I have been saying today about mathematics, and particularly about arithmetic and theory of numbers (the very simplest branches of mathematics), is in fact a model of what I said in the previous lectures about natural systems. It is the axiomatization, it is the formalization of the system which produces the trouble.

Nature is not a gigantic formalizable system. In order to formalize it, we have to make some assumptions which cut out some parts. We then lose the total connectivity. And what we get is a superb metaphor, but it is not a system which can embrace the whole of nature. We are really saying that there is no system of axioms which can embrace the whole of nature, or for that matter the whole of mathematics. We therefore cannot attain the great wish that we have had ever since the days of Thomas Hobbes and Newton: we will never be able to exhibit the whole of physics one fine day as a gorgeous system with about six axioms and a few operations, and from that moment everything would fall into place. You would know why, for example, flowers that grow at high altitude are often blue, whereas flowers that grow at low altitude are often red. Anything that you could ask would follow from the axiomatic system. That is obviously a hopeless task. What I have been trying to show is that whether you approach it in a strictly formal way from the mathematics or in the more informal way in which I discussed it in the last lecture, you always come to the same conclusion: no formal system embraces all the questions that can be asked.

In other words, when I said this system is going to consist of true sentences, the fact is that truth is in many ways the problem. You can prove everything if you no longer distinguish between truth and falsehood. But if you insist on truth and want to do it in an axiomatic system, then there are things which you can show to be true, but which you cannot bring back to the formalism of the system. And if you then force them into the system, then you can show that something else is true which in turn you have to force back in, so that you have an endless regress of axioms that you have to add all the time.

Now we are, roughly speaking, in the same position as Gorgias of Leontium, Plato’s least favorite sophist. Plato accused Gorgias of holding that “there is no truth, if there were it could not be comprehended—and if comprehended, it could not be communicated.” In some sense, we have this feeling. But of course, we have it only if we ask that absolute systems be constructed which have this simple form. Now the question is, How did it all come about? Why do these theorems occur? And how is it that we are able to prove things to be true when they will not go into the system?

Now Gödel’s proof, Russell’s original paradox, all these things, all stem from one common root which is inherent in all symbolic languages, including the language we use. This is the problem which dogs all formal systems, the problem of self-reference; that is, the language can be used to refer to sentences in the language. Indeed, between 1900 and 1910 Russell tried to forbid this, to say you cannot do mathematics if you do that, and so he invented the theory of types. Of course, no sooner had he invented it than it turned up that you could not do mathematics at all if you obeyed the theory of types. So then he had to put in an axiom of reducibility, which allows a certain amount of self-reference. And by this time everybody was pretty bored.

The problem of self-reference is a classical paradox of Greek literature, in which it is usually referred to as the paradox of the liar, or the paradox of Epimenides the Cretan. Epimenides the Cretan said, “All Cretans are liars.” And that is a statement which patently leaves you in a paradox. If all Cretans are liars, then what he is uttering is not true, and therefore he is not a liar at that moment; and if on the other hand, all Cretans are not liars, then what he is saying is true, and therefore all Cretans are liars. To put this into slightly more precise terms, I will read you Bertrand Russell’s exposition of this particular paradox. I cut it out of the passage I read to you before, so that we should not get there too fast.

A contradiction essentially similar to that of Epimenides can be created by giving a person a piece of paper on which is written: “The statement on the other side of this paper is false.” The person turns the paper over, and finds on the other side: “The statement on the other side of this paper is true.”

And this is why he says in the next sentence, which I did read to you, “It seemed unworthy of a grown man to spend his time on such trivialities, but what was I to do?” I think, myself, that is a very elegant form of the paradox. You think of a piece of paper, and you write on one side that what is written on the other side is untrue, and then you write on the other side that what is written on the other side is true. It is left as an exercise for the student to see that you cannot possibly get out of this paradox. Why is this a paradox? Because to use the phrase, “the statement is” at once puts you into a universe of discourse in which you are no longer using this language to describe things but statements about things. And now you cannot get out.

Indeed, a much more powerful theorem than any of those that I have quoted so far was in fact proved by Alfred Tarski, my favorite among these philosophers because he is a fellow Pole. In 1931, Tarski proved quite simply that all this amounts to saying that there is no complete language of science.5 If you look at Tarski’s proof, it essentially consists in showing that, as soon as you not only exhibit the statements but add to them the statement, “is true,” you are in trouble because you are bound to be landed in contradictions like the one which arises in the Epimenides paradox.

It may seem a very long way from this to mathematics and to physics, but it has really been my business in these lectures to take you exactly that way in order to show how enormously closely linked our whole universe of discourse and thought really is. It is of the nature of human language that among the things that it talks about is itself. It is of the nature of human beings that among the things they talk about are themselves. And if you wish to issue a decree that they should not do this, then you move as I did by a slip of the tongue from the universe of Hilbert to the universe of Hitler. Nobody wants to talk in such a way as to be prevented from talking about themselves. Bless my soul! There would be universal silence. References to yourself are an essential part of our consciousness.

The power of literature, the strength of, say, the lines I quoted in the first lecture from Yeats about her “honey-coloured hair,” arises from the fact that we both know what it feels like to be the man in love, and we also know what it feels like to be the woman that is being loved. And the old Greek fable about Tiresias, who had been both sexes at different stages of his life, in some profound way is absolutely true. At any rate our humanity depends on both having in our consciousness a sense of self, and yet also knowing that inside every other person there is a self like ourselves. Now that is very fine to say about literature, and everybody understands it, but the real thunderclap of 1931-36 was to show that you could not do science and deny this. Now that really was unexpected. The notion that you really cannot get rid of the paradoxes of self-reference from what seemed to be the ordinary descriptive sentences of science is very strange. The point is that these paradoxes enter into the language of science because we not only want to write sentences in science, we want to say about them that they are true or false. And at once we are back in the universe in which we are using a language in which we refer to ourselves.

In order to say this quite firmly let me just say one more thing. I have told you that Tarski’s proof that there is no complete closed scientific language depends on showing that as soon as you introduce the words “is true” you get paradoxes. I told you that Turing’s proofs (and the allied proofs of other people) depend on showing that certain things cannot be done in a finite time. I should just tell you what Gödel’s proof consists of. What Gödel proved was that no consistent system of axioms can capture all the truths of arithmetic. Any consistent axiomatization is incomplete. The trick he used was to provide a scheme for translating propositions about numbers into propositions about the provability of propositions about numbers. And the crux of his argument is to show how, for any given axiomatization of arithmetic, to produce a proposition about numbers which is true, but which under his ingenious translation scheme “says of itself” that it is not provable from the axioms. So, like the liar paradox, which Gödel cites as one of his sources of inspiration, the result depends crucially upon self-reference.

Now what are we going to do about all this? The answer is straightforward. We have to accept the fact that that is how we do science, that it is essentially a crisis of mechanism in the sense that all science is a Turing machine which is the model of any machine that we can now conceive. But, of course, when there is a crisis of mechanism, you obviously do not get out of your car and start walking. One has, at this stage, simply to admit that mechanism is not a solution to the problem of the universe but a strategy, just as induction and all previous methods of doing science were.

We go on doing science in exactly the same mechanistic way because that is the one strategy by which we make progress. When I first discussed these concepts some years ago, I gave a talk not unlike this, and one of my listeners was Pauling. Pauling got very impatient towards the end of the talk and said to me, “Tell me one operational way in which what you are saying would make me do science differently.” To which the answer is, “No, we know no other way of doing science.” But it is also quite clear that we now have a conception of what the universe is which is different from that which, say, Newton shared with Liebnitz. We have to realize that the total connectivity of nature is something that cannot be imagined in axiomatic systems. To that extent, no proposition that we put, no axiomatic system, no formal language, is ever final. (That is the Incompleteness Theorem.) What is far more important, none of these can possibly be proved to be consistent within the system itself.

I myself think that all explorations of this kind that we do in science are essentially attempts to show that when we run into an inconsistency, we can rearrange the system. As soon as the system runs into a fault, into an inconsistency, the human mind, unlike the machine, has the ability to throw the whole thing away and start building up a new aixomatic system. This is the way general relativity has taken the place of Newton’s system, and no doubt something else will take the place of general relativity.

I do not believe that human beings are consistent either, but I think that they have a strategy for coping with inconsistencies which they meet. Let me invent a phrase on the spur of the moment. What human beings have that machines do not have is superb optimism. You know, the thing breaks down, and by Jove, next day they are at it again. You just heard it in the pieces that I read you out of Bertrand Russell, who was struggling with all this and then gets on his bicycle, goes out, and finds he is not in love with his wife. What happened? He gets divorced, he gets married again, he writes the Principia Mathematica, and he is still at it. The fact that we are content, when running into this kind of difficulty, to reanalyze the system, to seek a new consistent formulation, is terribly important.

Let us make no mistake about it, the Michelson-Morley experiment in a profound sense actually showed that the Newtonian system (at least as Michelson and Morley conceived it) was inconsistent. You could not give light both the kinds of properties that they wanted, or you could not give the ether that kind of property. In a very profound sense relativity was not just a new physical system, it was a new physical system which was forced by the need to remove an inconsistency. And if you read Einstein’s first major paper, he says right at the outset: “I will make the following axioms: that one is not able to detect relative velocity [that’s pretty old] and that the velocity of light is constant for every observer however he measures it.”6 Now there was an impertinent remark to make! There was something which threw out the whole of previous physics because, of course, that is an axiom which is absolutely inconsistent with the way we conceived physics before. Well, I must not go on about physics because I really wanted to talk about poetry and connectivity and so on.

Let me say one more thing. I have said of the “inferred units,” the theoretical concepts of a science, that they form the links in the system. I have said of the “grammar of explanation,” the axiom system of a science, that it is a truth (in so far as there is truth) which we judge by its coherence; whereas through the “dictionary of translation,” which relates abstract theorems to specific problems, we judge that truth by its correspondence. And the fact is that once you think of science as that kind of language, then the usual dilemma of philosophy—the coherence theory of truth versus the correspondence theory of truth—disappears. Why? Because you cannot make a theory of scientific explanation which does not involve both, if you believe the universe to be totally connected. And if you believe that, then you have a very good reason for preferring one axiomatic system to another: namely, that it is more richly connected.

If you think for a moment of some systems that have been connected, you will see at once how important this is. Take, for example, the day that Faraday discovered that electricity and magnetism were in fact connected. He had been doing the experiment the wrong way all the time and then one day when he switched off the current, he saw the needle jump. He realized that he had been looking for the connection at the time when the current was going, and that was just the wrong time. (You know, it is the nature of science, it always happens when you are not looking.) At that moment he showed that magnetism and electricity belong to a common system. As a result, the connectivity of the two sets of axioms became higher. He had invented a richer system. And what we have in this sense of richness is essentially a metaphysic which is the equivalent of Occam’s razor, or rather the notion that is embedded in Occam’s razor, which is that the simpler the hypotheses, the fewer the hypotheses, the more they are to be preferred. And that is saying the same thing as that, if nature is totally connected, then we should prefer those languages or systems which show the highest connection, not because they do in fact show the connections in nature, but because they are coming closest to it.
