5

Error, Progress, and the Concept of Time


The program which I set myself, you will recall, was to put into practice the philosophic project that Immanuel Kant once set himself—how is man’s view of the world dictated by his biological makeup? In the first lecture I talked particularly about how the senses enter our consciousness. I pointed out that it is not true, as eighteenth-century philosophers thought, that our eye is a kind of camera obscura which throws a vision of the world somewhere into our heads for us to inspect. This is a childish notion and appropriate for what might be called the childhood of philosophy. But it is obviously silly to think that, instead of looking out at the world, you sit inside your head and you look at a picture of the world which is projected onto your own brain. The whole notion of the world playing itself over again inside our skull, and then there being a self which looks at that, is plainly foolish. The division between man as a receiver of sensations, and man as a thinker, an actor in the world, is mistaken.

When we look at what the eye does, we become aware that it interprets the world from the outset by a process of inference. Perception itself is a mechanism in which sensations are instantly interpreted by an inferential process. I chose the eye as my example because, of course, vision is one of the two main gifts and privileges that man has which put him immensely ahead of the other animals. In the second lecture I concentrated on the second of these gifts, the gift of speech.

I want to pause for a moment to remind you how intimately this is wrapped up with our whole outlook on the world. There is a sonnet by Shakespeare which begins,

My Mistres eyes are nothing like the Sunne,

Currall is farre more red, then her lips red,

If snow be white, why then her brests are dun

I quote this to you because it is so characteristic of how human beings think of the loved object. In line 1 her eyes, in line 2 her lips, in line 3 her breasts. Now, animals are capable of connecting sexual attraction with the secondary sexual organs like the breasts, but the notion of connecting them first with the eyes or with the mouth is, of course, wholly alien to the animal’s vision of itself. I think it is very remarkable to think that we think of the loved object as first of all something into whose eyes you look, and then something whose mouth you kiss. And the first of these is connected with the prime importance of vision in human beings, and the second with the even greater importance of speech. Vision is our channel to the outside world, speech is our channel of communication with one another.

In my second lecture I made an analysis of animal language as against human language, and I pointed out that we had invented words where animals have only sentences. We have divided the sentence into words, words which stand for objects or words which stand for actions. And those things are not there in the world, they are the way that we perceive the world. Our consciousness of the world is thing-directed and action-directed because that is how we ourselves speak.

With consciousness comes self-consciousness. We think of ourselves also as objects. And all the paradoxes of science and of literature arise from our attempt to speak simultaneously of ourselves both as knowing selves and as known objects. The second of these has a cardinal importance because by it we identify ourselves with other human beings and indeed with all living things. When Albert Schweitzer talks of “reverence for life,” he means that our consciousness is such that because we can equate ourselves with the feeling selves in other animals, we are aware that life is something that goes on inside us all. That was the evolutionary apparatus that I set up in the first and second lectures.

Then in the third and fourth lectures I directed myself to the question, What about science? What about that kind of generalization in which we see the world not only as objects but as classes, as laws, as relations? In the third lecture I presented a view of science as the process of taking the sentences of explanation of how the world works and breaking them into words. And then we invent words like “gravitation” or “electrons,” which are just as much inventions as the words “tree” and “love.” They are just as real, but they are also just as much something which human beings put into their interpretation of the world. An electron is like a tree, it is there. But if you are asked to define a tree, then you run into the same troubles that you run into when you are asked to define an electron. You can say all the things that it does to your present knowledge, you can say why it seems to you to represent an enormous arrangement of the world; but that is all that you know about it. I will remind you that if I were giving this lecture fifty years from now, the word “gravitation” would be just as old-fashioned to the students of that time as the word “phlogiston” is to us. Relativity has certainly demoted gravitation as a real explanation, just as Priestley’s and Lavoisier’s analyses and decoding of chemical reactions destroyed the word “phlogiston.” When Priestley isolated oxygen and when Lavoisier then said, “Well, all the things that we have been looking on as phlogistication and dephlogistication are oxidation reactions,” that was a new decoding in which oxygen played a new part, and phlogiston was dead. And just so curvature of space-time for the generation two or three after ours will kill gravitation.

There is no permanence to scientific concepts because they are only our interpretations of natural phenomena. Why are they only provisional? Because—and this was the central point of my third lecture—the part of the world that we can inspect and analyze is always finite. We always have to say the rest of the world does not influence this part, and it is never true. We merely make a temporary invention which covers that part of the world accessible to us at the moment. Who would have thought when I was an undergraduate that there is an evolution in the stars, that hydrogen is built up into helium, and that this is the beginning of a great hierarchy of the elements which at last explains Mendeleef’s periodic table. What has happened? We have suddenly discovered that parts of the universe which did not seem relevant to the laboratory, the sun and the stars, are in fact laboratories themselves. And once we inspected them, we got a larger integration of the connections in nature which gave us a new and more subtle interpretation. The world is totally connected. Whatever explanation we invent at any moment is a partial connection, and its richness derives from the richness of such connections as we are able to make.

Now in order to establish this in the most direct terms, I devoted my fourth lecture to really a rather difficult subject (which I am happy to be talking about now because even ten years ago it was very hard to get anybody but professional mathematicians to listen to it), the fact that mathematical systems suffer from the same partiality. Gödel, Turing, Tarski all proved this. Gödel proved that you cannot have a complete axiomatization of the whole of mathematics, that every system which you devise is partial and suffers from one great shortcoming. If it is consistent, there are theorems which are true that cannot be proved in it. And Turing showed that every machine that we can devise is like a formal system, and that therefore no machine can do all of mathematics. And Tarski put it even more boldly when he said that no universal language for all of science can exist in all cases without paradox.

Now these theorems are relevant to the subject of this, the fifth lecture, for they tell us something about the brain itself. What is a Turing machine? It is equivalent to any digital computer, that is, to any computer which does all its calculations in discrete steps. Essentially what we have proved is that no such machine can do the whole of mathematics. And by that we mean that we can do a more advanced kind of mathematics than a given machine the moment you show us that machine. Well, that destroys the validity of an old saying, “Show me what a machine cannot do, and I will build you a machine that can do it.” The only way that we know to build such a machine is (if I may put the matter very bluntly) to put two human beings of opposite sexes to bed together. Only the human mind can transcend all these machines. Why? Because the human mind is not a digital computer.

Now let me say two things. First of all, how do the paradoxes that tell us all this about digital machines arise? They arise by using the language of the system to describe the system; that is, they arise by what is called “self-reference.” Now self-reference, like self-consciousness, is in fact the glory of the human mind. It is the special way in which our language works. Bertrand Russell, who tried to remove self-reference from mathematics in the Principia, found very soon that removing it meant you could not do mathematics at all, and that you had to find a device for putting it back. But in any case we would not really want as human beings to do science or mathematics if we were thereby forbidden to think about ourselves, to talk about ourselves, and to compare our feelings from the inside with what we suppose other people to feel whom we only view from the outside. “Cogito ergo sum,” (I think therefore I am) is, of course, the basic self-referential statement. Who tells you that you think? How can you even start to make deductions about your thinking process in your own thinking language? And that goes for psychology, it goes for literature, and the striking thing is that it also goes for mathematics and science.

The second point is that this kind of paradox arises from the very nature of knowledge. Tarski showed that any scientific language fails because as soon as you introduce the phrase, “so and so is true,” then the introduction of the words “is true” creates a self-reference in the language which gives rise to paradoxes. And you cannot do without those words, you cannot do without “is true.” It is of the nature of knowledge, it is of the nature of the cognitive construction of human language that these contradictions occur in it. Now we might naturally ask, Well, what about the brain? How does the brain cope with all this? It is very fine to tell me that no machine can do what the brain can do because the machine is only a digital computer. What is it that the brain can do? Where does the brain fail to be bound by these uncertainties and paradoxes?

There are two things to be said about this. One is that the wholeness of the human being must not be violated by separating the brain from the body. That is what I meant when I said there is no little observer who looks at the camera obscura inside your head. This notion arises from problems of consciousness and self-consciousness, divisions between the world and ourselves, and essentially it arises from the whole Cartesian dualism between the mind and the body. What is wrong with this? What is wrong is that if you think of the brain as receiving the information, processing it, and then giving an instruction to the muscle, you have already falsified the whole procedure. There is no nerve without the muscle and no muscle without the nerve in the total animal. This is the same statement as the one I made about the total connection of the world. In terms of the brain and the muscle it can be put very concretely by taking another famous paradox, the great paradox, the Einstein-Rosen-Podolsky paradox in quantum physics.1 (Please do not be alarmed, but that is what it is called.)

Einstein, as you know, was a delightful person who had a special capacity of sometimes treating God as if God were his uncle, and of sometimes treating God as if he were God’s uncle. He was always making splendid generalizations, you know, “Raffiniert ist der Herrgott, aber boshaft ist er nicht” (God is cunning but he is not malicious). It is quite untrue: nature is extremely malicious, as every practicing scientist knows. You give her the slightest chance to get out of the experiment by the one trick that you would rather not have to close the door to, and, bang! that is just how the experiment goes wrong. And the most famous of Einstein’s sayings about God was that he was not “ein würfelnder Gott” (a God who plays dice).2 You know, why should God listen to Einstein about what he wants to play at?

Now in order to demonstrate this, Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen said, “Let us take a closed system in quantum physics and challenge it and then we come out with an answer: this is the state of the system. There is a ψ symbol which describes the state of the system. Now let us take another system to which we give its symbol; now let us join them up, and it suddenly turns out that neither system has the old symbol of ψ attached to it.” They say, “Well, that is paradoxical. Why should the total system deny what we had found for the small system?” Well, the answer is that that is just the nature of the universe—whatever partition you make of it gives its own answer, which is not the whole answer.

And it is just the same in the brain. As soon as you separate the brain from the muscle and ask the brain what order it is going to give, you falsify the nature of the brain. We can show this again quite positively. If the brain were separated from the body—and this is the essential fallacy in the Descartes duality of mind and body—if the brain were separated from the body and were fed with the information of the senses and then the output went out to the muscle, then the brain by ordinary quantum physics would have to come up with one of a finite number of answers. Then the brain would be a finite state machine, it would be a digital computer, and it would be enmeshed in all the paradoxes of digital computers. But the point is that you have reached this artificial position because you have put the brain into a box, you have fed the information into this box, and now you have asked it for an answer. As soon as you challenge the box for an answer, then it is bound to print one of a number of digits—you have converted it artificially into a Turing machine.

But if you regard the brain in the body as a totality, then it is exactly what Einstein, Rosen, and Podolsky said—the whole thing comes out with answers which are contained in it, and the brain itself is now no longer acting as a digital computer. The nerve and the muscle are part of a unit. And let me say that all cybernetic approximations to this using a to and fro process fail entirely, because that is only a series of challenges. No, you just have to face the fact that the totality of mind and body forms a unit in which the mind is not a finite state system. The mind, like the hydrogen atom, so long as you do not look at it, is allowed to reach one of an infinite number of answers, and only when action is demanded of it does it come up with a definite answer. But the action now is not an action of the brain—it is an action of the total person.

The most striking way in which to see this is to think for a moment about another of the great paradoxes (this is the lecture of the paradoxes), and that is Heisenberg’s paradox about why you cannot measure the momentum and the position of a particle simultaneously. Why? Because you are challenging the particle to print two symbols at the same time. And the particle is not a printing machine. It is not bound by its nature to print symbols. If you challenge it by fixing the position, then it will print an answer to the momentum. If you challenge it by fixing the momentum, or the velocity, then it will print an answer, it will give you the position. But that is not its reality. Its reality is that the whole thing is contained within the particle. As Max Born, Heisenberg’s teacher, said, we are trying to press the symbolism of position and momentum beyond what it will really stand by asking of individual electrons what answers they will print to challenges on this.

So we are trying to press the symbolism of, say, algebra beyond what it will stand when we try to say, “Well, every Turing machine does algebra, the mind does algebra; therefore the mind is a Turing machine.” As you know that is one of the famous syllogisms that is wrong. Yes, the mind does algebra, and the mind carries out actions and does all kinds of things, but it does not arrive at its actions by actually doing the computations as a finite-state machine does—that is, as a digital computer does. All right, how does it do it? As Einstein used to say, “Meine lieben Damen und Herren …!”, “Dear ladies and gentlemen, if I knew that, I would know everything!” We none of us know. And what is so exciting about research on the brain at this moment is that although we do not know, we can see how it must go. It is clear that the mind can get this enormous richness because it has a huge number of connections. And these connections are not of the push or pull type, but of some other type in which every connection modulates every other. The result is that the brain must be using some kind of statistical language which is quite unlike human language. The brain does not work inside itself with sentences like “I am hearing you.” There is no “I,” there is no “you”; that is not how it takes the sentence to pieces. Otherwise it would be a printing machine.

In a Silliman Lecture which I took as my precedent when I accepted the invitation to give these lectures, John von Neumann, who was dying at the time, wrote some of the most splendid sentences he wrote in all his life about this very problem.3 He pointed out that there were good grounds merely in terms of electrical analysis to show that the mind, the brain itself, could not be working on a digital system. It did not have enough accuracy; or, if it had all that accuracy, it did not have enough memory. There must be some other way. And he wrote some classical sentences saying there is a statistical language in the brain, it is different from any statistical language that we use, we do not know how it goes, but this is what we have to discover. I guess that the discovery will take us the rest of the life of the universe. But meanwhile, I hope that we shall make some progress. And I think we shall make some progress along the lines of looking for what kind of statistical language would work.

Let me propose an analogy to you. When Robert Boyle invented Boyle’s law, he said that if you compressed a gas to half its volume, the pressure would double. In other words, your direct action will give you a pointer reading twice as big. Now all sorts of people after that, chiefly Maxwell and Boltzmann, showed that this was a statistical result of the fact that the gas is full of little atoms rushing about, and that if you halve the volume in which you contain them, then the collisions with the containing walls will give you twice the pressure. In other words, we are seeing what appears to be a unique pointer reading arising as the result of an enormous statistical interplay within the gas. Now I am not proposing that the brain is a gas, you understand. What I am saying is that the nature of the connections inside must be such that when there is input, there is an enormous amount of cross-reference as the result of which there is a certain output. And it is usually the same output.

If you put a man into a psychological laboratory, which Einstein’s God forbid, and you say to him, “Bread,” he says, “Butter.” If he does not say “Butter,” you already know there is something wrong with him, he is hiding something. And you can ask him day after day, and he will say, “Butter.” But the brain is also able to utter the word “butter” in many settings other than in the psychological laboratory and in response to many things other than this particular inquiry. Moreover, if you change the conditions, the man may no longer say, “Butter.” Remember the gas experiment. Boyle’s law works fine. When you halve the volume of gas, you double the pressure, if you keep the temperature constant. But as soon as you change the temperature, the pointer goes somewhere else. Now the statistical connections within the brain—the number of connections is certainly of the order of ten to at least the tenth or eleventh—the statistical connections within the brain are plainly such (if we take this analogy) that if you alter other conditions and then say “Bread,” “Butter” is no longer the response that comes out. You have, according to my analogy, altered the temperature—you have altered another condition, and as a result you get a different response. And these responses must have this statistical character: you feed in a perfectly definite piece of information, you get out a perfectly definite answer, but what goes on inside is not at all a computer-like process. It must be much more like the process which we imagine to go on in a cloud of gas.

Now where do we see this most clearly? When we actually ask ourselves what we are trying to do when we try to press the mind to give exact answers in a symbolism that we have laid down. Why do I require an hour to give this lecture when all I have to say really could go into roughly six sentences? Because I could not utter six sentences which are not so heavily charged with ambiguity that no one in the end would get the picture that I am trying to formulate. Most of human sentences are in fact aimed at getting rid of the ambiguity which you unfortunately left trailing in the last sentence. Now I believe this to be absolutely inherent in the relation between the symbolism of language (that is, an exact symbolism) and the brain processes that it stands for. It is not possible to get rid of ambiguity in our statements, because that would press symbolism beyond its capabilities. And it is not possible to get rid of ambiguity because the number of responses that the brain could make never has a sharp edge because the thing is not a digital machine. So we have to work with the ambiguities. And nearly all discussions about Turing’s theorem or about poetry always come back to this central point about ambiguity. One of my fellow mathematicians, William Empson, who did mathematics with me at Cambridge, turned to poetry and at once published a book called Seven Types of Ambiguity,4 which the English students here will know—it is still a kind of minor bible, but a bible written by a mathematician, never forget that.

Ambiguity, multivalence, the fact that language simply cannot be regarded as a clear and final exposition of what it says, is central both to science and, of course, to literature. Why to science? We have just seen it—we have just seen that whenever you try to press the symbolism to do more than it can do, you fail. Why? For the same reason that you cannot make a single general statement about anything in the world which really is wholly delimited, wholly unambiguous, and divides the world into two pieces.

You cannot say anything about gravitation which excludes it from the space-time in which it is now embedded; you cannot say anything about a table or a chair which does not leave you open to the challenge, “Well, I am using this chair as a table.” Kids do it all the time, “I am using this chair as a table, it is now a table or a chair.” If that seems silly to you, I will remind you of a phrase I read you from Bertrand Russell last week. “It seemed unworthy of a grown man to spend his time on such trivialities, but what was I to do?” It is very hard to ask yourself, Why do I have to worry about whether I can really define a table so that every object in the world is now classified as being a table or not a table? Well, the world is not like that. For one thing, the world does not consist simply of an endless array of objects and the word “table” was not invented in order to bisect the universe into tables and non-tables. And if that is true of “table,” it is true of “honor,” and it is true of “love,” and it is true of “gravitation,” and it is true, of course, of “mass” and “energy” and everything else.

Now this was really demonstrated for the first time by my teacher Frank Ramsey, who showed that if a scientific system was so completely precise that you could replace every word in it, such as “electrons,” by the totality of all observations on the electron, then you could never discover anything new.5 And of course, Ramsey’s theorem is really equivalent to all the Tarski-Turing theorems in essence because it says that if you push the symbolism even in a word like “mass” so that you say, as operationists do well, mass is everything you do when you weigh the mass, you are never going to discover that mass and energy are interchangeable. You have closed the system to new discoveries. What I really have to say in all this is contained in those words.

Science is an attempt to represent the known world as a closed system with a perfect formalism. Scientific discovery is a constant maverick process of breaking out at the ends of the system and opening it up again and then hastily closing it after you have done your particular piece of work. You would like yours, of course, to be the last discovery. But alas—or, I prefer to say, happily—it is not so. It is in the nature of all symbolic systems that they can only remain closed so long as you attempt to say nothing with them which was not already contained in all the experimental work that you had done. If you want a closed system (which is what Newton’s contemporaries hoped that he had achieved), then you must believe that the whole world has now been described and that everything else is just a kind of trivial embroidery. For example, you have now explained everything in biology about human beings, you have a few minor things to explain, like why some people have curly hair, some people have straight hair, some people have no hair at all, but that is all that remains to be done. Well, neither biology nor physics nor chemistry nor any other subject is like that.

What distinguishes science is that it is a systematic attempt to establish closed systems one after another. But all fundamental scientific discovery opens the system again. The symbolism of the language is found to be richer than had been supposed. New connections are discovered. The symbolism has to be broadened. Symbolism, language, scientific formulae here are all synonymous. What opens it? That function of the brain which in fact is not the function of a digital computer.

I have a great many friends who are passionately in love with digital computers. They are really heartbroken at the thought that men are not digital computers. Since most of them are men, they would like to make an exception of women, but so far as the male brain is concerned, they would love to feel that it is a digital computer. And that seems very strange to me. They would love to feel that the end of science is only just over the horizon. Why they are so keen to work themselves out of a living I do not understand!

The endless progress of science, of course, arises exactly from the fact that you can go on doing mathematics which the machine could not do. You can go on working at whether the system is consistent or not. And as I said in the fourth lecture, when you come on a profound discovery like the Michelson-Morley experiment, which is really essentially an inconsistency in the system, then you reorganize the whole thing. And that reorganization is the central act of imagination.

The act of imagination is the opening of the system so that it shows new connections. I originally put this idea in Science and Human Values6 when I said that every act of imagination is the discovery of likenesses between two things which were thought unlike. And the example that I gave was Newton’s thinking of the likeness between the thrown apple and the moon sailing majestically in the sky. A most improbable likeness, but one which turned out to be (if you will forgive the phrase) enormously fruitful. All acts of imagination are of that kind. They take the closed system, they inspect it, they manipulate it, and then they find something which had not been put into the system so far. They open the system up, they introduce new likenesses, whether it is Shakespeare saying, “My Mistres eyes are nothing like the Sunne” or it is Newton saying that the moon in essence is exactly like a thrown apple. All those who imagine take parts of the universe which have not been connected hitherto and enlarge the total connectivity of the universe by showing them to be connected.

Now my official subject today was “error, progress, and the concept of time.” I had proposed to take time as an example of a particular concept which had, through successive generations, been opened in this way—changing first from absolute Newtonian time to the time of relativity, then involving the whole question of cosmic time, and in particular evolutionary time. I shall not try to give you a thumbnail sketch of time, but there is one point that I want to pick out: In my concept of time, which is largely connected with evolutionary time, the notion that errors are made by nature, that replication is not perfect, is central. Evolution is built up by the perpetuation of errors. It runs counter to the second law of thermodynamics by promoting the error to the new norm so that the second law now works on the error, and then a new error is built up. That is also central to all inductive acts and all acts of imagination. We ask ourselves, “Why does one chess player play better than another?” The answer is not that the one who plays better makes fewer mistakes, because in a fundamental way the one who plays better makes more mistakes, by which I mean more imaginative mistakes. He sees more ridiculous alternatives. If any of you play chess you may have sat in front of the board with a published diagram and then refused to look at the next move, saying, “Well, what crazy thing did he do now?” The mark of the great player is exactly that he thinks of something which by all known norms of the game is an error. His choice does not conform to the way in which, if you want to put it most brutally, a machine would play the game.

Therefore, we must accept the fact that all the imaginative inventions are to some extent errors with respect to the norm. Nothing is worth doing which is not this mad maverick kind of change. But these errors have the peculiar quality of being able to sustain themselves, of being able to reproduce themselves.

Nor must we decry the fact that we do all kinds of experiments, and every so often we are wrong—more often wrong than right. More scientific theories are wrong than right. Of course, the wrong ones do not get published so often. But never confuse the process of exposition with the process of discovery. You see, unfortunately, the B-movies showing Paul Muni discovering some antisomething or other always represent the scientists at the moment of triumph, with the notion that there it is, here is the discovery. Well, that is not how the discovery is made. The discovery is made with tears and sweat (at any rate, with a good deal of bad language) by people who are constantly getting the wrong answer. And it is not possible to eliminate it because that is the nature of looking for imaginative likenesses. You are always looking for a likeness and nine out of ten of the likenesses you are looking for are not there. So, of course, more bad science is produced than good and more bad works of art are produced than good ones. The difference is only that most scientists take care not to exhibit their bad work.

Progress is the exploration of our own error. Evolution is a consolidation of what have always begun as errors. And errors are of two kinds: errors that turn out to be true and errors that turn out to be false (which are most of them). But they both have the same character of being an imaginative speculation. I say all this because I want very much to talk about the human side of discovery and progress, and it seems to me terribly important to say this in an age in which most nonscientists are feeling a kind of loss of nerve.

I was up at Berkeley eighteen months ago when all the boys were saying “We do not want to be computer cards.” I quite agree—nobody wants to be an IBM card, and all those remarks about “do not fold or otherwise mutilate, this is a human being” were absolutely just. But that has nothing to do with the nature of science. You must remember that by the time science becomes a closed—that is, computerizable—project, it is not science anymore. It is not in the area of the exploration of errors. I want very much to transmit to you—scientists as well as nonscientists—the feeling of adventure, of exploration, in this exactly because we are all the time pushing the boundaries of the closed scientific system into an area which is full of pitfalls and errors.

And I object to trying to close the system in literature as much as I object to it in science. I think that Sartre’s Huis Clos—Sartre’s No Exit—is a terrible play. I do not mean terrible as a play but terrible in the philosophy that it regards as dictating boundaries to human beings. It is terrible for exactly the same reason that I think that any scientist who really believes that what he is doing is a mechanical process is in a terrible state of mind.

If we ask “Why do we know more now than we knew ten thousand years ago, or even ten years ago?” the answer is that it is by this constant adventure of taking the closed system and pushing its frontiers imaginatively into the open spaces where we shall make mistakes. But we also know something of the laws and responsibilities by which that investigation is bounded. My sixth and last lecture will deal with this. It is called “Law and Individual Responsibility,” and I mean by the word “law” just what the State Department means, not a law of nature, but a state law. Because I think the questions of what we mean by natural law and what we mean by human law are intimately bound up with science.
