6

Law and Individual Responsibility


On this slightly maudlin occasion, the last of six lectures, I want to talk about the practice of science, first as an individual activity and then as a social activity. I am going to speak for a little while about the kind of person who succeeds in science. Then I will make a brief transition between what might be called the personality of the scientist and the community of scientists into which he has to fit. I shall then talk about the community of scientists, what holds it together, how it works, and why it has had spectacular success, which (in the comparatively short time between, let us say, 1666, when Newton was startled to see the apple fall, and 1967) has made it the largest single factor in our social life. And finally, I shall speak about the place of science in our society today, not as a technical activity, nor even as a search for knowledge, but as the kind of ethical activity it is. When I gave this lecture its title, it was because I wanted to talk very clearly about the ethical conditions which have made the practice of science successful and, indeed, possible.

Let me begin by talking about the scientist as a person. In the fourth of my lectures I told you a story about Linus Pauling. I said that I had given a talk to a small group of scientists roughly on the lines of that lecture, namely, about the limitations inherent in all axiomatic scientific systems in what in the last lecture we learned to call closed systems. And I told you how, as I came near the end of the lecture, Pauling became more and more restless, and how, as soon as I had finished, he said to me, “Operationally speaking, as a practicing scientist, how does all this affect me? How should my practice as a scientist be changed by the fact that you tell me convincingly that mechanism is not the answer to the world as it is put together?” And I said blandly and sweetly, “Not at all. What we have really proved is that mechanism is not an ultimate explanation of the world, but it is the only strategy that we know for penetrating the laws. And you go right on doing it.” But now I must tell you the rest of the story, because then Pauling said to me, “OK, why should I care? Why bother me with all this abstruse stuff about how the world is really put together?”

I cannot pretend to recall my reply verbatim—in any case I am sure that the form in which I will tell it to you will be more flattering to me than what I really said. But I did rather feel as T. H. Huxley felt on that famous day in 1860 at the British Association in Oxford when Bishop Wilberforce had the folly to ask Huxley whether he claimed descent from the monkey on his father’s or his mother’s side, and Huxley said to his neighbor before he got up to reply, “God has delivered him into my hands” (a piece of piety which I must say I am sorry that Bishop Wilberforce did not overhear). So I said on this occasion to Pauling, “Well, that is a very strange thing for you to say, because you of all people are a man who has demonstrated that a scientist is not merely a man who makes profound imaginative discoveries, but a man who regards the world as a whole. Here you are, the only man in the world who has actually won two Nobel Prizes, one for chemistry and the other for what?—for peace, if you please. And you ask me why the change in the world picture of science should affect scientists. You, Pauling, are the personal demonstration of the fact that a scientist is a complete person and that he can no more talk about chemistry without thinking about peace than he can talk about peace without thinking about chemistry.” Now I am happy to say that Pauling said absolutely nothing in reply.

There is, of course, a reply. There are scientists much given to thinking of themselves as machines, and they would reply: “Oh, no, no. What I do for peace is a deduction from my chemistry. I have these convictions about peace because I am a scientist.” I do not share this view. I do not think that you can prove that peace is desirable in any kind of mathematical system which avoids all the difficulties of Gödel’s theorem and so on. If you want peace, if you want any particular form of human community, it is not because science has proved it to be desirable, but because it is to you part of the same world picture that science gives you. And a man like Pauling who has crazy ideas about world peace and crazy ideas about chemistry is, of course, the scientific personality. In spite of all their attempts to look and behave like computers, scientists are maverick personalities. It is not possible constantly to face the world with the idea that the explanation which you have just been told is sure to be wrong unless you are a very questioning, a very challenging kind of person.

I once addressed, on a Christmas day many years ago, on behalf of the United Nations, an audience of about two thousand school children in London. As on this occasion, I knew in general what I was going to say, but I did not know exactly what I was going to say, and in a moment of abandon I said to them: “This is how the world goes, you are going to have to make it different, you are going to have to stop listening to your parents. If you go on obeying your parents, the world will never be a better place.” And at that moment twenty newspaper men representing the European press got up from the front row and rushed for the telephone boxes. And by the time I got home one of the more adventurous correspondents from Geneva had actually phoned my daughter, then aged seven, at school in order to ask her whether she was encouraged to disobey her parents at home.

But that is what we mean. And indeed, if I may lapse for a moment into my views on sociology, one of the reasons why, on the whole, women have had difficulty so far in making very good scientists is that they are not contrary enough. Happily time will cure all that. Time will produce belligerent, contrary, questioning, challenging women as it has produced belligerent, contrary, questioning, challenging men. None of us cares for them, it is always a nuisance to have them in the laboratory. Read Watson’s account of what Bragg thought of having Francis Crick in the laboratory in Cambridge, and you will see how the best of scientists still finds it very awkward to have even a brash young man, who is going to be just as good as he, going round contradicting everything that the great man says.1

Now it is very important to recognize this kind of personality because, of course, it makes the changes in society. We have been for some hundreds of years a society directed towards change. And it is people like that who are the catalysts, the stimulators, the creators of change. And they are this as complete personalities.

Senator McCarthy used to be troubled by the fact that he was constantly faced by good scientists who were not in his opinion good citizens. And he would constantly utter rather plaintive little cries, the burden of which was roughly, “Mr. Einstein (not that he ever saw Einstein, but let us take a neutral name), why cannot you invent relativity and keep out of politics?” He did not mean that, however, he meant, “Mr. Einstein, why cannot you invent relativity without at the same time voting for my opponent?” That is what people usually mean when they advise you to keep out of politics. To that, of course, people like Einstein have always had to reply, “If I were not a very awkward character, I would not have thought of relativity in the first place.” You do not invent a new world system by being satisfied with what other people have told you about how the world works. And that dissatisfaction goes through and through, and it makes a complete personality. The scientist is as completely involved in the whole of his work as any poet or artist and, I suppose, bank manager or truck driver. If he does the job well, it is because it is him. Einstein used to play the violin, execrably, I am glad to say. But he played it and he did not play it the way a tennis player goes out to take twenty minutes of exercise. He did not play it in order to exercise anything. He played it as part of the human being that he was.

Now all this only makes sense, of course, if you accept the fact that science is not a finished enterprise—that knowledge is not a finished enterprise, that literature is not a finished enterprise. To go looking for the truth only has a point if the truth has not already been found. And naturally if you suppose that the truth is a thing, that you could find it the way you could find your hat or your umbrella, then none of this makes sense, then you just look for a good finder. But that is not how truth is found. It is not how knowledge is created, and it is not how it works to quicken and leaven and create social change. The kind of questioning personality that I am describing is one who is appropriate to our changing society only because he is the self-correcting mechanism. He is the thermostat built into the system. He is the man who says, “That is not right, we will try it another way.” Science is essentially a self-correcting activity. But more important, scientists are people who correct the picture of the moment with another one, as a natural evolution towards a “true” picture of the world. We have spoken enough about truth to know that we are not going to get a final picture of the world. Nobody is going to find the truth one fine day, as I say, like a hat or an umbrella.

Now a good deal of attention has been given to scientists as human beings before now, and Roe has written an excellent book about it.2 And this kind of heroism, the heroism of being a contrary man is well known to us all, if only from the cinema. I want to turn your attention now to the community of scientists. Because you see, what has made science successful as a social leaven over the last three hundred years is its change from the practice of individuals, however great their ingenuity, to a communal enterprise.

Leonardo da Vinci was born in 1452. He died in 1519. No scientific society existed at that time; neither Shakespeare nor Galileo had yet been born. And one reason why immensely prolific, vivid, imaginative, and inventive brains like Leonardo’s failed to make any impact on the body of science was that there were no colleagues. There were colleagues in painting, and they undoubtedly had an influence which produced more and better paintings than we should otherwise have. And now that there have been so many scientists and so few painters, I am well content to let Leonardo da Vinci alone. But I do want you to see that even that tremendous mind could not work in isolation.

This is a particularly crucial point because, in a way, everything that I have been saying about the maverick personality so far is really true of all creative minds. You know, Shakespeare and Goethe were just as troublesome to their teachers at school as Leonardo and, say, Rutherford. The creative personality is always one that looks on the world as fit for change and on himself as an instrument for change. Otherwise, what are you creating for? If the world is perfectly all right the way it is, you have no place in it. The creative personality thinks of the world as a canvas for change and of himself as a divine agent of change.

But, you see, it is rather puzzling why on the whole science took off about three hundred years ago and has been so very successful in expanding its kind of knowledge when on the whole the same cannot be said of the arts. Do not let me appear to denigrate the arts. I believe that we live in a period of literary and artistic creation quite as great as any of the past. And I think that this is just the way history works. If you are at a moment of obviously enormous scientific inventiveness (such as this century), then the world of the arts takes fire as well. But it takes fire in a different way. There is not this sense that somehow pop art is obviously much better than The Virgin of the Rocks. Whereas it is perfectly clear that the elucidation of the DNA molecule is a great deal better than those pictures of the homunculus which they used to draw in the fifteenth century.

Now this is because science is and can be practiced as a communal activity. The community of scientists has a special strength. You can see this very easily. Since so many Nobel Prize winners have been announced over the last weeks let me draw your attention to one very obvious thing. If you look at a list of the people who since 1900 have won Nobel Prizes in physics, biology and medicine, chemistry, there is hardly a name which you would not recognize and highly respect. But, alas, if you look at the list of the people who have won the Nobel Prize for literature during the sixty odd years that it has been awarded, it really makes rather sad reading. When I was a boy the Nobel Prize for literature was awarded one year to a lady called Selma Lagerlof. Now I doubt whether more than one or two of you have ever read a book by Selma Lagerlof. I suppose I could find more obscure names, and I could also find some very great names that were not awarded the prize. Clearly there is much more uncertainty involved in the awarding of literary prizes.

Now I make this comparison only in order to point out something about the judgments of scientists as a community that has nothing to do with whether scientists are being better judges or whether literary critics are good or bad. It has to do with the fact that in the practice of science everybody knows what everybody else’s work is. How has this been possible? Of course, it is very simple. In the end you cannot propose a scientific theory unless it conforms to a certain sanction of fact. Now, it is true of literature, it is true of painting, that it has to conform to some sanctions of how human beings think and feel and act, but such sanctions are not so easily exhibited as the physical facts of science. If I write a paper and it goes to China and Czechoslovakia and South America and Los Angeles everybody in all these places who reads it believes that I am telling the truth as I see it. Nobody assumes that what I am saying is true. It is not given to us to know what is true in that sense. But everybody knows that I write the scientific paper on an implicit, unwritten understanding among scientists that it can be absolutely believed to be what I believe.

Now, unhappily, that kind of simple sanction simply does not exist in any other subject. I shall return to this when I talk about the influence of the scientific ethic, but it is clear that if I were writing a political pamphlet and sent it to China, Czechoslovakia, South America, and Los Angeles, nobody would suppose for a moment that I had written it with the express purpose of putting down what I believed to be true and nothing else.

Now I draw your attention to the fact that this adherence to the literal truth works in detail, not in the large. I am not allowed to say, “I think the theory of relativity is true, I think it would be a splendid thing for everybody to believe it, why do I not cook the evidence just a little so that it will appear to be true? Why do I not select the facts in favor of it and suppress the facts against it?” Now this is absolutely crucial: scientists never discuss ends, they only discuss means, the steps by which you get from today’s knowledge to tomorrow’s knowledge. It is wonderful when a man produces a grand theory and one has a new direction to work toward, a new end. But the means have got to be absolutely honest. You cannot say, “It would be a good thing if I were in charge of the nation’s science next year, it would certainly be a better thing than if somebody else were in charge, and therefore it would be a good thing if I got all my fellow scientists to say that this discovery or that discovery of mine was true when, in fact, I know it to be false.” There are spectacular cases of this kind, as you know. There have been scientists in whose laboratories some forgery was carried out (Kammerer is the best known example) and who committed suicide because life was intolerable in those circumstances.3

Of course, something came into European civilization at the time of the Renaissance which in general inclined our society this way. I told you the story of how Kepler (by way of Nicholas of Cusa) probably heard about God’s love making all things attract one another from a man who went by the name of Dionysius the Areopagite, who claimed to be a Church father, but who in fact was later found to be a fifth-century forger. Well, unhappily, between 1500 and 1600, a number of such forgeries turned up in very important Church documents.4 And the men of Florence and Milan were astonished to think that there had been a time in the history of the Church when it was thought that in order to convert the faithful to the glory of God it was all right to put forged documents into the records.

Now so far, I have been speaking only of the scientific enterprise as taking its strength from the fact that everybody can believe what everybody else says. But in the end, after all, what is science discovering except what is the case? How do we build norms of conduct on that? And I want now to turn to the norms of conduct in the scientific community that arise from this.

It is basic to the concept of truth as practiced in science that it is an absolute command in every detail. There is no distinction between good means and good ends. You are only allowed to employ perfectly honest means. This is what puts you in a position of special trust. And this is a deeply ethical principle. You see, for a long time past there has been an assumption that the findings of science are neutral. “What is” simply is the case, and how can you get an “ought” out of that? The argument was probably first put forth by G. E. Moore in the Principia Ethica, but it is probably much older than that and goes back at least to the eighteenth century. But the argument is that from what is you cannot draw any information as to how you ought to act. And the transition from “is” to “ought” is usually called the naturalistic fallacy. I do not accept this.

There are three different arguments against the naturalistic fallacy. Two due to other people and one due to me. I will briefly deal with those due to other people. The first simply says—and rightly—that every time you know something about the world there are certain forms of conduct which are obviously ridiculous. Once you know that gravity goes down and not up, it is ridiculous to build buildings in which you assume that it goes up. Once you know how gravitation works outside the earth, there are certain forms of spaceships which you will not build. Once you know that there are two sexes, then certain forms of behavior become pointless. (Perhaps that is not a very wise remark. At least, certain forms of behavior become pointless for the community as a whole.) I think this is perfectly sensible. I think that it is perfectly true that the more we know, the stronger we are in our choices. It is not true that because our choices become narrower, they become weaker. On the contrary, we have a firmer ground for making choices. However, I think this is not a very important argument.

A more interesting argument, which has been put forward largely by Waddington, is: “Well, human beings are the way they are [after all, the whole point of these lectures that I am giving is this is how human beings are] and we ought to act as human beings are.” I think that is a good argument. I think it is very important to find what human beings are really capable of and to act accordingly. I think it is a perfectly fair criticism to say that the guards in concentration camps acted like beasts. (Though I must just say in fairness to beasts that you cannot find beasts who act like that. It is very specific to human conduct to be able to be as bestial as that.) I think it can be held that the more we know about our evolutionary history, about our potential as human beings, the more clear it becomes that we have become the way we have because of certain gifts and that it is right that we should practice those gifts.

However, I think that one needs neither of these metaphysical arguments in face of the last argument, which is my own. You all know it since the one book of mine that everybody has read is Science and Human Values and I advanced it there for the first time. This argument says simply that you cannot know what is true unless you behave in certain ways. What is the good of talking about what is, when in fact you are told how to behave in order to discover what is true. “Ought” is dictated by “is” in the actual inquiry for knowledge. Knowledge cannot be gained unless you behave in certain ways.

The most interesting example of this is, of course, the Nazi doctors in the concentration camps and the Nazis in general. They found themselves in an extraordinary paradox. They knew the ultimate truth, they knew that Aryans were better than anybody else so they knew that relativity could not be true, because after all it had been proposed by Einstein. They were not scholarly enough to be able to remember that Poincaré had made a very similar proposal. When Heisenberg was actually foolish enough to give a speech to his students saying, “You must read relativity, never mind whether Einstein was a Jew or not,” Himmler actually had Heisenberg investigated. And, because in this kind of totalitarian state everything is done by nepotism, fortunately Himmler’s aunt knew a cousin of Heisenberg’s, so he was OK.

But you see their dilemma. On the one hand they were addicted to the founding principle of the modern state, which is that knowledge brings you power; and on the other hand they were not willing to accept the fact that you can only gain knowledge by being truthful. For example, if you put forward a fable that Negroes are more nearly related to chimpanzees than Hitler is, then you sap the foundations of science. And sooner or later the whole thing comes tumbling about your ears, because if you also want to build a policy, say just about genetics, on this kind of false premise, it cannot be done. A basic reason why no discovery of importance was made by the Nazis throughout the war, why the doctors in the concentration camps with all their opportunities made such a pitiful show of nonsense, was because Nazi scientists were caught in a dreadful paradox; they only knew one way to get knowledge, but that was exactly the way that was forbidden to them.

Once you regard truth (truth in detail) as the cement of the scientific community, then it follows at once that people have got to behave so that the truth shall be apparent. You see, it is very fine for all of us in this room to talk as if we could all have invented something simple, like the steam engine, had the necessity arisen. You know perfectly well that you could not. Imagine yourself for a moment, actually in the unhappy position of being cast away on a desert island among a lot of Trobrianders. You say to them, “We have marvelous things,” and they say, “Well, what?” And you say, “Well, a bicycle.” So they say, “OK, make us a bicycle.” You would not know how to begin to make a bicycle. Do you know how a gear works? Can you even remember how the chain goes? Do you know what kind of metals you need for it?

Benjamin Huntsman spent the whole of his life building what has since become the metallurgic industry of Sheffield in order to make a better watch spring, because he was not satisfied with the way in which watches went when he was a boy. Nobody who now makes a watch spring of this kind gives a thought to Benjamin Huntsman. But it is out of the individual work of such people that science is made. Now Huntsman would not become a fellow of the Royal Society because as a Quaker he despised all worldly honors. He kept his formulas a great secret. Indeed, he buried specimens of his work that were not up to his standard, and other people in Sheffield dug them up and made perfectly good steel that he did not think good enough. But the watch, in the end, if you think of it, is made out of the communal work of such people.

And if you can make a watch today, it is because you can actually believe what Robert Hooke said about the escapement, what Huygens said about the escapement, and so on and so on. And that is true of every scientific theory. You cannot take the simplest statement in science without having to believe a lot of people. I know an awful lot of biologists and there are many subjects about which I would not believe a word they said. But when they start talking about how DNA is put together, then I know that they are telling the truth. We could not work without that tradition, which started back in 1660 when scientific papers really began as personal letters from one friend to another. That has been the quickening life force in science which has made it possible for people to have an absolute trust in one another’s statements. So that from the attempt to find the “is,” for example, exactly how many seconds there are in a year, we are forced to the “ought”; namely, you ought to tell me how to make a good watch spring, and I ought to be able to believe you.

I have told you that I said all this in 1953 in Science and Human Values. Many of you have read it, so I am slightly embarrassed about repeating the argument, but if you have not I will ask you to turn to the argument because I then go on to show how the other values derive from truth. There are the personal values—respect, sensitivity, tolerance—without which science could not be carried on. They are the “is” values, the values of the man working by himself. And then there are the communal values, the “ought” values—honesty, integrity, dignity, authenticity—which bind the scientific community together. And on the basis of this, science has been able for three hundred years to change completely (as I have told you several times) practically every fifty years. Nobody is shot, nobody is gleichgeschaltet, nobody is liquidated. People whose theories have been wrong retire full of honors. Somebody was talking to me this very afternoon about Patrick Blackett’s theory that magnetism is due to rotation. I remember when the theory came out, I remember that it has not worked. Patrick Blackett is now president of the Royal Society, and nobody says to him, “Come on, you are no good, you made a mistake.” But on the other hand, if he had been going about ever since then pretending he had not made a mistake, making ingenious experiments to say he had not made a mistake, bribing his colleagues to give testimonials about what a good fellow he was, he would not be president of the Royal Society, I do assure you.

If you are going to make what science has been—a stable body of knowledge which at any given moment is closed and yet is always changing—and if that is really going to be dynamic, yet stable, then you have to build in the conditions and the safeguards for absolute integrity. The society of scientists, the community of scientists, has this advantage, that from the moment we enter it, we all know that fifty years from now, most of the things we learned here will turn out not to have been quite right. And yet that will be achieved without enormous personal dramas. It will be achieved by giving due honor to the people who take the steps, the steps that turn out to be wrong as well as the steps that turn out to be right. You have to build this into the social relations if the society is to be able to maintain itself in the face of change, otherwise you get a rigid totalitarian society of the kind Plato wanted to build, Hitler wanted to build, Mussolini wanted to build, Stalin wanted to build. And all that I know about all these societies is that I have seen Hitler die, and Mussolini die, and Stalin die, while the societies in which I was fortunate to be brought up have on the whole sustained themselves without the enormous human loss of those others.

Having said this, it would be timid of me not to say something about the impact of this aspect of science into our society. We, we the people in this city and in the world now, are living for the first time in what is essentially a community penetrated through and through by the scientific outlook. And the scientific outlook is inseparable from the scientific ethic. I read in the paper four days ago that nuns have the longest expectation of life of any group in this country. Their average expectation of life is seventy-seven years. Now I believe this absolutely, not because I read it in the paper but because I recognize the name of the man who published the findings. I am not, therefore, tempted to be a nun. It does not in itself tell me anything about being a nun. Some people may be influenced by such considerations, among others. But the very fact that such questions are asked and answered shows how we are penetrated in all respects by this kind of outlook and the fact that we place absolute trust in it. We do not therefore say, “Oh well, now we have to believe in Roman Catholicism or we have to disbelieve in Roman Catholicism.” We just say, “Well, that is it. Interesting, is it not? You should not eat so much. Or you should not smoke, perhaps.”

We are living at the moment in history when the scientific ethic comes through everything. The notion is that you can believe it, it is in the paper, it is not a piece of propaganda by one religious sect or another, it has been said by a scientist in a serious publication. If, on the other hand, this kind of thing had been put out by some sectarian agency, we would not have believed it.

I think that at present there is quite a crisis in the history of politics and government. I think that it is a very difficult time to have governments run by people who are really too old to have quite this spirit. All the arguments about wars and credibility gaps and so on in the end come down to this: that we are all growing up in university communities, intellectual communities in general, with a feeling that we trust people to say just what they think. We believe that they will tell the truth, we believe that they will organize society so that honesty, integrity, dignity, and so on are respected. And then we are very disappointed when it happens not to be so. When I meet university students, I am conscious of the fact that they do not think that this is a credibility gap, they just think it is a hypocrisy gap. They just think that in the political community, in the relations between states, you, the elders, are allowed to practice a form of hypocrisy, which they are not allowed to practice within the hallowed halls of universities.

As you know, I am not an American. (Listening to me, it must slowly have dawned on you.) And there are some American institutions which strike me particularly in this way. If you came to England there would be British institutions which would strike you in this way. But let me mention three about which I feel strongly. I think, for instance, that it has been a terrible mistake in the legal system of America to put gangsters in jail for tax evasion. As soon as the law becomes a device, then the whole relation between “law of nature” and “law of man,” between “is” and “ought” is lost. If you cannot jail him for keeping a string of prostitutes, you had better just let him go free. The distinction is lost as soon as the law becomes a means of manipulating people into jail because—why?—because they deserve to be in jail. What do they deserve to be in jail for? Do not ask. They deserve to be in jail. You know, that is not the scientific ethic. If you are going to put them in jail, you had better put them in jail for something fundamentally criminal.

Everybody also knows that very soon all civil services become guardians of the state as it is (this is not particularly an American phenomenon, it is a universal one). But I do find it a very difficult situation in America that so much government money goes into scientific research, because as a result a young man who does not want to conform to what the government that day and that hour regards as proper conduct may find himself many years after in life in a very awkward state.

Finally, of course, I am very struck by the fact that once you introduce the system of the law as a device (the protection of the status quo by legal means), you finish up not with society against criminals but with two gangs: one called the police and the other called the criminals. The police wear a different kind of hat, but they have now become an army. I am, for instance, very unpleasantly struck by the fact that in my home state of California the policemen look as if they were soldiers. Policemen are not soldiers, they are guardians of the law. They are not in a campaign against crime.

Having said those things about the general tendency for the law to become an entity of its own beyond justice, what I call “the insolence of office” (I am sorry, what Shakespeare called “the insolence of office,” but I am happy to steal from him), I come back to the central point about the cement of science which I now believe is the cement for any lasting community. Democracy is a way of organizing the state which has shown its success exactly as science has, because it is constantly able to transform itself. It can only do that by the same means as science, by absolute honesty and integrity. And my personal dictum about all politics is this: just make sure that everybody tells the truth all the time and tell him when he is not. You will be surprised how much notice people pay. Certainly the intellectual’s duty to complete integrity seems to me clear-cut. It seems to me clear-cut that we do not want to argue about whether these are good ends or those are good ends, whether such and such or such and such is a good form of society. We want to argue about the fact that as intellectuals we have seen the prodigious success of science as an activity because it is based on perfect trust in the truth of statements. The intellectual as a witness to truth seems to me the one thing that has to come out of this. And if I have spent five earlier lectures confusing you a great deal about just what the truth is, do not be alarmed. It is exactly because we know that we are not guardians of the truth, we do not hold any Holy Grail, that we tell the truth as best we can, and we stick to that through thick and thin.

Now having made a specific remark about American policemen, you will, I hope, allow me to end this lecture and this series of lectures with one small story just to show you that policemen are really wonderful in this country, as they are in England. In 1953 I came to M.I.T. to give the lectures on Science and Human Values. I had a number of misfortunes, one of which was that I was almost the first academic who came over under the new McCarran-Walter Act. I will not detail the indignities through which I was put, which ranged from being examined for venereal disease to having hastily to change my status from a professor of science to professor of history in order to get in. But finally I arrived on a cold, windy January morning on a pier in New York. And a small Irish policeman, smaller than I, faced my huge box of belongings. There had been a long list of papers which said, “What have you brought?” and so on. And I, knowing perfectly well that this was a situation in which absolute truth was much the best policy, had written down six volumes of this, and that book to give to friends, and so on. He said, “You have got all of these books?” And I said, “Yes.” He said, “You know I am supposed to read all of these.” I said, “Well, you know, several of the copies are identical, why don’t you start?” So as bad luck would have it, he picked up a book on Blake. As I saw him handle it, I thought, “We may be in trouble, there are all kinds of references to Karl Marx, socialism and the Industrial Revolution and other taboo subjects in this.” However, he read perhaps two sentences, and then he said to me, “You write this, Bud?” I said, “Yes.” He said, “Psshh, this ain’t never going to be no best-seller!”

So long as there are Irish policemen who are more addicted to literary criticism than to legalisms, the intellect will not perish.
