Preface


                      I know that many will comment on what I say, they will mock me,
                                                    they will be after phrases and accents
                                 without the spirit of God, judging me in their own way.
                                                               Campanella, Lettere, p. 48
                         And they want to fight against me with unjust officials, prisons,
                        handcuffs, bars, ropes, tortures and slayers, darkness and hunger,
                                       whereas I cannot use such weapons against them,
                                                     nor do they want to fight with reason.
                                                                                Ibid., p. 13

Even if one has studied an author for many years, perhaps precisely for this
very reason, anything that is said about him or her appears inadequate and
insufficient: an abyss opens up behind each word, every phrase recalls yet
other phrases. With an author like Tommaso Campanella, the feeling of dis-
orientation may turn into actual dizziness. Campanella was bold enough to
address all fields of knowledge. However much his attempt can be better
described as generous rather than pretentious, the whole enterprise was
undoubtedly tricky, marked by all kinds of difficulties, with very diverse out-
comes, which at times cause amazement and emotion, even as on other occa-
sions they prove disappointing and almost irritating. This has led to so many
contrasting evaluations of his thought, characterised as it is by the presence
of both powerfully innovative visions and tenaciously persistent convictions.
All these elements, however, result in a complex picture, which the author,
striking out on tortuous and intricate paths, intended to present as unified by
a coherent vision.
   This volume is an attempt at offering a map of the biographical and intellec-
tual journey of Campanella. Taking into account new findings about his life and
works that enhance or correct the classic studies of the author, these pages try to
present, through variations of recurrent motifs, the origins, development, and
persistence of some of the fundamental themes of his philosophy. This map is
necessarily a selective one. Needless to say, it can only barely touch upon monu-
mental works such as the Metaphysica, the Theologia, and many others, while it
draws the reader’s attention to less known or forgotten texts. It is a map that


                                                                                               vii
viii   Preface

offers itself as an introduction, with an eye to future research and a much-to-be-
desired project of gathering and publishing all the works of the philosopher.
   I truly hope that this translation of my monograph on Campanella will
contribute towards a better understanding of the wide-ranging thought of
one of the most original philosophers of the early modern period and that it
will generate further interest in his complex oeuvre. With regard to the Italian
edition (2002) and the subsequent translation into French (2007), I have
limited myself to adding occasional bibliographical references and making a
few minor changes to the text so as to render it more straightforward. I have
also reorganized the material in some chapters in a way that makes the
presentation more coherent.
   I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to all those who have contrib-
uted towards the realization of this initiative. I would like to thank, in particu-
lar, Sarah Hutton, who kindly suggested that I should publish the volume in
the present series; Anita Fei van der Linden of Springer Publishers, Raffaella
Colombo (SEPS – Segretariato Europeo per le Pubblicazioni Scientifiche,
Bologna), and the publishers Laterza, who followed and supported the various
phases of the production of the book. I would also like to express my gratitude
to David Marshall, who took on the job of translating a demanding text with
friendly enthusiasm and courage; special thanks are due to Jean-Paul De
Lucca for his many suggestions and for compiling the subject index. I would
also like to thank Guido Giglioni for his constant help, and all those whose
affection and friendship have accompanied me throughout my work.
                                                                             G. E.
Natal chart of Tommaso Campanella (Rome, Archivio di Stato,
      Tribunale criminale del governatore, Processi 1630)
Frontispiece of T. Campanella, Philosophia sensibus demonstrata (Naples, 1591).
Frontispiece of T. Campanella, Civitas Solis (in Philosophia realis, Paris, 1637)
Frontispiece of T. Campanella, Atheismus triumphatus (Rome, 1631)
                  with dedication to Gabriel Naudé
