1. Telesius me Delectavit


                                 The Book of Nature

   Having become worried because it seemed to me that one could not find
   truth in the Peripatetic school and because falsehood had taken the place
   of truth, I took up the task of examining all the commentators on Aristotle
   – Greek, Latin, and Arabic – and my doubts with respect to their doctrines
   were increased. I wanted therefore to discover also whether their assertions
   could be verified in the world, which – as I learned from the doctrines of
   the philosophers – is the living book of God. And since my teachers were
   not able to respond to the objections that I raised to whatever they taught, I
   decided to read for myself all the books of Plato, Pliny, Galen, the books of
   the Stoics, those of the followers of Democritus, but above all the works of
   Telesio, so that I might compare them with the book of nature and thereby
   find out, from such a comparison with the original and autograph version,
   how much truth and how much falsehood there was in the copies. In the
   course of public disputes at Cosenza or in private conversations with fellow
   friars, the replies of my interlocutors did not succeed in allaying my doubts.
   Only Telesio replenished my spirit with joy, both on account of his liberty
   of philosophizing and also because he derived his opinions from the natural
   world, and not from the words of men.1

In this passage, from his Syntagma de libris propriis (written at Rome in 1632 in
response to repeated requests from Gabriel Naudé), Campanella expressed the
deep significance of his early studies in the years of his youth spent in the Domini-
can convents of Calabria.2 The section just cited is preceded by a rapid sketch of


    1
      Syntagma, I, 1, pp. 31–33. On book metaphors in Campanella, see Margherita
Palumbo, ‘libri, libro della natura,’ in Enciclopedia, vol. 1, coll. 257–265.
    2
      The Syntagma would be published in Paris only in 1642, three years after the death of
the author. Even if a degree of inaccuracy and some incoherence have raised suspicions
of manipulation (probably minor) of the text by Naudé, the text immediately proved to
be an irreplaceable document for the purpose of reconstructing the human and intel-
lectual development of the author. Campanella had also dictated a Vita Campanellae to
Naudé, the loss of which cannot be but deeply regretted. In the Syntagma scant and not


G. Ernst, Tommaso Campanella, International Archives of the History                      1
of Ideas / Archives internationales d’histoire des idées 200,
DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3126-6_1, © Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2010
2      Chapter 1

his childhood and early adolescence, characterized by a precocious, intensely felt
desire to learn that was accompanied by a gifted memory together with a natu-
ral predisposition to poetic expression. Campanella composed his first verses at
around the age of thirteen (even if they were mostly without great merit); at fifteen,
in the village of San Giorgio Morgeto, during celebrations on the occasion of the
visit of the lord of the place, he recited an oration in verse that he had composed
himself, before a great crowd, which had gathered there from nearby villages.3
    Campanella was born shortly after dawn on 5 September 1568 in Stilo, in
Calabria, which was part of the Spanish viceroyalty of Naples.4 On 12 Septem-
ber, he was baptized with the name Giovan Domenico. His family was of humble
extraction: his father, Geronimo, was an illiterate cobbler; his mother, Caterina
Martello, died just after her son had turned five years old. In a curious passage
in the Theologia, Campanella would later remember that, in the course of a
diabolical evocation in Padua (in 1593–1594), the devil, inhabiting the body of
a possessed woman, had guessed the name of his mother (who had died at Stilo
twenty years earlier), but was curiously incapable of recalling the first words of
Plato’s Timaeus.5 Testament to his desire to learn and to his poverty is an anec-
dote relating that as a child he listened from outside the school (being unable to
pay for lessons) and, when the schoolchildren did not know how to respond to
the questions of the teacher, he would appear at the window and shout: ‘Would
you like me to tell you?’ This was the first of many such anecdotes – more or
less verisimilar – that recur throughout his autobiography.
    During an outbreak of the plague (which was said to have been caused by
infected cloth imported from Algeria to Messina and later to Calabria), his
father Geronimo had managed to keep the disease under control.6

always perspicuous autobiographical notes are woven into a critical bibliography of
the contents of his own books. For autobiographical information present in other
books, see Germana Ernst, ‘Autobiografia di Tommaso Campanella,’ in Laboratorio
Campanella, pp. 15–38.
    3
      Syntagma, I, 1, p. 30.
    4
      The hour indicated by Firpo (‘six minutes after six in the afternoon’) in DBI, XVII
(Rome, 1974), p. 372, ought to be modified. A correct interpretation of the hour indicated
within the nativity theme, which is included in the papers of the Abbot Orazio Morandi (for
which see below, ch. 11.2), indicates twelve hours after the setting of the sun (the moment at
which the new day was judged to have begun in the early modern period) and eighteen hours
post meridiem on 4 September – that is, around six in the morning of the 5th. The nativity,
preserved at Rome (Archivio di Stato, Tribunale Criminale del Governatore, Processi 1630,
n. 251, c. 1298r) is reproduced in Ernst, Religione, p. 158; Campanella, Opuscoli astrologici,
p. 62. For another nativity theme, which confirms these dates, see Germana Ernst and
Giuseppe Bezza, ‘Una natività manoscritta di Campanella,’ B&C, 13 (2007), pp. 711–716.
    5
      Tommaso Campanella, Le creature sovrannaturali, Theologicorum liber V, ed. R.
Amerio (Rome, 1970), p. 104; the passage is highlighted by Romano Amerio, Il sistema
teologico di Tommaso Campanella (Milan-Naples, 1972), p. 64, note 2.
                                                          Telesius me delectavit         3

   From childhood Campanella had suffered from pains in the spleen and
during a night of the new moon, he had been restored to health by a healer
thanks to a magical formula.7 At the age of fourteen and a half, against the
wishes of his father (who had hoped to send him to Naples in the care of a rel-
ative, so that he might follow courses in jurisprudence), Campanella decided
to enter the Dominican order. He had been fascinated by the eloquence of
a preacher (from whom he had learned the rudiments of logic) and by the
figures of Albert the Great and Thomas Aquinas. After entering the convent
of Placanica and changing his birth-name to Tommaso, he was transferred
to the convent of the Annunziata in San Giorgio Morgeto, where he studied
scholastic texts on logic and physics, as well as Aristotle’s Metaphysics and
De anima.8 On the occasion of the mentioned visit of the small town’s baron,
Giacomo II Milano, who had married Isabella del Tufo, he forged a relation-
ship with the del Tufo, an important aristocratic family in whose palace he
would later stay during his sojourn in Naples. In the autumn of 1586, Campan-
ella was transferred to the convent of the Annunziata in Nicastro, where he
struck up a friendship with the Ponzio brothers (Dionisio in particular), who
would later play an important part in the Calabrian conspiracy of 1599.
   Immediately, the reading of Aristotelian texts together with their com-
mentators prompted dissatisfaction and a critical attitude in the young friar.
At Nicastro, a teacher, referring to that polemical attitude, is said to have
warned: ‘Campanella, Campanella, you will not meet with a good end!’9 Cam-
panella explained the reasons for breaking with the doctrines of the schools in



    6
      Medicina, p. 324. The reference is to the plague that struck Sicily in 1575–1576. A
contemporary report on the plague by the physician Giovanni Filippo Ingrassia has
recently been published in a modern edition as Giovanni Filippo Ingrassia, Informatione
del pestifero et contagioso morbo, ed. L. Ingaliso (Milan, 2005).
    7
      Senso delle cose, IV, 17, p. 215.
    8
      There, he wrote a sequence of Lectiones logicae, physicae et animasticae, which
has not survived. Regarding the organization of the Dominican convents and their
library collections in Calabria, see L. G. Esposito, I Domenicani in Calabria. Ricerche
archivistiche, ed. G. Cioffari (Naples-Bari, 1997); little is known concerning the earliest
periods in Campanella’s youth, but see Carlo Longo OP, ‘Su gli anni giovanili di Fr.
Tommaso Campanella OP, 1568–1589,’ Archivum Fratrum Praedicatorum, 73 (2003),
pp. 363–390; Idem, ‘“Thomas ille tertius.” I Domenicani di Placanica e Campanella,’
B&C, 12 (2006), pp. 137–144.
    9
      Amabile, Congiura, III, doc. 278, p. 199. In the volume Fra le letture del giovane
Tommaso Campanella (Vibo Valentia, 2002), Antonella De Vinci relates that there are
autograph notes made by a very young Campanella in the margins of books that come
from the convent in Nicastro; see also her subsequent paper, ‘Postille del giovane
Campanella in volumi della Casa del Libro Antico di Lamezia Terme’, in Laboratorio
Campanella, pp. 39–63.
4      Chapter 1

the preface of his first published work, the Philosophia sensibus demonstrata.
They are intense pages, that offer the reader a vivid autobiographical sketch
and a passionate methodological manifesto.10 Not by chance, this preface
opens with the word ‘truth,’ which is represented, in the vignette of the fron-
tispiece, as a sphere that floats on the water, while winds blowing from every
quarter try to sink it and a young friar attempts to reach it by swimming. Truth
can be obscured and attacked, begins the author, but in the end it emerges
from the shadows and becomes once again resplendent. Campanella does not
hesitate to add that one ought even to prefer the truth to life itself.
    Tracing the fundamental lines of his first years of study, Campanella con-
fessed that the reading of Aristotle’s scholastic texts had raised in him more
doubts than certainties. His teachers did not know how to respond to his ques-
tions and gave embarrassed replies, in which the young student found little
solace. Thus, he came to find himself in a painful condition of fearfulness and
loneliness, feeling himself completely isolated from the entire philosophical
tradition. But in the end, there awoke in Campanella the intuition of a new
philosophy taken not from books or from the intellect of Aristotle, but rather
from things themselves and by means of the senses and experience. And noth-
ing could any longer impede the powerful development of this perspective:
‘thereafter the truth burned brightly and it was not possible to contain it within
me.’11 Accused of supporting doctrines similar to those of Telesio, Campanella
could not help but feel joy at the judgment – which was meant as a reproach
and a condemnation – because he had finally found an intellectual companion
and guide.
    Having moved to Cosenza so as to pursue the study of theology, Cam-
panella was able to read the first edition of Telesio’s De rerum natura iuxta
propria principia (Naples, 1565). From the very first pages, he intuited the
novelty and the coherence of a doctrine that, in accord with his own aspira-
tions, ‘derives the truth from things examined by means of sense and not
by means of illusions.’12 His desire to meet Telesio in person was, however,
frustrated by the death of the philosopher at the age of eighty. Campanella
could only admire his noble face and offer a reverent homage to the corpse
as it lay in state at the cathedral of the city. He then affixed some verses by




   10
      There is an italian translation in Luigi Firpo, ‘Il metodo nuovo (Praefatio alla
Philosophia sensibus demonstrata di Tommaso Campanella),’ Rivista di Filosofia, 40
(1949), pp. 182–205.
   11
      Phil. sens. dem., p. 7: ‘Post haec incaluit veritas et intus cogi amplius minus poterat.’
   12
      Ibid.: I appreciated Telesio ‘tanquam veritatem ex rebus conspectis sensu elicien-
tem, ut patuit, non ex chimeris.’
                                                             Telesius me delectavit           5

the casket.13 This virtual encounter, in which the young Dominican seemed
to receive the spiritual inheritance of the new philosophy, fixed itself indel-
ibly in his mind, and would later reemerge with the same emotional intensity
more than forty years later, in a letter written from Paris to Nicolas-Claude
Fabri de Peiresc on 19 June 1636. Evoking once again this memorable Tel-
esian period and recalling some of Telesio’s exponents, such as the physician
Francesco Sopravia of Seminara (who ‘glossed the opinions of Leucippus
and Democritus wondrously to everyone, when I was sixteen’), Campanella
did not fail to remember his own desire to go to Cosenza, as he described
the homage he paid to the corpse: ‘then I went, growing in feeling and desire
to know, to where Telesio was in upper Calabria; I was not able to see him
except in death, when I composed for him an epigram and read his books.’14
The episode would strike later readers too, and in the second half of the
nineteenth century a poet from Cosenza, Vincenzo Baffi, would dedicate a
long elegy to the funeral vigil of the young Campanella next to the coffin of
Telesio, imagining that in the course of the night, during the breaking of a
violent storm, the young friar, asleep, foresaw in a dream the difficult trials
that he would later have to endure. But, in the morning, as he awoke, the fury
of the elements was stilled and when he came out of the church into the fresh
air he was able to contemplate the consoling image of a rainbow under a sky
that had once again become serene.15
    Although the youthful verses attached to the casket have been lost, Cam-
panella celebrated in a famous sonnet the philosopher who had defeated and
killed the tyrant of the intellects, emancipating man from the yoke of Aristo-
tle and from every other philosophy that would presume to substitute itself
for the book of nature, so as to restore to man that libertas philosophandi that
is inseparable from the truth:
   Telesio, in the midst of the sophists’ encampment
   An arrow from your quiver kills
   The tyrant of the mind without hope of escape;
   And conquers liberty, so sweet to truth.16


    13
       Ibid.: ‘me ibi [in Cosenza] existente defunctus est summus Telesius et ab eo suas
sententias audire non licuit, nec viventem videre sed mortuum, in templum delatum, cuius
vultum discooperiens admiratus sum, et in eius tumulo plurima de eo affixi carmina.’
    14
       Germana Ernst and Eugenio Canone, ‘Una lettera ritrovata: Campanella a Peir-
esc, 19 giugno 1636,’ Rivista di storia della Filosofia, 49 (1994), pp. 353–366: 364; the text
of the letter is also in Lettere 2, p. 116.
    15
       Vincenzo Baffi, Una notte di Tommaso Campanella, in Versi (Florence, 1858),
pp. 27–32.
    16
       Poesie, p. 278: ‘Telesio, il telo della tua faretra/uccide de’ sofisti in mezzo al campo/
degli ingegni il tiranno senza scampo;/libertà dolce alla verità impetra.’
6        Chapter 1

When Campanella sought to explain in the Syntagma why, after having
searched through the entire philosophical tradition, his restless research had
settled on the philosophy of Telesio (‘sed Telesius me delectavit’), he empha-
sized two reasons: libertas philosophandi and adherence to natural facts
instead of to the words of men. Campanella was among the first to use the
expression libertas philosophandi in order to denote emancipation from all
authority whatsoever and the right, which was also a duty, on the part of the
scholar to read directly from the book of nature.17 A third reason was that
Telesio, animated by a disinterested love for the truth and unmoved by vain
academic honors, also embodied in his own life, and not just in his thought,
an authentic (and extremely rare) philosophical style. According to Campan-
ella, in the entire history of thought one can enumerate only twenty-five true
philosophers – and only four in modern times. Even if we do not know the
names of those philosophers – or even whether, or how, Campanella might
have responded to François La Mothe Le Vayer, who was curious to know
them – at least two are absolutely certain: Socrates for antiquity and Telesio,
an admirable example of true philosophical modesty, for modernity.18
    Telesio’s philosophy reestablished those connections between things and
words that had been worn out and lost in the Aristotelian tradition. Even
if in Aristotle (depicted in the Syntagma as one of the greatest geniuses of
the human race) the importance of the relationship to the natural world was
front and center, his followers, convinced that in the corpus of his writings
the master had included, once and for all time, the whole truth, no longer
recognized the necessity of verification by means of experience. Indeed,
such verification was perceived as a disturbance and a menace. Denounc-
ing the ‘fictions’ and sophistries of the Aristotelians, the young Campanella
underlined their incapacity to distance themselves from the narrow confines
of their own philosophy in order to go outside into the open air and observe
things themselves:

    Never, by Hercules, have I succeeded in finding one of them looking upon
    things, going into the countryside – to the sea, to the mountains – in order to


    17
       See John M. Headley, ‘Campanella on Freedom of Thought: The Case of the
Cropped Pericope,’ B&C, 2 (1996), pp. 165–177; see also his important monograph on
Tommaso Campanella and the Transformation of the World (Princeton, 1997); on the
Apologia pro Galileo, see below, ch. 9.1.
    18
       Ateismo trionfato, I, p. 18 (Ath. triumph., p. 4); regarding La Mothe le Vayer, see
Naudé’s letter to Campanella sent from Urbino on 21 August 1632 (where, perhaps
as a result of a printing error, ‘twenty-four natural philosophers’ of modern times are
spoken of, whereas Campanella wrote ‘vix quatuor’), in Epistulae (Geneva, 1667), p.
262. As for other ancient philosophers, one might imagine Pythagoras, Plato, Diogenes,
Hermes Trismegistus, perhaps Seneca and Dante.
                                                           Telesius me delectavit         7

   observe things, instead of remaining always squirreled away at home, study-
   ing only in the books of Aristotle, over which they are always poring.19

Campanella found in Telesio a response to the necessity of leaving the labyrinth
of paper and of words, in which books beget books and reason (forgetting its
relationship to things and to experience) degenerates into sophisms and merely
verbal disputes. As he would say in a passage from a later work addressed to crit-
ics who were accusing him of privileging sense over reason, he explained that he
did not deny reason in itself but rather held that, cut off from the senses, reason
lost itself in sophisms.20
    In another famous sonnet, among those translated by Herder,21 Campan-
ella took up the metaphor of the book of nature, connecting it to that of the
living temple:
   The world is the book in which Eternal Wisdom
   Has written its ideas; it is a living temple
   Decorated from high to low with living statues
   Representing its own undertakings and its own example.22
From here he went on to deplore the human attitude of preferring ‘dead
books and temples/copied by the living with many errors,’ which cannot but
engender evils such as ‘disputes, ignorance, great difficulty, and sorrow.’ He
concluded with a vivid exhortation to return to the observation and study of
the original book of nature itself.


                       In Defense of Telesio Against Aristotle

In 1591, at Naples, in the publishing house of Orazio Salviano, the first of
Campanella’s published works appeared – the previously mentioned Philos-
ophia sensibus demonstrata. It was a massive volume defending Telesio’s natural
philosophy and dedicated to Mario del Tufo, in whose palace the author was
residing. Campanella had written it in the first eight months of 1589, before
he was twenty, in the Calabrian convent of Altomonte, where he had been
sent by his superiors, perhaps as a punishment for his enthusiastic adherence
to Telesio’s philosophy.23 There he established friendships with physicians and


   19
        Phil. sens. dem., p. 5.
   20
        See Dialogo politico contro Luterani, p. 42 (for this work, see ch. 3.1).
     21
        See ch. 7, note 13.
     22
        Poesie, p. 44: ‘Il mondo è il libro dove il Senno Eterno/scrisse i proprii concetti,
e vivo tempio/dove, pingendo i gesti e ’l proprio esempio,/di statue vive ornò l’imo e
’l superno.’
     23
        It is probable that material elaborated previously is woven into the work, and
perhaps others elements were added later.
8     Chapter 1

local scholars24 and was able to develop his own readings further. This nour-
ished and fed an appetite for knowing so insatiable that in a sonnet (signifi-
cantly titled Anima immortale, ‘Immortal Soul,’ as if in the measurelessness of
that desire to know there might be a sign of such immortality), he gave voice
to his own soul:
    I am held in a brain the size of a fist and I devour
    So much that all the books in the world
    Are not enough to satiate my vast appetite:
    I have consumed so much and yet I am dying of hunger.25
It was in fact his new friends who procured for Campanella a copy of the
Pugnaculum Aristotelis adversus principia Bernardini Telesii, in which the
Neapolitan jurist Giacomo Antonio Marta set himself up as a defender of
Aristotle’s doctrines, deriding Telesio’s. Indeed, these friends encouraged
Campanella to respond and return the attack and he did just that, quickly
and with confidence. He drew up the eight weighty disputations of the Philos-
ophia, setting out a systematic critique of Aristotle’s philosophy from physical,
cosmological, and metaphysical points of view in light of Telesian principles
combined with arguments derived from other philosophies and traditions
(including the pre-Socratics and the Platonists, as well as the Neo-Platonist
and Hermetic traditions). The text is not easy to read.26 The very polemical
structure of the text makes the reader’s journey tortuous and disjointed and
is illuminated only by flashes of vivid attacks on Marta, who is presented as a
presumptuous and arrogant pseudo-philosopher, a dog barking wildly in the
street. And then, when this pseudo-philosopher had the temerity to make a
joke on the connection between Calabrians and the sphere of fire, Campanella
replied proudly that Calabrians might be said to partake in that sphere with
good reason, on account of the subtlety and the purity of their minds, capable
of penetrating the heavens, while Marta – made up of dense and murky animal




    24
       In the Praefatio, Campanella mentioned the physicians Giovan Francesco
Branca and Plinio Rogliano, Muzio Campolongo, baron of Acquaformosa, and the
jurisconsult Giovan Paolo Galterio.
    25
       Poesie, p. 39: ‘Di cervel dentro un pugno io sto, e divoro/tanto, che quanti libri
tiene il mondo/non saziâr l’appetito mio profondo:/quanto ho mangiato! e del digiun
pur moro.’
    26
       The scholars who have analyzed the themes of this work the most are Antonio
Corsano, Nicola Badaloni, Pasquale Tuscano, and Luigi De Franco. On the relationship
between Campanella and Telesio, see Michel-Pierre Lerner, ‘Telesio et Campanella:
de la nature iuxta propria principia à la nature instrumentum Dei,’ B&C, 13 (2007),
pp. 79–97.
                                                         Telesius me delectavit        9

spirits – would merit being closed up in the bowels of the earth. Similarly,
responding to one contemptuous line on the Calabrian origins of Telesio, he
launched into a passionate speech on the illustrious Calabrian philosophical
tradition, of which Telesio was a renowned exponent.27
   Although the text proceeds in a minute and tedious manner, the work
actually turns out to be important, both because it contains themes and prob-
lems that would later be much further developed and also on account of the
extremely dense blizzard of citations, which serves to reveal the young Cam-
panella’s ‘library’ – in all its surprising extension and variety – in a way that
would never be repeated. Campanella moved with great confidence within
the Aristotelian texts themselves, as well as in those of his commentators and
followers – the ancients (Themistius, Alexander of Aphrodisia, Philoponus),
the medievals (the ‘prince’ Averroes is heavily cited, as is St. Thomas, and
above all the ‘divine’ Albert the Great), and the moderns, such as Agostino
Nifo. Campanella reevaluated the Pre-Socratics, suppressed and criticized by
Aristotle. He knew well the physicians, from Hippocrates to Galen, Peter de
Abano, Jean Fernel, and Vesalius. He had read the texts of the astronomers
and those of the natural philosophers. A central role was reserved for Pliny the
Elder and his Naturalis Historia, but Cardano’s De Subtilitate is also cited.28
Above all, there is Ficino, who is mentioned with some reserve but also with
the strong will to connect his doctrines with Telesio’s philosophy – Ficino the
commentator on Plato (especially the Timaeus and the Symposium) and the
Enneads of Plotinus, with whom the ‘Platonic’ Virgil is associated.
   Other than proposing a new methodology, based on sensory categories
instead on words or astractions,29 the Philosophia is concerned with attacking
Aristotelianism on all fronts: thus, in an examination both systematic and pre-
cise, Campanella discusses and rejects the doctrines of form and privation, of
the four elements as principles of the sublunary world, of matter as privation,
of the derivation of celestial heat from the friction of the spheres, and of the
distinction between natural and violent motion. This is a systematic work of
dismantling that finds its complement in a radical critique of traditional cos-
mology, both with regard to the nature of the heavens and to the trajectories
and mechanisms of heavenly motions. Alongside the pars destruens, the work
defends with passion and ample argumentation the constitutive principles of


   27
        Phil. sens. dem., pp. 473–474; Praefatio, p. 18.
   28
        According to testimony from the trial following the attempted revolt in Calabria,
Campanella recoursed to Pliny in order to identify God and nature: ’...nel ragiona-
mento [Campanella] diceva che non ci era Dio, ma solo è la natura, et noi a questa li
avemo messo nome Dio, et allegava Plinio, quale teneva in mano’ (Amabile, Congiura,
III, doc. 393, p. 421; see also doc. 303, p. 245).
     29
        Syntagma, I, 1, p. 34; Phil. sens. dem., p. 363.
10        Chapter 1

Telesio’s philosophy, according to which every being derives from the modifica-
tions that follow from the acting of the two primary principles of heat and cold on
matter, which is considered not as an abstract ens rationis, but as an inert, obscure,
corporeal extension deprived of every particular form but capable of taking on
any form. The sun and the earth are the first bodies and elements, seats of the
two primary principles. Motion is the operation of heat. The sky has an igneous
nature and the celestial heat is of the same nature as its terrestrial counterpart.
With regard to the complicated mechanism of the celestial spheres, Campanella
did not hesitate to reject the absurdity of mathematical fictions, together with
the ambiguous role played by the motive intelligences, so as to propose a more
coherent theory that, shared by Telesio, was derived from the Arab astronomer
Alpetragius. With the spheres eliminated and with the uniqueness of the heavens
asserted, the diversity of celestial motions and bodies is explained in terms of the
different quantities of heat with which each is endowed.
    Campanella’s interests and studies in medicine manifested themselves above
all in the second disputation, which was dedicated to the generation and con-
stitution of the fetus. On this subject – very dear to him – Campanella broke
decisively with Aristotle, who accentuated almost exclusively the active and
formative function of the male seed. Instead, Campanella took up the positions
of Telesio – who adopted, but also went beyond, the positions of Galen. With
the role of the menstrual blood discounted (because it was considered to be
simply an excrement to be expelled), important factors in the constitution of
the embryo other than the male seed were taken up: the female seed, the mere
existence of which Aristotle had denied, and above all the heat of the uterus,
which (endowed with great understanding and art) had the capacity to awaken
and organize the life contained in the seed. In this way, the uterus did not merely
perform the function of a passive container, but, just the opposite, played a fun-
damental role in the development of the seeds, a role similar to that played by
the ‘fertile and fecund’ earth, as is underscored with a reference to Fernel.30
    With precise references to passages in the Timaeus and to the commentary
by Ficino, Campanella underlined the powerful influence of the imagination
on the complexion of the child, given that the spiritus takes in and transports
the images impressed in itself that pass from the brain to the ‘mirror’ of the
liver and can from there easily imprint themselves on the supple complexion of
the fetus. And it is naturally for this reason that the bedrooms of Campanella’s
utopia – the City of the Sun – are furnished with ‘beautiful statues of famous
men, at which the women look intently.’31 In confronting a problem so diffuse

     Phil. sens. dem., p. 216.
     30

     Città del Sole, p. 19. For a good English translation see T. Campanella, La Città
     31

del Sole: Dialogo Poetico / The City of the Sun: A Poetical Dialogue, ed. D.J. Donno
(Berkeley and Los Angeles-London, 1981).
                                                        Telesius me delectavit       11

as that of the birthmarks, Campanella did not refrain from reporting popular
beliefs, oscillating between skepticism and attempts to provide more plausible
philosophical explanations. He insisted on continuity between the maternal
spirit and that of the child, as well as the possible communication of strong pas-
sions. From such attention to the marvelous constitution of the fetus derives
a decisive theoretical reappraisal of the role of the female in generation, a role
that is no longer relegated to the categories of privation and passivity. Taking up
Galen again, Campanella emphasized the fundamental similarity of the male
and female sexual organs, which are differentiated only by the fact that the
male sex organs are external while the female are internal, a difference that, in
turn, reflects the greater or lesser heat with which they originated. On the basis
of such a description, one could account for the possibility that a woman, in
particular circumstances, could push out her own internal organs and become
a man. In the Quaestiones physiologicae too, Campanella recalled a recent case
(which he had observed personally in Naples) of a Spanish nun who became
both a man and a soldier. He added a contemptuous dig directed at the Dis-
quisitiones magicae of the Spanish Jesuit Martin Del Rio, who had maintained
that the change of sex was a result of diabolical intervention, whereas accord-
ing to Campanella this was a completely natural fact.32
    The third dispute, dedicated to the heavens and to the cosmos, discusses
the igneous nature of the heavens and the motions of the stars. Speaking of
celestial heat, Campanella inserted a lengthy digression on astrology, directed
against Marta, that recalls the astrologers’ distinction between the cold bodies,
such as the Moon and Saturn, and the hot ones. Campanella replied that all
celestial bodies are hot, and that they are distinct only on account of a greater
or lesser degree of heat. Moreover, he argued that all entities without excep-
tion, including the earth, must be hot in various degrees and proportions, since
all originated in the action of solar heat on matter. After having responded
to the objections of his adversary, Campanella took the opportunity to linger
for a while on the problems of astrology. Some years later, in two famous pas-
sages, Campanella would recall his own youthful aversion to astrologers and
relate that eventually, having considered the matter from a different point
of view, he overcame this aversion.33 In truth, in these dense pages of the
Philosophia, Campanella is not so much an adversary of astrology as a Tel-
esian reformer. Against those who argue that human events (both individual
and collective) depend on the stars, he added nothing to what Picohad said on


   32
       Quaest. phys., p. 362; see Guido Giglioni, ‘Immaginazione, spiriti e generazione.
La teoria del concepimento nella Philosophia sensibus demonstrata,’ B&C, 4 (1998),
pp. 37–57.
    33
       See ch. 9.3.
12    Chapter 1

the matter. Campanella knew and valued Pico’s Disputationes adversus astro-
logiam divinatricem, and is in full agreement with him when he maintains that
from the heavens comes only heat and light. Then, a long passage from Pliny
is relayed, in which it is asserted (against Hermetic doctrines that seemed to
institute a connection between particular terrestrial beings and specific astral
bodies) that there are not stars for rich people and stars for poor people. In
accordance with Plotinus, who in the third Ennead asserted that the heav-
ens cannot act either for good or for ill, Campanella reaffirmed that from
the heavens came only life, and never death. He showed himself, moreover,
to be very critical of the vain predictive pretentions of astrology, going back
once again to Pico’s Disputationes.34 Then, the deterministic and necessitarian
aspect of astrology is decisively rejected. Since fate is understood as the gen-
eral sum of all causes, which are of various kinds (some of them contingent),
fate is not inexorable but can be avoided and changed. When he then went on
to consider the occult powers, accepted by the hermetic tradition, Campan-
ella intended to explain and specify them rather than reject them in a radical
way, and he connected the variety of terrestrial beings with the almost infinite
quantity of variations in heat.
    Out of the subtle and minute argumentative structure of the eight hefty
disputationes emerges a powerful unifying motive: the centrality, nobility, and
primacy of solar heat, which operates at various levels to confer connected-
ness and life to all beings. It is in this context that the assimilation of solar
heat with the soul of the world takes on a particular significance, and it is
a theme that constitutes the beating heart of the third dispute. Campanella
gathered together a series of authors and texts – the golden chain of Homer,
the colcodea of Avicenna, hermetic excerpts – so as to call attention to a
theme neglected in Telesio, but that is in fact similar and assimilable to Tel-
esio’s concept of solar heat. The author who most approximated this perspec-
tive was Ficino and Campanella transcribed verbatim the beautiful passages
of the commentary on Plotinus’s Enneads in which Ficino discusses the soul
of the world and the ‘vital and sensual breath’ it expires and out of which the
heavens are constituted.35 Ficino compares such hot breath, which penetrates
and is infused throughout the world, to a famous verse of the Aeneid, VI, 726
(spiritus intus alit: ‘the spirit nourishes within’). Because it contains all things


    34
       On the relationship between Campanella and Pico, see Luigi Firpo, ‘Pico come
modello dello scienziato nel Campanella,’ in L’opera e il pensiero di Giovanni Pico
della Mirandola nella storia dell’Umanesimo (Florence, 1965), II, pp. 363–371; Nicola
Badaloni, ‘L’influenza di Giovanni Pico sulla giovanile Philosophia sensibus demon-
strata del Campanella,’ ibid., pp. 373–388; now in Idem, Inquietudini e fermenti di lib-
ertà nel Rinascimento italiano (Pisa, 2005), pp. 363–375.
    35
       Phil. sens. dem., p. 322ff.
                                                        Telesius me delectavit         13

and because it flows smoothly ‘like oil,’ that breath can also be compared to
the divine spirit of Genesis, 1:2 (spiritus Dei ferebatur super aquas: ‘the Spirit
of God was hovering over the waters’) that moved on top of – or, better, ‘hung
over’ – the water, communicating an occult, vivifying heat to all cold matter.
The heavens are constituted out of this breath and divine word. It is the word
of the soul extending out that vivifies and nourishes everything:

   From the Soul of the world, thus, pours forth always a kind of animal spirit,
   almost an offshoot of the interior life, and this is fire, almost an animal light
   stretched out towards dimension, a luminous hot spirit and a spark for the
   generation of all things; a sky, I say, not only surrounding, but also infused
   in all things and a sky of skies, a breath of the divine spirit in a certain form
   close to soul; celestial, igneous, luminous, hot, it flies away and expands in
   the air while it contracts in water and in earth.36

Thus, everything that grows on the earth has celestial origins: the heavens are
infused in everything and ‘everything lives by virtue of the occult heaven or
heat inside it.’37 In so far as they are humid, fecund, and generative of life, the
heavens, living and life-giving, are analogous to animal spirits: that which in the
soul is life is heat in the heavens, and it is thanks to such heat and to such life
that the wondrous concord of all discordant things is realized. These are things
that, in so far as they are all governed by a single cause, remain connected with
each other, are animated by the same life, and are vivified by the same spirit.
Specifying the relationship between God, soul of the world, and heat, Campan-
ella insisted, however, on underscoring the fact that God is not identified, as
Varro had it, with the soul of the world. Instead, one is to understand that God
creates by means of heat, and Campanella proposes once again passages from
Ficino, flanked, in order to show the agreement, by verses from Psalms.38
    As for the relationship between theology and the Holy Scriptures, Cam-
panella, though conscious of the risk and the danger of an attack on Aristo-
telianism, intended to argue in favor of dissociating Peripatetic philosophy
and theology, so as to demonstrate how other philosophical traditions can
be more suited to such a union. Holding fast to some points of Christian
doctrine that were impossible to renounce (such as creation ex nihilo and
divine providence) and that he reinterpreted in the light of Telesio, Cam-
panella emphasized Aristotle’s impiety instead. After all, Aristotle main-
tained the eternity of the world and the disinterestedness of God for human
events (caring for such events would render him base), so as to demonstrate

   36
       Ibid., p. 323 (the passage cited comes from Ficino).
   37
       Ibid., p. 327: ‘coelum esse infusum singulis entibus et occulto coelo seu calore
vivere omnia.’
    38
       Ibid., p. 523ff.
14        Chapter 1

how the Christian Telesio permits a reading of many Biblical passages that is
simpler and closer to the text than the reading one would get if one accepted
the principles of the pagan Aristotle.39 Notwithstanding such an effort at
reconciliation, Campanella was completely aware of the delicacy and the
possible risks of such a proposition. He was aware also of the insinuations
– only just coming to light, but already very menacing – of possible con-
flicts between Telesio and the Bible. Marta warned that considering water
as the dampness of the earth (and no longer as the ‘great elemental body,’
as had been the common opinion of theologians and Councils) could have
implications for the sacrament of baptism.40 Moreover, Marta had also sug-
gested that reconsidering, or even eliminating, the role of the male seed in
reproduction could have consequences for the doctrine of original sin and
the miraculousness of Mary’s conception of Christ.41 To such objections and
insinuations, Campanella replied by seeking to stabilize the division of com-
petences between theology and natural philosophy, emphasizing the great
difficulties that present themselves on the path of the search for truth.42
    So as to render the dense pages of the Philosophia somewhat lighter, Cam-
panella related some autobiographical anecdotes. Some were more certain and
direct, as when the author recalls having seen the volcanic eruptions of Aeolian
Islands with his own eyes from the convent of San Giorgio Morgeto. Others
were less certain and more indirect, such as when Campanella, in a genuinely
odd passage, while speaking of the similarities between children and parents,
criticized the way in which many attribute dissimilarity in father and son to a
sort of degeneration or an attenuating of the energy of the seed that would bring
with it a weakness of spirit. Had this been the case, he objected, ‘a Calabrian
child of the Campanella family not looking like any of his relatives (nor even
like a Calabrian) and instead looking like someone from a completely differ-
ent family (that might even be Indian), ought to be of very low quality in mind
and body.’ He rejected this conclusion, because ‘every day we have experienced
just the opposite.’43 Campanella also remembered – while speaking of mice and
other animals whose eyes glow in the dark or of the fact that sometimes, having
rubbed one’s eyes at night, one sees a certain light being emitted – that a man
‘when he woke up at night saw his own bed completely illuminated by the light
from his own eyes, a light however that then vanished at once.’44



     39
        Ibid., p. 522.
     40
       Ibid., p. 519.
     41
        Ibid., p. 282.
     42
        Ibid., p. 447ff.
     43
        Ibid., pp. 343; 240.
     44
        Ibid., p. 662; see Epilogo magno, p. 401.
