2. From Naples to Padua: Encounters,
                  Conflicts, Trials


                                         Naples

At the end of 1589, the twenty-one-year-old Campanella, after a second brief
stay at Cosenza, where he perhaps had the opportunity to frequent the Acad-
emy of Cosenza, the ‘prize’ of which is described in a passage in the Poetica,1
left both Calabria and his affiliates there (who are remembered with affec-
tion in the sonnet dedicated to Telesio).2 He headed for Naples and would not
return for nine years. He may have been accompanied by a mysterious rabbi
Abraham, necromancer and astrologer, to whom Campanella never made ref-
erence, but who, according to some reports and rumors, may have commu-
nicated to him the secrets needed to acquire extraordinary knowledge and
who may also have predicted an exceptional destiny for him, tempting him to
abandon the Dominican order.3 As soon as he reached the capital, Campanella
took part in a public debate. Relatively common in that time, such debates took
place in churches, mostly on Sundays, before large audiences. They concen-
trated on arguments announced by posters affixed publically in the preceding
days. The arguments of the young Dominican were so brilliant that he quickly
put his adversaries to flight and was carried in triumph by his colleagues into
the convent at San Domenico, where he lodged at first, transferring later to


   1
      Poetica, p. 401. See Lina Bolzoni, ‘Conoscenza e piacere. L’influenza di Telesio su
teorie e pratiche letterarie fra Cinque e Seicento,’ in Bernardino Telesio e la cultura
napoletana (Naples, 1992), pp. 221–226: 224.
    2
      Poesie, pp. 278–279.
    3
      For testimony on Rabbi Abraham see Amabile, Congiura, III, doc. 328–329, pp. 281–
283. The episode was noted by Ernst Salomon Cyprianus, Vita Campanellae (Amsterdam:
Wetstenios, 1722), pp. 4–5, who recalled a passage from a letter by Carlo Cassa, which cited
the testimony of one of Campanella’s former peers, according to whom the young friar was
quickly transformed from an initial condition of ignorance and roughness (rudioris Min-
ervae) to the heights of an exceptional understanding thanks to the cabalistic teachings of
a rabbi; on the life of Campanella by Cyprian, see Margherita Palumbo, ‘Ernst Salomon
Cyprian, biografo di Tommaso Campanella,’ in Laboratorio Campanella, pp. 137–159.


G. Ernst, Tommaso Campanella, International Archives of the History                      15
of Ideas /Archives internationales d’histoire des idées 200,
DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3126-6_2, © Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2010
16       Chapter 2

the palace of the del Tufo family. Similar episodes had already been reported
at Cosenza, as well as later in the Paris years when Campanella would astound
people with his dialectical abilities.
    At the age of twenty-three, Campanella was the victim of a severe attack
of sciatica, from which he suffered for many months. He listed a series of
factors as causes of the disease: first, having taken a horse-ride that was
too long and hurried, second having eaten pig brains and, in general, too
much rich food in the splendid kitchen of the lord with whom he was living,
third having imbibed iced beverages.4 On the question of using iced bever-
ages, animated arguments had flared up between physicians and philoso-
phers in the last decades of the century. It was asked whether, in order to
satisfy thirst, it might be better (above all in summer) to follow the modern
usage of adding ‘snow’ to drinks or alternatively to drink them tepid, as the
ancients were accustomed to doing and as was the practice among Orien-
tals in modern times. Campanella fell into line with those supporting the
drinking of ‘warm liquids,’ writing also a small work, now lost, in defense
of a treatise on this matter by the Telesian Antonio Persio, to whom he was
linked by an affectionate and lasting friendship.5 The sciatica would resolve
itself only after a couple of years, thanks to a spell at the baths of Pozzuoli
and to a radical change in eating habits.6
    In the capital of the viceroyalty, the young Campanella had opportuni-
ties to frequent intense intellectual circles, especially the one centered on
the palace of the brothers della Porta (which was a meeting place for schol-
ars from all over Europe), as well as that centered on the group of scholars
protected by Matteo di Capua, Prince of Conca.7 In this way, Campanella
was able to get to know, among others, scholars such as Ferrante Imperato,
whose celebrated Museum of natural history he visited, and Colantonio Stig-
liola (the architect, astronomer, and philosopher who was an adherent of the



     4
       The marquises del Tufo owned thorough-bred farms in Apulia, at Minervino, that
without doubt Campanella was able to visit (ch. 4.1). He would dedicate a work on
horses and the art of riding to Mario del Tufo, which has been lost, and the observation
(Città del Sole, p. 10) that men pay greater attention to breeding dogs and horses than
to the reproduction of men ought perhaps to be connected Campanella’s acquain-
tance with such breeding.
    5
      Antonio Persio had published the short work Sul bever caldo (Venice, 1593); see
the anastatic copy in the appendix to the Trattato sull’ingegno dell’huomo, ed. L. Artese
(Pisa-Rome, 1999); Campanella addressed the issue in Quaest. phys., pp. 549–556.
    6
      Medicina, p. 381.
    7
      See Nicola Badaloni, ‘I fratelli Della Porta e la cultura magica e astrologica a
Napoli nel ’500,’ Studi storici, 1 (1959–60), pp. 677–711 (now in Idem, Inquietudini e
fermenti di libertà nel Rinascimento italiano, pp. 93–125).
                      From Naples to Padua: Encounters, Conflicts, Trials            17

theories of Copernicus and Giordano Bruno).8 Years later, some passages
of the Metaphysica would echo conversations that he had had with Stigli-
ola regarding a Pythagorean and Brunian vision of the universe. The young
Campanella showed some reserve on these issues – especially regarding the
basic structure of the stars and the possibility that they might be inhabited, a
doctrine that he rejected in favor of an assertion of the igneous nature of the
heavens and the stars, which were the seat of celestial spirits:
   Stigliola said to me (like the Nolan in a different way and the Pythagoreans
   have said in the past) that it seemed irrational to him that bodies so much
   larger than the earth and the space between the centre of the earth to the
   moon should be composed simply of idle fire, and not instead of all manner of
   elements and plants and animals and men, just as our countryman Philolaus
   held. But to me it seems easy to parry this argument. Indeed, I ask myself –
   stupefied – why on earth God should have made our system of earth, water,
   and animals, in which men are subjected to constant travails and are exposed
   to generation and decay. On that account, I hold that the stars are instead
   the composites of immortal things and the seats of the angels that know and
   praise God. In our system, in fact, ignorance, unhappiness, and deceit rule;
   God is blasphemed against, faith is not extended to him, nor is he recognized.
   Therefore if God did indeed make other systems unhappy in this way, then
   this would seem to be evidence not of his goodness but rather of his anger.9

But such disagreement on various specific points did not prevent a generally
strong interest in Pythagorean philosophy, to which Campanella had dedicated
a poem in his youth – the loss of which is to be greatly regretted. At Naples,
he participated in the Academy of the Awakened (Accademia degli Svegliati),
which soon thereafter in 1593 was closed by the Spanish authorities. The Acad-
emy counted among its members Ascanio Pignatelli, Paolo Regio, and Iacopo da
Gaeta and had been founded (and then led) by Giulio Cortese, a learned man


     8
       On Ferrante Imperato (circa 1550-1631), author of Dell’historia naturale (Naples,
1599), see Enrica Stendardo, Ferrante Imperato. Collezionismo e studio della natura a
Napoli tra Cinque e Seicento (Naples: Accademia Pontaniana, 2001), and the entry by
C. Preti, in DBI, LXII (Rome, 2004), pp. 286–290. Nicola Antonio Stigliola (1546–
 1624), was the author of works much appreciated by Campanella, such as the
 Telescopio. Of his principal work, Encyclopaedia Pythagorica, only a summary has
 survived. See Giuseppe Gabrieli, ‘Intorno a Nicola Antonio Stigliola, filosofo e Linceo
 napoletano,’ GCFI, 10 (1929), pp. 469–485, now in Idem, Contributi alla storia della
Accademia dei Lincei, 2 vols. (Rome: Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, 1989), I, pp.
889–905; Nicola Badaloni, Tommaso Campanella (Milan, 1965), p. 87ff; Idem, ‘Il
programma scientifico di un bruniano: Colantonio Stigliola,’ Studi storici, 26 (1985),
 pp. 161–174; Saverio Ricci, Nicola Antonio Stigliola, enciclopedista e Linceo, together
with an edition of the treatise Delle apparenze celesti, ed. A. Cuna (Rome, 1996).
     9
       Metaphysica, III, p. 52.
18        Chapter 2

whose striking similarity to and unmistakable echoes of Campanella (both on a
philosophical and political level) have been pointed out. Campanella would later
make him one of the interlocutors in the Dialogo politico contro Luterani.10
   Of the brothers della Porta, Giovan Vincenzo, the eldest, was fascinated by
every field of scientific inquiry, and had particular competence in medicine
and alchemy. But he was above all ‘divine in astrology, both in the theoreti-
cal part that measures the motions of the stars … and in the practical part
that foretells future events,’ such that he was accustomed to saying of himself
that the spirit of Ptolemy had transmigrated into him given the amazement
he provoked in many because of the precision of his predictions.11 Giovan
Vincenzo had written many works, above all commentaries to Ptolemy’s
Almagest and Quadripartite, works that he hurriedly destroyed.12 He had also
collected an impressive number of nativities – and it is thus probably from
him that Campanella derived his understanding of the technical aspects of
astrological theory, once he had overcome his earlier diffidence. Yet the more
productive exchange was with Giovan Battista, whose early Magia naturalis
(in four books, published in 1558), beyond being an immediate success, had
created quite a stir for the unscrupulousness of some of its remedies and for
having revealed the ingredients of witch’s ointment – something that had also
not failed to attract the dangerous attention of the Inquisition.13 But what
made him famous in Europe was the new edition of the work in twenty books
published more than thirty years later (1589). There the parts dedicated to the
occult were eliminated and ample space was given to more clearly scientific
and practical interests. In this way, the new text came to be configured as an
encyclopedia offering recipes, advice, and explanations on various subjects,
from domestic economy to cosmetics, from the art of distillation to optical


     10
        See Lina Bolzoni, ‘Le prose letterarie di Giulio Cortese: una fonte della giova-
nile Poetica campanelliana,’ GSLI, 148 (1971), pp. 316–326; Ead. ‘Note su Giulio
Cortese. Per uno studio delle Accademie napoletane di fine ’500,’ Rassegna della
letteratura italiana, 77 (1973), pp. 475–499; Maurice Slawinski, ‘La poetica di Giulio
Cortese tra Campanella e Marino,’ B&C, 7 (2001), pp. 127–153; on Regio, see Anna
Cerbo, ‘La Sirenide di Paolo Regio,’ ibid., pp. 77–106.
     11
        Nicola Badaloni, I fratelli Della Porta, p. 679.
     12
        A commentary on the Almagesto of Giambattista has recently been edited within
the National Edition of the Opere of G. B. della Porta. See Claudii Ptolemaei Magnae
Constructionis liber primus cum Theonis Alexandrini commentariis Io. Baptista Porta
Neapolitano interprete, ed. R. De Vivo (Naples, 2000).
     13
        Giovanni Aquilecchia, ‘Appunti su Giovan Battista Della Porta e l’Inquisizione,’
Studi secenteschi, 9 (1968), pp. 3–31, now in Idem, Schede di Italianistica (Turin, 1976);
Germana Ernst, ‘I poteri delle streghe tra cause naturali e interventi diabolici. Spunti
di un dibattito,’ in Giovan Battista della Porta nell’Europa del suo tempo, ed. M. Torrini
(Naples, 1990), pp. 167–197 (and then in Religione, pp. 167–190).
                      From Naples to Padua: Encounters, Conflicts, Trials          19

phenomena, from magnetism to secret writings. Yet it retained a particular
taste for stranger and more unusual phenomena and remedies. The Neapoli-
tan magus inserted the vast range of his discoveries into the Neo-Platonic
outlook that had been made popular by Marsilio Ficino, Pico della Miran-
dola, and Cornelius Agrippa of Nettesheim, according to whom the role of the
magus consisted in combining terrestrial and celestial things. Moreover, Gio-
van Battista della Porta connected that tradition to the most successful vein of
the literature on secrets, which, thanks to the collection of secrets made by the
self-styled Alessio Piemontese (i.e. Girolamo Ruscelli), had been a success
from mid-century on and was enjoying a growing diffusion.14 The first draft
of the Del senso delle cose e della magia originated precisely in conversations
with Giovan Battista, who was also the author of several treatises, from the
Physiognomica to the beautiful Phytognomonica, dedicated to highlighting
and interpreting the variety of correspondences and analogies between the
different levels of natural reality. The Del senso delle cose sought to offer a
philosophically grounded interpretation of those phenomena of antipathy
and sympathy, of attraction and repulsion between natural entities, the exist-
ence of which della Porta, faithful to an image of nature as ludus and specta-
cle, simply confirmed without attempting to offer any explanation.15
    At Naples, however, suspicions and allegations regarding the young friar
were also taking shape. In 1592, the ‘first trial’ took place, an event that was
still obscure and uncertain in the treatment of Amabile and then later took on
more precise contours in the studies of Giovanni Gentile and Luigi Firpo.16 In
the month of May, Campanella was imprisoned in the convent of San Domen-
ico, on the allegation that his extraordinary knowledge had a demonic ori-
gin and that he had scoffed at excommunication. But the real issue, as would
later be verified from the text of the condemnation, was adherence to the
doctrines of Telesio. The suspicion that Campanella’s knowledge had a dia-
bolical origin resounds in his own writings. In the proemial letter of Ateismo
trionfato addressed to Kaspar Schoppe, in which he confirmed having been
‘called to judgment’ five times, Campanella specified that the first accusations


    14
       On the book of secrets, see William Eamon, Science and the Secrets of Nature:
Books of Secrets in Medieval and Early Modern Culture (Princeton, 1994); by the
same author, see also ‘Natural Magic and Utopia in the Cinquecento: Campanella, the
Della Porta Circle and the Revolt of Calabria,’ Memorie Domenicane, n. s., 26 (1995),
pp. 369–402.
    15
       Syntagma, I, 1, p. 34.
    16
       See Giovanni Gentile, ‘Il primo processo d’eresia di Tommaso Campanella,’
Archivio storico per le provincie napoletane, 31 (1906), pp. 623–31, then in Studi sul
Rinascimento (Florence, 1923), pp. 165–73; Luigi Firpo, I primi processi campanelliani
in una ricostruzione unitaria (1939), now in Firpo, Processi, pp. 44–95: 45–54.
20     Chapter 2

concerned his alleged relationship with the devil: ‘how can you know so much,
if you never learned?’ (quomodo literas scis, cum non didiceris?), ‘you have a
devil in you’ (demonium habes); he replied to these charges by saying that his
knowledge derived only from his own vigilance and incessant studies: ‘and I
showed that I had consumed more oil than they had consumed wine.’17
    In the middle of May, Giovan Battista da Polistena (the former provin-
cial for Calabria) attempted to shelter Campanella from persecution. He
sent a note to the Grand Duke Ferdinand I, in which he asked him to take
the gifted young man – who, he said, had been made the object of unjust
accusations – under his protection. From Rome, the Florentine ambassador
Giovanni Niccolini, in a letter dated 23 May, informed secretary Lorenzo
Usimbardi that Polistena had confirmed that he had written to the Grand
Duke, ‘saying that he had been moved because this father had been falsely
charged and because, being a man of great literary cultivation (particularly
in philosophy but also in other disciplines), he wanted him to be embraced
and favored in the protection of his Highness.’ As referees for the young
Dominican, Polistena suggested that at Naples ‘Mario Del Tufo (with whom
the said Tommaso had been residing) could speak to the issue, as well as the
Regent Mardos18 and Ascanio Pignatello and many other gentlemen who
had taken part, according to Campanella, in the same Academy.’19 According
to Polistena, the most immediate assistance for the young man in difficulty
would consist in having him come to Rome ‘with some assurance of safety
… for the purpose of clearing his name from the unfounded accusations
brought against him, as he was offering and desiring.’ Niccolini concluded
that, if the young man were indeed virtuous and if it were confirmed that he
was in fact innocent, then it would be possible to accede to the request. He
raised, with some caution, the possibility of employing him ‘to lecture on
philosophy or theology at the university in Pisa or Siena; if, of course, that
also seemed appropriate in this case.’20
    The Tuscan agent in Naples, Giulio Battaglino (to whom, at Niccolini’s
indication, the Grand Duke turned) at first suggested that one ought not to
‘involve oneself in that kind of bother,’ considering the fact that Campanella
found himself imprisoned ‘for reason of religion;’ but in a subsequent let-
ter dated 4 September, once the suspect had been cleared, he expressed the
greatest admiration for someone he called ‘one of the rarest intellects that

    17
       The Italian redaction of the letter is in Ateismo trionfato, I, p. 10; the Latin ver-
sion, in Lettere, pp. 100–111: 107.
    18
       The reference is to Alfonso Martos Gorostiola, to whom Campanella would
address the Monarchia di Spagna, declaring that he had written it at his behest.
    19
       Probably an allusion to the Academy of the Awakened: see note 10.
    20
       Firpo, Processi, p. 50.
                      From Naples to Padua: Encounters, Conflicts, Trials            21

Italy has’ and ‘a gigantic mind’ on account of his knowledge.21 The verdict of
the Order’s internal inquiry had been handed down on 28 August. It deter-
mined that Campanella was to return to Calabria within a week, and was to
adhere to the doctrines of St. Thomas, giving up those of Telesio.22


                               In Rome and Florence

With the intention, or the pretext, of punishing the person who in his opin-
ion had denounced him, Campanella departed instead on 5 September for
Rome, where he stayed for a couple of weeks. There he met with, among
others, Cardinal Francesco Maria Del Monte, who had also been asked
by the Grand Duke to report on the young friar and who sent a rather
perplexing letter to Florence on the twenty-fifth of the same month. On
the basis of impressions derived from meeting Campanella in person and
from the judgment of learned men who had visited him (among whom the
Dominican theologian Alessandro de Franciscis, a Jewish convert, and the
political writer Fabio Albergati), he maintained that the young man was
certainly endowed with a great mind, but was unfortunately taken in by
Telesian fancies while also being a supporter of illusory doctrines based on
ramshackle foundations:

   And at first Master Alessandro, a Jew, said to me that this Father had a
   beautiful mind. Yet, not being on the true path, he has no hope of a good
   outcome, since his doctrine is Telesian, and full of chimeras, madness, and
   things that apparently can sound good at table to the ignorant, but that pos-
   sess neither substance nor foundation. The father commissioner says that
   many books of this Father are now seen as being full of trifles and vanities,
   and that it is still not clear whether there is something contained in those
   books that pertains to religion. Fabio Albergati says to me that this Father
   has a good but not extraordinary intellect, and that his contentions derive
   from Telesian caprices and do not proceed from good foundations – and he
   says that there are many ordinary things in it too. Finally, I spoke with him
   and I find him very bold; he reasons effectively enough as do all the subjects
   of the realm. He immediately started talking about his works, which are set
   against the doctrines of Aristotle, and I found him promising great things
   and expressing his conception fluently, but the foundations of his thought



   21
     Amabile, Congiura, III, doc. 3, p. 12.
   22
      The text of the verdict reads as follows: ‘ut discedat ab hac provincia et ad suam
se conferat infra spatium octo dierum, et sub poena gravioris culpae ut disputando,
praedicando et legendo teneat doctrinas sancti Thomae et reprobet doctrinas Telesii’
(Firpo, Processi, p. 52).
22        Chapter 2

     appear to me highly dilapidated. And this is as much as I am able to say
     after the sole conversation that I had with him.23

Resuming his journey, Campanella arrived in Florence at the beginning of
October, where he resided in the convent of San Marco and where he was
warmly received by the Grand Duke, to whom he dedicated the first
version of De sensu rerum, following which he received compliments and a
sum of money. On 13 October he visited the Biblioteca Medicea, a ‘wonder of
the world,’ where he had philosophical discussions with two learned men in
the presence of the librarian Baccio Valori, who had also been asked by the
Grand Duke to look after the guest, for the purpose of reporting on his doc-
trines and the books he had already published or that he intended to publish
– as we learn in a letter dated 2 October, which the Secretary Lorenzo Usim-
bardi had asked Campanella himself to deliver to Valori. The combination of
exceptional gifts and adherence to Telesianism were once again emphasized
in that letter:24

     His Highness has commanded me in his name to communicate to your Lord-
     ship the desire he has that you welcome openly the Dominican friar brother
     Tommaso Campanella, who is at San Marco on his way to Padua and who is
     held by his Highness to be a man of the greatest learning, an excellent phi-
     losopher, although a follower of Telesio. At Naples, he had been held in high
     esteem. He wishes to see the library of San Lorenzo. It would be most helpful
     to his Highness if your Lordship could use the opportunity of meeting with
     him in the presence of other learned gentlemen and to speak with him and
     evaluate his doctrine. Examine the works that are set for publication and
     relay how they seem; and see to it that he departs satisfied from Florence – as
     will come to pass, given the prudence of your Lordship, for which I kiss your
     hands.25

     23
       Published for the first time by Cesare Guasti, ‘Lettera del Cardinale Del Monte al
Granduca Ferdinando I a proposito di frate T. Campanella,’ Giornale storico degli
archivi toscani, 3 (1859), pp. 159–160, the letter has been reproduced and commented
upon in Zigmund Wazbinski, Il Cardinale Francesco Maria del Monte. 1549–1626, 2 vols.
(Florence, 1994), II, pp. 421–422. Actually, in the months that followed, the Cardinal
would demonstrate interest in Campanella’s new philosophy of nature, sending the Phil.
sens. dem. to the Duke of Urbino. Later, he would harbor real sympathies for the opin-
ions of Galileo and Fabio Colonna (ibid., I, pp. 50, 51, 53). The “Father Commissioner”
cited in the letter is the Cardinal of the Santi Quattro (Gio. Ant. Facchinetti, + 1606),
who presided over the Commission of the Index. Regarding the encounter with
Campanella, see Firpo, entry Campanella, in DBI, XIII, p. 375; Id., Processi, p. 57; Id., ‘La
proibizione delle Opere di Campanella,’ ibid., pp. 317–318.
    24
       The scholars were probably Ferrante de Rossi and the Florentine Dominican
Giovan Battista Bracceschi: see Lettere, p. 389 and note 26.
    25
       Florence, Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale, Rinuccini, 27, cass. 3 (lettere a Baccio
Valori, T-Z), cc. 77–131, c. 113r.
                       From Naples to Padua: Encounters, Conflicts, Trials              23

In the course of the encounter in the library, the conversation turned to
Machiavelli. When, many years later, he had to defend himself against the
accusation of having been offensive and insulting in alluding (in the Atheismus
triumphatus) to Machiavelli’s illegitimate birth, Campanella indicated that he
obtained the information in Florence, from a trustworthy source – namely,
from Baccio Valori himself, the ‘old knight’ and librarian at San Lorenzo who
had accompanied him in the visit: ‘when he showed me secret books inside a
small room into which no one could enter, he produced for me the works of
Machiavelli written in his own hand and, speaking of him, he said that he was
of noble extraction, but a bastard, and he narrated to me the story of his life.’
This piece of information was said to have been confirmed by Giovan Battista
Bracceschi, an old Dominican present during the conversation, ‘who was able
to remember Machiavelli and Leo X and Clement VII.’26
    On 15 October, Campanella took his leave of Florence, writing two let-
ters, one addressed to Usimbardi, a second to Grand Duke Ferdinand. While
expressing gratitude and respect, these letters already reveal the bitterness
of not having been at once accepted into service.27 Later too he would often
express a strongly felt regret at having failed to become established there,
something that would have guaranteed him a more peaceful life, safe from
persecution. The negotiations for a position in Tuscany did not succeed, and
again on 15 October Valori deigned to write the letter that had been requested.
He praised the gifts of a ‘young man with a mature sense who possessed
numerous and recondite ideas.’ He argued that this was something one could
appreciate both from the volumes that had been published and from those
treatises that he intended to publish, as well as from his arguments and from
the conversations in the library ‘on quite arduous subjects, which astounded
us even if they did not persuade us.’28 Once again, however, even as he was
praising Campanella for these reasons, Valori emphasized the risks posed by
his adherence to Telesianism and by his break with Aristotle: ‘it is true that
some in Rome are currently trying to prohibit Telesio’s philosophy, given that
it seems to harm the scholastic theology founded on Aristotle, and he too runs
the same risks because of his adherence to that [i.e. Telesio’s] school.’29 Cam-
panella would later get to know about this judgment, and lamented it greatly,
as one reads in a letter – somewhat embittered because his hopes were being



   26
       Risposte alle censure all’Ateismo trionfato, in Opuscoli inediti, pp. 53–54.
   27
       Lettere, pp. 4–5.
    28
       Valori, emphasizing the interests of the young Dominican for Pythagoreanism,
cites a De sphaera Aristarchi, a title that Campanella never actually cited; Firpo’s refer-
ence (Bibliografia, p. 172) to the Phil. realis does not seem verifiable.
    29
       Opere di Tommaso Campanella, ed. A. D’Ancona (Turin, 1854), I, p. LXXV.
24        Chapter 2

dashed – that he wrote to the Grand Duke from Padua on 13 August 1593.
In that letter, Campanella strongly defended Telesianism and the new phi-
losophies, which as he put it do not harm but are rather ‘useful, because they
render the prince admirable and worthy of respect,’ while the old and accus-
tomed sciences ‘render man less respectful.’30
   Subsequent inquiries made by the Grand Duke did not turn out positively.
The General of the Dominican Order, Ippolito Maria Beccaria, replied on
23 November with a letter in which the desire to accommodate Ferdinand
– in the event that he might want to take the young man into his service – is
accompanied by tones of great caution (‘I have a somewhat different report
of brother Tommaso Campanella’). Beccaria also gave the instruction, not
completely reassuring, to ‘review those works that he had prepared to give to
the printer, as instructed by the Council of Trent and the Orders of the Reli-
gion – and, if it is found that they merit publication, then I will gladly order
that they be printed.’31
   Having reached Bologna, a very serious episode took place, one that fore-
shadowed future suspicion of and dangerous inquisitorial interest in his writ-
ings. In the city, the manuscripts that he was carrying with him were confiscated
by those whom he called ‘false friars.’ Even if he would later tend to minimize
the incident, the episode was the harbinger of serious future developments.32
The writings underwent a close examination in July of the following year, in
the context of the condemnation of Telesio’s philosophy, and he would see
his own writings again in the Roman Holy Office, where he would be called
upon to clear himself of the doctrines contained in them. But he would claim,
proudly, that he did not request the return of the papers, having decided to
re-write them in a better form.33


                                         Padua

From Bologna, Campanella went on to Padua, where he lived at the convent
of Saint Augustine and enrolled himself at the university as a Spanish stu-
dent.34 Not even three days after his arrival, he was involved with others in a


     30
       Lettere, pp. 6–7.
     31
       See Luigi Firpo, ‘La proibizione delle Opere di Campanella,’ in Processi, p. 318;
the letter is in Amabile, Congiura, I, p. 61
    32
       Syntagma, I, 2, p. 36: ‘nihil hac iactura deterritus.’
    33
       Ibid., p. 38.
    34
       The date suggested by Firpo, Processi, pp. 62, oscillates between two alternatives:
the end of 1592 and the beginning of 1593. But Firpo appears to have preferred the
latter.
                      From Naples to Padua: Encounters, Conflicts, Trials            25

disagreeable inquest into charges of sodomy perpetrated against the General
of the Order.35 Designated the ‘second trial’ (in which he was absolved), the
true nature of the episode is quite uncertain. Of the incident we have only one
report from Campanella himself, who alluded to it in two passages in letters
written years later (in 1607) with expressions that strike one not so much for
their understandable reticence as for the embarrassment and the weakness
of the arguments that he used in his own defense. In the first passage – where
he remembers being accused ‘of having offended (quod deturpassem) the most
reverend Father General in the convent at Padua, where I had been for hardly
three days’ – he limited himself to pointing out that, not having a room of his
own, he was sleeping with a companion and had been wrongly accused, with
others, of an act perpetrated at night only on the basis of the unfounded sus-
picions of envious fools.36 In the second letter, the arguments brought in his
defense turned out to be even more baffling (poor eyesight!) and not entirely
coherent. It is not easy to understand why the fact of not sleeping alone ought
to have implied responsibility also on the part of the others sharing the room:
‘it was said that it was something done at night, which for me would be impos-
sible because I do not see very well; also, I did not have my own room and was
instead billeted with others. You ought to question those who were staying
with me, because if I sinned against the prelate, then they sinned too. But the
aim of the injustice was not to search for the crime, but rather to find me the
offending party.’37
    At Padua, Campanella met Galileo who, arriving from Florence, deliv-
ered to him a letter from the Grand Duke. This meeting too – like the virtual
one with Telesio – took on a profound significance in his memory. He would
remember it in the eloquent Latin letter that he would send to Galileo imme-
diately after reading the Sidereus nuncius, at the beginning of 1611. Nor did
he fail to remember the meeting in a commentary to the ode of Urban VIII
titled Adulatio perniciosa, or again in the beautiful letter that accompanied
the gift of the Philosophia realis to Ferdinand II.38 The encounter with Gali-
leo was very important, even if their paths would very soon diverge, only to
converge again many years later. On the other hand, the idea of a meeting at



   35
        The Father General, the already mentioned Ippolito Maria Beccaria, found him-
self in Padua between 4 and 18 January 1593; regarding Beccaria, see Amabile, Congiura,
I, p. 23 and the entry by Carlo Ginzburg in DBI, VII (Rome, 1965), pp. 473–475.
     36
        Lettere, p. 61: ‘et noctu patratum scelus etiam mihi cum aliis ex sola aemulorum
sciolorum ficta suspicione impositum est...’
     37
        Ateismo trionfato, I, p. 10; Lettere, p. 107.
     38
        Lettere, pp. 169, 389; Sante Pieralisi, Urbano VIII e Campanella (Rome, 1875),
pp. 25–27. For the Commentaria on the poetry of Urban, see ch. 11, note 26.
26      Chapter 2

Padua between Galileo, G. B. della Porta, Paolo Sarpi, and Campanella is to
be discounted; such a meeting never took place. That meeting was conjured
into existence on the basis of a summary redacted by a French librarian
from a lost letter, a summary that seemed ‘fabricated precisely so as to make
one regret that loss all the more bitterly.’39 The recent rediscovery of the
letter, which completed the recovery of the three letters removed from the
correspondence with Peiresc by the Florentine Count Guglielmo Libri, has
proven that the librarian misunderstood the original. In that letter, dated
19 June 1636, Campanella again evoked the Telesian period of his youth in
tones of affectionate nostalgia and offered extremely interesting informa-
tion on the atomism of Galileo.40 But on the subject of a supposed meeting
at Padua, Campanella said only:

     And brother Paolo one knows ab antiquo to have been a follower of Dem-
     ocritus, because I was told as much by Giambattista della Porta – his friend
     when he was in Naples and with whom he had made many chemical exper-
     iments. And Signor Galileo spoke with him, when we were in Padua in
     1593, when he distinguished himself from everyone else, and I – forced to
     leave (forzato a partire) – did not communicate with the aforementioned
     brother Paolo.41

While the French version does not hesitate to assert the existence of a meeting
of the three scholars at Padua in 1593,42 the letter informs us on the con-
trary that della Porta got to know Sarpi in Naples, and that Galileo and Sarpi
met each other in Padua. It seems, moreover, that Campanella expressed his
regret at not having had the chance – on account of the regrettable judicial
events (‘forced to leave!’) – to meet the friar. On other occasions, Campanella
would not hold back from virulent utterances against the friar, in so far as he
was a supporter of Venice breaking politically from the Pope and because he
was a bad teacher of the young on account of his atheistic doctrines, on a par
with the Aristotelian Cremonini.43



    39
       Luigi Firpo, ‘Appunti campanelliani. XXV. Storia di un furto,’ GCFI, 35 (1956),
pp. 541–549: 544.
    40
       See ch. 1, note 14.
    41
       G. Ernst, E. Canone, ‘Una lettera ritrovata: Campanella a Peiresc, 19 giugno
1636,’ Rivista di storia della Filosofia, XLIX (1994), pp. 353–366: 363–364; also in
Lettere 2, p. 116.
    42
       Firpo, Appunti campanelliani. XXV, p. 545: ‘Fra Paolo avoit aussi suivi ce système
[atomism], comme il l’avoit appris de J. B. Porta, qui avoit vecu avec lui à Naples.
Galilée, fra Paolo et Porta se trouvoient ensemble à Padoue en 1593 et Campanella
les y avoit vus.’
    43
       Mon. Francia, p. 554.
                      From Naples to Padua: Encounters, Conflicts, Trials            27

    In the first months of his stay in Padua, Campanella enjoyed a period
of great productivity and was able to compose a number of writings – all of
which are, unfortunately, lost. Other than a Rhetorica nova and some occa-
sional pieces, he also wrote an Apologia pro Telesio, primarily dealing with
medical issues. In 1590, the Telesian Antonio Persio had edited for publication
the shorter naturalist works of Telesio, among which was the Quod animal uni-
versum ab unica animae substantia gubernatur where the author argued for the
corporeal nature and uniqueness of the animal spiritus located in the brain
against the opinion of Galen who supported a tripartition of principles and
incorporeal faculties that had their respective seats in the liver, the heart, and
the brain (from where came the veins, the arteries, and the nerves, principles
that remained distinct in the end so as to fulfill different nutritative, genera-
tive, emotive, intellective, and motive functions).44 In 1593 the Veronese phy-
sician Andrea Chiocco published his own Quaestiones naturales, dedicating
them to the college of physicians of the city.45 Question XII was titled De fac-
ultate irascibili et pulsifica pro Galeni sententia and was addressed ‘Ad Telesianum
quendam virum doctissimum,’ i.e. Antonio Persio. It was meant as a defense of
Aristotle and Galen and as a confutation of Telesio, whom he accused moreo-
ver of wrapping his own doctrines up ‘in so much Heraclitean obscurity’.46
The centrality of animal spiritus and his identification with the soul came under
particularly close examination. This attack on Telesian principles elicited the
deepest bitterness and indignation in Persio, who had moved to Rome after
years spent in Venice and Padua. He knew Chiocco well and had sought to
dissuade him from taking up such a project. Campanella did not hesitate, once
again, to defend Telesio. He composed the Apologia, which he sent to Rome
to Persio and to the powerful Don Lelio Orsini, an old pupil and protector of
Persio (from whom Campanella himself was hoping to receive protection).47
The short work, delivered by Persio to Schoppe, has been lost. But one can
read an effective summary of it in the ninth chapter of the second book of
the Senso delle cose, where Campanella maintained, in the same manner as
Telesio, the unity and the corporeal nature of animal spirit, the seat of which
was in the brain, from where (through the extremely subtle nerve ducts) it


   44
       Bernardino Telesio, Varii de naturalibus rebus libelli (Venice: ap. Felicem
Valgrisium, 1590); modern edition by L. De Franco (Florence, 1981).
    45
       Andrea Chiocco, Quaestionum philosophicarum et medicarum libri tres (Verona:
ap. Hier. Discipulum, 1593).
    46
       Ibid., p. 126. On the polemic, see Firpo, ‘Appunti campanelliani. III. La perduta
Apologia pro Telesio,’ GCFI, 21 (1940), pp. 435–445; on Chiocco, see Idem, Ricerche,
pp. 13–27.
    47
       Lelio Orsini would be one of the noblemen involved in the conspiracy and he
would die suddenly in 1603.
28        Chapter 2

was diffused throughout the organism in order to fulfill all of its multiple vital,
motive, and cognitive functions.48 The defense of Telesian principles takes on
a greater significance if one thinks that it was in this period that initiatives to
condemn the works of Telesio were already taking shape, initiatives that would
be realized with the banning of three works donec expurgentur (‘until they are
purged’) in the Clementine Index of 1596 (namely, the De rerum natura and
two smaller works, the De somno and indeed the Quod animal universum).49
That ban would be remembered, many years later, by Campanella himself in
an important biographical passage, where he evoked the arguments on which
he had relied in his youth in order to defend his position on the sense of things
before the judges of the Roman Inquisition:

     When the philosophy of Telesio was examined by the Holy Office towards
     1592, this opinion on the sense of things was discussed. In fact at that time
     only three of his books were prohibited, donec expurgentur, as listed in the
     first Index of Clement VIII – that is to say, the works De somno, the Quod
     universum animal etc., and the De rerum natura – and Tiberio Carnelevari
     (physician, philosopher and fellow countryman) received from the Holy
     Office the propositions that were to be corrected in Telesio, among which
     this proposition was not to be found. Besides, in his other books (namely,
     De mari, De iride, De usu respirationis, De his quae in aëre fiunt, De colori-
     bus) this opinion was to be found; and yet they are not banned.50

The Paduan period was also important on account of the formation of Cam-
panella’s political interests. Already in the letter to the Grand Duke dated 13
August, we encounter a fleeting indication of his understanding of how states
are governed.51 In the Syntagma he would later confirm having composed
two works at Padua: the first, the Monarchia de’ Cristiani – which would later


     48
       Senso delle cose, II, 9, p. 47ff.
     49
       See Luigi Firpo, ‘Filosofia italiana e Controriforma. IV: La proibizione di Telesio,’
Rivista di Filosofia, 42 (1951), pp. 30–47.
    50
       Defensio libri sui de Sensu rerum, in De sensu rerum (Paris, 1637), p. 90: ‘Cum
examinaretur doctrina Telesii in S. Officio circa annum 1592, haec opinio de sensu
rerum non venit in dubium. Nam tres tantum ipsius libri tunc prohibiti sunt, donec
expurgentur, ut patet ex I indice sub Clemente VIII, videlicet liber de somno et liber
Quod universum animal etc. et liber de rerum natura: et Tiberius Carnelevarius medi-
cus et philosophus conterraneus accepit a S. Officio propositiones corrigendas in Tel-
esio, in quibus haec non extat. Praeterea in aliis eius libris, videlicet de mari, de iride, de
usu respirationis, de his quae in aëre fiunt, de coloribus, haec opinio habetur, nec vetiti
sunt.’ On the censorship of Telesio’s works see now Saverio Ricci, Inquisitori, censori,
filosofi sulla scenario della Controriforma (Rome, 2008), pp. 221–258, 377–389.
    51
       Lettere, p. 7; a codex of the Opere politiche, conserved in Florence, Biblioteca
Riccardiana, ms. 2340, which contains the early version of the Monarchia di Spagna
and other political writings, is perhaps to be connected to the journey to Florence.
                          From Naples to Padua: Encounters, Conflicts, Trials   29

be cited quite frequently, but which has been lost – was concerned with dem-
onstrating ‘from a political point of view, the arts with which the Christian
republic grew in the past and will grow in the future, those with which it usu-
ally declines, and those with which it is possible to reinvigorate it.’ The second
treatise, Del governo della Chiesa, was addressed to the Pontiff, suggesting
to him ‘the means by which he might establish one flock under one shep-
herd, not as a result of conflict with the opposition of the princes of all the
world … but through ecclesiastical arms alone.’ In this case also, the original
version has been lost, although it was recomposed in an aphoristic format
later in the Discorsi universali sul governo ecclesiastico.52 Not to be excluded
– indeed perhaps even likely (and understandable) – is the possibility that
such texts were being used in an apologetic manner at such a difficult junc-
ture in terms of legal proceedings, although this is not to say that they were
the product of calculation or premeditated and sustained simulation. Indeed,
these texts announce ongoing themes. They constitute a testimony that, right
from the beginning, reflection on the relationship between religion and poli-
tics had been central in Campanella’s thought. This relationship highlighted
the necessity to rethink the forms and the modalities of a reconstruction of
the Christian union that was threatened and fragmented by the forces of the
Reformation, together with the necessity of redefining the relations between
temporal and ecclesiastical power, within the perspective of a universal mon-
archy and the reconstitution of one flock under one shepherd.
    The first nucleus of the Discorsi ai principi d’Italia probably also dates
back to this same period. In that work, the appeal for unity is configured as an
exhortation to the princes of the peninsula to turn themselves into supporters
of a strict politics of alliance with the Pontiff, who (as a common father) could
not but position himself as a guarantor of peace, defender of the rights of the
weaker children when they are unjustly assailed, supporter of a union and of
a defense against the enemies of the faith, who profit and take advantage of
internal discords. Against those who maintained the advantages of division
and a balance of power in Italy, Campanella claimed that in truth the weak-
ness and the self-interests of the princes would only expose them ‘to the maw
of the great Turkish dragon.’ He exhorted them not to oppose the Christian
union, but rather to favor it by every means, in that it was advantageous also
from a political point of view. It was futile to hanker after the splendors, by
now extinguished, of the Roman Empire: ‘there is no possibility of us recover-
ing the empire, because the cycle of human affairs does not allow it.’ Modern
Rome wields a greater power, and a different kind of power, given that it
is the seat of the Pope and the center of Christianity. This is a power ‘more

   52
        Syntagma, I, 2, pp. 38ff.
30        Chapter 2

certain and august’ that had taken the place of that ancient power based on
military glory, as is said in a sonnet in which Christian Rome is celebrated. In
this poem, Rome has been transformed from the ‘Queen’ of the world into its
‘Mother,’ who defends and gathers together the virtuous and the ‘Christian
armies’ generously.53 The Discorsi would later be reworked, with a greater
emphasis on the prophetic role of Spain, to which the task had been given of
reunifying the Christian flock. The princes are asked not to oppose, but rather
to support the universalist project of the Spanish Empire, which was mani-
festly ‘founded in the hidden providence of God … for the purpose of uniting
the entire world under one law.’ They ought to do so, because regardless of
the passions that move men, God’s divine providence uses even errors and
passions in order to realize his own plans.’54
    These early thoughts of his youth would appear again in Discorsi ai principi
in Campanella’s French period. Even if the prophetic investiture of Spain would
be dropped, the later Discorsi are dedicated to the reaffirmation of how the
Christian princes might achieve advantageous and unbreakable alliances and
full agreement with the papacy. Because the papacy is not the ‘princedom of
any family or nation in particular,’ it does not aim at the expansion of personal
power. Instead, the papacy has the character of universality and is oriented
towards ‘all the virtuous in all the world,’ favoring the diffusion of understand-
ing, while tyrannical princes – according to a tenacious conviction – ‘want and
work towards the ignorance of their vassals, so that they would not aspire to a
condition of dignity achieved through merit,’ reducing them to the condition of
docile ‘buffalos’ so as to be able to dominate them without conflict.55
    The Paduan period is full of encounters and experiences, some of them dis-
concerting, such as those pertaining to exorcisms or interviews with persons
possessed by demons.56 In fact, during his stay there, a particular episode tragi-
cally unfolded and provoked quite an uproar – namely, the brutal killing of the
German astrologer Valentin Nabod. Having foreseen imminent danger in the
stars, Nabod had closed himself up at home, sealing the doors and windows,
pretending to have left. But he was killed by robbers who had broken into the
house, precisely because they believed that there would be no one there. It was
a tragic event and one on which, as an astrologer, Campanella had to reflect
upon given that it seemed to extinguish the possibility of avoiding an event that
had been established by fate.57 From the judicial point of view, the stay at Padua


      Discorsi ai principi d’Italia, p. 93; Poesie, p. 597.
     53

      Discorsi ai principi d’Italia, p. 119.
     54

   55
      Germana Ernst, ‘Ancora sugli ultimi scritti politici di Campanella. I. Gli inediti
Discorsi ai principi in favore del Papato,’ B&C, 5 (1999), pp. 131–153.
   56
      See ch. 1, note 5.
   57
      The episode is recalled in the De siderali fato vitando, in Opuscoli astrologici, pp.
27–30, 127.
                      From Naples to Padua: Encounters, Conflicts, Trials           31

 is full of events that would have a powerful influence on the years ahead. If the
 ‘second trial’ was, as it seems, a simple thing and devoid of consequences, the so-
 called ‘third trial’ would, in contrast, be very serious. At the beginning of 1594,
 Campanella was arrested, on the orders of the Paduan Inquisitor, together with
 two other persons, the physician Giovan Battista Clario from Udine and Ottavo
 Longo from Barletta, who would come to figure as the detainee accused of
 the most serious crimes.58 The initial charges against Campanella – to which
others would gradually be added – had to do with having contested de fide
 with a ‘Judaizer’ (that is to say, a converted Jew who had returned to the old
 faith), having composed a blasphemous sonnet (canticum nefandum) about
 Christ (that he would later say was Aretino’s), and having possessed a prohib-
 ited book on geomancy. In the spring, the accused were subjected to torture,
 which was repeated during the summer. Given the seriousness of the situation,
 Clario, who boasted acquaintances among and protection from the Habsburgs,
 begged the Archduchess Maria, aunt of Emperor Rudolf II, to write a letter
 in their favor to the Pope, which arrived about half way through July.59 But at
the end of July there occurred an event that would trigger a judicial procedure
that would last for years, and that has been specified only recently thanks to
the discovery of new documents conserved in the archives of the former Holy
Office.60 Some friends of the prisoners would attempt to break into the prison
 of the Paduan Inquisition, so as to allow the three prisoners to escape. Among
 those friends were a certain Nicolò Fanti from Noventa and Francesco Brini
 of Tarvisio. Some time later, the name of the more disquieting and mysterious
 figure of the Mantuan Jew Isac Senighi would be added to this list in the docu-
 ments. The attempt not only failed, but also worsened the situation dramatically.
 The external accomplices would suffer severe punishments and years of judicial
 investigation. The case was taken up by the Holy Office and on 11 October 1594
 the three accused, who had been secretly extradited from Venice, were jailed in
 the prisons of the Roman Inquisition.




   58
       See Firpo, Processi, p. 59ff.
   59
       For Giovan Battista Clario, son of the court physician to the deceased Archduke
of Stiria who would in turn become an imperial physician, see Firpo, Ricerche, p. 28ff,
together with the entry, also by Firpo, in DBI, XXVI (Rome, 1982), pp. 138–141.
    60
       Now Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith. Firpo had already identified
and tacitly used many decrees, including those published by [Enrico Carusi], ‘Nuovi
documenti sui processi di Tommaso Campanella,’ GCFI, 8 (1927), pp. 321–59; see
now Leen Spruit, ‘I processi campanelliani tra Padova e Calabria: Documenti inediti
dall’Archivio dell’Inquisizione Romana,’ in Congiura di Calabria, pp. 233–53; Vitto-
rio Frajese, Profezia e Machiavellismo. Il giovane Campanella (Rome, 2002); for the
unsuccessful escape, see Giacomo Moro, ‘Documenti veneti su Campanella e sul proc-
esso per la fallita evasione,’ B&C, 15 (2009), pp. 463–487.
