3. The Palace of Atlas


                                 Dogmas and Politics

In October 1594, the suspects entered the prison of the Holy Office, where the
famous philosopher Giordano Bruno and the Florentine heretic Francesco
Pucci were already being held. Colantonio Stigliola, whom Campanella had
already encountered in Naples, would also later be brought there. Drawing on
the popular belief, according to which the ‘timid and smiling’ weasel experiences
an irresistible and fatal attraction for the toad, ‘the monster that then devours
it,’ Campanella spoke in a beautiful sonnet, titled Al carcere (‘To Prison’), of
the inevitability of the encounter of free spirits in such a terrible place, which
he compares to the cavern of Polyphemus, the labyrinth at Crete, the palace of
Atlas. These were spirits who had abandoned the ‘stagnant pond’ of trite con-
ventional knowledge, in order to launch themselves boldly upon ‘the ocean of
the truth.’1 We know nothing of possible conversations with Bruno, even though
it is not completely absurd to hypothesize that – beyond, obviously, the explicit
references to the Nolan, chiefly regarding cosmological issues – some of the
echoes (subterranean and hidden, to be sure) of Bruno that lurk in some parts
of Campanella’s work could be the result of direct communication.2
     In the case of Pucci, such direct communication certainly did take place.
In a passage of the Responsiones that came after the Epistola antilutherana,
Campanella would make explicit reference to the three months of conversa-
tions regarding Lutheran dogma held in the prison of the Holy Office with the
heretic Francesco Filidino.3 Pucci exercised a long-lasting influence on Cam-
panella, both with respect to specific doctrinal points (such as the role of the

   1
      Poesie, p. 254; for the weasel and the toad, see Senso delle cose, I, 8, p. 20.
   2
      Cf. Michel-Pierre Lerner, ‘Campanella lecteur de Bruno?,’ in La filosofia di Giordano
Bruno. Problemi ermeneutici e storiografici (Letture bruniane III), ed. E. Canone (Florence,
2003), pp. 387–415.
    3
      Responsiones ad obiectiones Tobiae Adami… super epistola antilutherana, in
Quod reminiscentur, I, p. 144: ‘ego loquutus sum cum Francisco Filidino haeretico,
qui 28 annis servivit Luthero et Calvino eorumque libros memoria tenebat’; a vari-
ant of the ms. Lat. 1079 of the Bibl. Mazarine in Paris adds: ‘et per tres menses cum


G. Ernst, Tommaso Campanella, International Archives of the History                      33
of Ideas /Archives internationales d’histoire des idées 200,
DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3126-6_3, © Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2010
34     Chapter 3

sacraments, instituted so as to extend and not restrict the path to salvation, the
extension of salvation to children who died without being baptized, and the
universally redemptive work of Christ) and also with regard to the expectations
of an imminent and radical renewal – the ‘awaited, new redemption.’4 Later,
after Pucci had been decapitated at the Tor di Nona on 5 July 1597 and his body
burned on the pyre in Campo dei Fiori, Campanella would dedicate a moving
sonnet to him that praised the loftiness and the nobility of his thought. In the
splendid opening (‘Soul, having now left your bleak prison’), he addressed Pucci
as a soul that, releasing itself from the multiple prisons that had constrained it
(the terrestrial prison, as well as those of the Holy Office and of the body itself),
made its way back to its celestial home.5
    Campanella was held in a cell with Giovan Battista Clario, in whose subse-
quently written Dialoghi we find traces of conversations with his cellmate. In
the course of 1595, he wrote the Compendium de rerum natura that in 1617 –
under the title of Prodromus philosophiae instaurandae – would inaugurate the
series of Frankfurt publications edited by Tobias Adami. He also wrote shorter
literary works and political discourses, including probably the one regarding the
Low Countries that would later become the twenty-seventh chapter of the Mon-
archia di Spagna. New charges of upholding Democritean doctrines and of being
the author of the De tribus impostoribus were added. This infamous, mysterious
pamphlet had dared to argue that the founders of the three monotheistical reli-
gions were impostors – but, according to Campanella, he could not have been its
author since it had been published thirty years before he was born.6
    Tortured again at the end of April 1595, Campanella was condemned to
recant a ‘most serious charge of heresy’ (de vehementi haeresis suspicione).

eo in S. Offitio conversatus sum.’ On the relationship between Pucci-Campanella, see
Luigi Firpo, ‘Processo e morte di Francesco Pucci,’ Rivista di Filosofia, 40 (1949), pp.
371–405; Germana Ernst, ‘“Sicut amator insaniens.” Su Pucci e Campanella,’ in Lech
Szczucki (ed.), Faustus Socinus and his Heritage (Cracow, 2005), pp. 91–112.
    4
      Poesie, pp. 476–477: ‘Anima, ch’or lasciasti il carcer tetro…’; cf. notes 5 and 17. In
recent years, new studies and the rediscovery of important unpublished texts in the
Archive of the former Holy Office have contributed to the shedding of greater light
on Pucci; see, in particular, Paolo Carta, Nunziature ed eresia nel Cinquecento. Nuovi
documenti sul processo e la condanna di Francesco Pucci (1592–1597) (Padua, 1999);
A. Enzo Baldini, ‘Tre inediti di Francesco Pucci al Cardinal Nepote e a Gregorio XIV
alla vigilia del suo “rientro” a Roma,’ Rinascimento, 39 (2000), pp. 157–223; Francesco
Pucci, De praedestinatione, ed. M. Biagioni (Florence, 2000).
    5
      Titled ‘Sonetto fatto sopra un che morse nel Santo Offizio in Roma’ (‘Sonnet
concerning a man who died in the Holy Office in Rome’; Poesie, pp. 476-477), it is not
among those included in the Scelta (see ch. 7.1).
    6
      Regarding Campanella’s references to the mysterious blasphemous work, cf.
Germana Ernst, ‘Campanella e il De tribus impostoribus,’ Nouvelles de la République
des lettres, 1986/2, pp. 144–170 (and then in Religione, pp. 105–133); Ead. ‘L’enigma
del De tribus impostoribus. Note di lettura,’ in M. Marangio, L. Rizzo, A. Spedi-
cati, and L. Sturlese (eds.), Filosofia e storiografia. Studi in onore di Giovanni Papuli,
                                                             The Palace of Atlas        35

According to Firpo, the recantation took place on 16 May in the Dominican
church of Santa Maria sopra Minerva in a public and solemn fashion. That
date, however, has recently been moved to 30 October of the same year, on the
basis of evidence taken from an official note attached to a letter that Campan-
ella would send from Stilo on 11 November 1598 to Cardinal Santori.7 In the
second half of 1595, Campanella was assigned to the Dominican convent of
Santa Sabina on the Aventine hill as his obligatory residence, loco carceris. It
was there that he wrote the Dialogo politico contro Luterani, Calvinisti e altri
eretici, which at the end of the year he would dedicate and send to Michele
Bonelli,8 the Cardinal Protector of the Dominican order who had asked him
to write the work, to whom Campanella would express his repentance.9
   The Dialogo, a harsh reply to reformed doctrines, is set in the Naples of
the day and has three interlocutors. The protagonist, who acts as the author’s
mouthpiece, is the Telesian scholar Giacomo di Gaeta, who right from the
opening declares that as a philosopher he wants to confront the problem of
sects ‘that run against mother nature and the good customs of the republic.’10



3 vols. (Galatina, 2008), I, Dall’Antichità al Rinascimento, pp. 127–148. The critical edi-
tion of the Latin text, with a German translation by Johann Christian Edelmann
(1761), is in Anonymous [Johann Joachim Müller], De Imposturis Religionum (De
Tribus Impostoribus). Von den Betrügereyen der Religionen, ed. W. Schröder (Stuttgart-
Bad Cannstatt, 1999); the Latin text, with an Italian translation by L. Alfinito, is in
Anonimo, I tre impostori, ed. G. Ernst (Calabritto, Av., 2006).
    7
      The note says, ‘30 octobris 1595 decretum quod abiuret de vehementi, [Conventu]
sui ordinis Romae [pro] … loco carceris.’ Cf. Leen Spruit, ‘I processi campanelliani tra
Padova e Calabria,’ in Congiura di Calabria, p. 237; Ugo Baldini and Leen Spruit, p.
185 (see ch. 4, note 2); Leen Spruit, ‘A proposito dell’abiura di Campanella nel 1595,’
B&C, 12 (2006), pp. 191–194.
    8
      A passage of the Dialogo politico appears to allude to the fact that Campan-
ella was an eyewitness to a shocking act of blasphemy on the part of an Englishman;
Giacomo, the author’s mouthpiece, claims that ‘vidi in Roma un inglese gittar a terra
l’Eucaristia per morire per gloria stoltamente.’ The event took place on 15 June 1595
and the condemned was burned at the stake on 20 June. A contemporary account
of the episode and of the condemnation of the offender is found in Germana Ernst,
‘“Quasi totius orbis theatro.” Il supplizio di un inglese, Roma 20 Giugno 1595,’ B&C,
7 (2001), pp. 517–534; Ead. ‘Postilla sull’abiura di Campanella e sul rogo dell’inglese,’
B&C, 12 (2006), pp. 195–199.
    9
      The only edition of the Dialogo politico is highly unreliable, based as it is on an
inferior manuscript; here I have corrected the text with ms. Ital. 106, of the Paris BNF;
the dedicatory letter to Cardinal Bonelli is in Luigi Firpo, ‘Appunti campanelliani.
XVII. Due lettere inedite,’ GCFI, XXIX (1959), pp. 80–81, and then in Lettere 2, pp.
21–22.
    10
       The Telesian Giacomo (or Iacopo) di Gaeta, member of the Academy of Cosenza,
was the author of the Ragionamento chiamato l’Academico overo della Bellezza
(Naples, 1591); modern edition by Anna Cerbo (Naples, 1996); see ch. 2, note 10.
36        Chapter 3

The Dialogo’s protagonist responds to solicitations from the second inter-
locutor, Marquis Gerolamo del Tufo, who is invested with public and politi-
cal responsibilities and does not hide his most acute worries concerning the
diffusion of such sects as he moves on to ask for clarifications and counsel.
The third character is the Neapolitan priest and scholar Giulio Cortese, who
contributes to the debate with Biblical and poetic quotations. The work was
written in vernacular, which was the language of political writers, as Giacomo
indicates when Giulio deploys a refined citation of Latin verse from Terence.
It was also consciously written using everyday language, together with very
concrete and common images. As is emphasized several times, the interests
and the practical advantages that motivate the supporters of the reformed
doctrines derive from the ‘heat of the cauldron’ that had replaced the
warmth of charity. The author did not hesitate to turn a vision recorded in
Jeremiah back against Luther, who is identified as the pot that boils in the
northern parts, and from which originates all evil.11
    Beyond Pucci, Campanella could also have had information on reformed
doctrines from conversations he had had with foreign students during his stay
in Padua.12 In the dialogue he recalled conversations with English students, who
recounted to him how the old people of their country regretted the loss of the
secret confession of sins, and deplored the serious consequences of its aboli-
tion.13 In the text, the author confronted the most hotly disputed points of the
polemic with the reformers, discussing the origin and the content of their doc-
trines. In the final part, the author put himself to the test on controversial points
such as indulgences, purgatory, sacraments, and the celibacy of the clergy. But
the heart of the work is the discussion regarding the compatibility of reformed
doctrines with political association. Articulating one of the strong and persist-
ent principles of his thought, Campanella asserted that in order to have an
organized and stable political governance it is essential to have a unity of souls,
on which depends the unity of bodies and of goods – a unity that is inseparable
from the unity of a shared religion, which finds in the Pope its point of cohe-
sion.
    The reformers rejected this unity as they attempted to establish a ‘partisan’
religion that was useful to their own political interests (‘with the excuse of
maintaining their liberty of conscience, they maintained their political liberty’).



     11
       See Jer 1, 13.
     12
       See notes 3 and 17.
    13
       Dialogo politico, p. 134: ‘Intesi di più in Padova da Inglesi stessi che in Inghilterra
molto si lamentano gli anziani di aver levato via la confessione secreta….’ Regarding
Englishmen in Padua, cf. Jonathan Woolfson, Padua and the Tudors: English Students
in Italy, 1485–1603 (Cambridge, 1998).
                                                       The Palace of Atlas      37

With the view of undermining the unity of the Catholic Church, the reformers
had not hesitated to spread new religious beliefs by taking advantage of the cre-
dulity and the volatility of ordinary people. In order to achieve his own ends,
Luther – in an unscrupulous and highly dangerous political calculation – had
attacked religious unity, uprooting it from the conscience of princes and subjects,
thus turning princes into tyrants and ordinary people into rebels. On this account,
his position came to be ‘absolutely antithetical to civil order and destructive of
it.’ Drawing the ‘foolish multitude’ into disobedience of political leaders, the
reformed doctrine unleashed conflicts and factions to deleterious effect, both
politically and at a personal level. With regard to this diminishing of assurance
and sound points of reference at the personal level, Campanella vividly described
the scene of a dying man, whose family members had each called a minister of
their own faith to his deathbed. The poor sick man – ‘unsteady in the medicine of
the soul’ – could not even make use of the medicines of the body and ‘died angry
and uncertain.’14
     During this discussion on the unity of the faith, Campanella considered the
doctrine of predestination. Inaugurating an ongoing reflection that would span
the entirety of his thought, Campanella intended to denounce the politically
harmful consequences of a doctrine, that – denying the free will of man, so as
to accentuate the exclusivity of divine initiative and as a result devaluing the
merits and demerits of works for the purpose of salvation – ended up being, in
his opinion, incompatible with an orderly political community. If God decides
the destinies of men before their birth, such that they are born already judged
and are not to be judged on the basis of the actions that they later undertake,
then such men – believing in the irrelevance of every good or bad action (which
would not change their already established fate in the slightest) – cannot but
behave in a licentious manner. They are prey to instability and are drawn
towards every innovation that might procure some advantage for them.
     In an even more serious way, the ‘counterfeit’ God represented by the
reformers is a deceitful and unjust God, who asserts that he wants to save
everyone but in fact has already chosen those who are predestined. This is
a God who exhorts men to do good without giving them the freedom to be
able to do it and does not extend his grace to anyone beyond those few he has
already decided to save. This is a God who plays the ‘malicious joke’ of calling
men to the good, without giving them the possibility of achieving it and who
‘enjoys putting them in a trap in order to make them fall, saying to them that
they might help themselves whereas in fact they cannot – that they might fly
without having given them wings.’ In short, this is a tyrannical God, who acts
according to his own whim and not according to justice:


   14
        Dialogo politico, p. 138.
38        Chapter 3

     they created a tyrant God, who had determined that some would go to par-
     adise, and many to hell, and that the former could not hurt themselves and
     that the latter could not save themselves, because God operates through
     them for his own enjoyment – good for some, bad for others – without
     attention to their own merits or demerits.15

When Gerolamo is not able to hold back a shout of dismay (‘This kind of
Christianity terrorizes me so much!’), Giacomo intervenes quickly to reassure
him: ‘the law of God, when it is well understood, is the law of consolation and
joy.’ To the unacceptable image of the Lutheran God is opposed the image,
entirely different, of a God who is a father to all and loves all of his children
equally, not creating anyone so as to damn them: ‘God wants to save everyone
… and … came to die for everyone, and … does not hate ab initio those whom
he ab initio created.’ This is a God who with ‘a grace bountiful enough for all
includes all without exception,’ giving to all the possibility of salvation. After
the original sin and the loss of primitive righteousness, Christ became flesh for
the salvation of all and not, as the Lutherans believe, only in order to confirm
the salvation of those few chosen before the sin of Adam. It is up to each
man to accept and to make good use of the grace that he receives. Damnation
does not depend on a kind of ‘effective disgrace,’ already established among
the innocent multitude before original sin. Instead, damnation depends on the
obstinate rejection of divine assistance that is extended to all:

     Christ came to save everyone without distinction and to confer upon us
     the greatest goods, without which grace would not be more common than
     crime, without which a craftsman would not be more powerful than his
     ruined creation, and without which he would not be greater in power and
     goodness. Given that God is the God of all men, there is thus sufficient
     grace for all, extended without exception.16

In proclaiming the universal redemptive value of the death of Christ, Campan-
ella closely echoed themes from Pucci’s De Christi efficacitate.17 Acquaint-
ance with the text appears to be confirmed when Campanella takes up a precise
comparison to the book of merchants, where a creditor becomes a debtor: he
‘is said not to be a creditor, not because he was not a creditor in the begin-
ning, but because later he incurred such debts that he ended up not being thus
described,’ an image that serves to explain the sense of a verse from the Book
of Revelation that asserts that reprobates are not written in the book of life.


     15
       Ibid., p. 100.
     16
       Ibid., p. 104.
    17
       De Christi efficacitate (Goudae: typ. Ioannis Zafei Hoenii, 1592); Italian transla-
tion L’efficacia salvifica del Cristo, ed. G. Isozio (Pisa, 1991).
                                                       The Palace of Atlas         39

The passage is important, because it can prove that the conversations with the
Florentine heretic in the prison of the Holy Office took place in all probabil-
ity right at the beginning of the incarceration.18
    Even though Giacomo (that is, Campanella) defends himself by saying that
he is not a theologian, in truth, he engages in close interpretations of scrip-
tural passages (particularly from St. Paul’s Letter to the Romans) in order to
reconsider and reinterpret the relationship between faith and deeds. The pas-
sages invoked by the reformers in support of their doctrine did not condemn
the deeds themselves but only the Jews’ external and ceremonial deeds, which
Campanella held to be ineffective with regard to salvation. This is done with
a powerful call back to the ‘living faith’ that redeems non-Jews too. Thus, the
true children of Abraham, worthy of acquiring their inheritance, are his true
imitators – his spiritual, if not carnal, children. If what the reformers upheld
were true (that is, if God, having induced men into sin, continued to induce
them to do evil, so as to have a means of demonstrating his own justice), then
this planned slaughter of his own begotten children would make him similar
to Medea, who, ‘consuming herself with rage and disdain, not knowing how to
show it, became angry with her own children and killed them.’ Except that the
God of the Calvinists would be even worse, because ‘Medea was almost out
of her mind with anger and tore them to shreds, but God had considered this
butchering of his own children for a long time, even ab eterno.’19
    This image of a cruel and tyrannical God could not help but render politi-
cal leaders tyrants in turn, because they would feel themselves licensed to
imitate a God who acts according to his own taste and whim, and not accord-
ing to mercy and justice. As ordinary language also testifies, even the memory
of the authentic meaning of the concept of justice had been lost, from the
moment that it was identified exclusively with a punitive conception of justice
and not with a distributive one, which consists in good laws. In response to the
exclamation of Geronimo (‘what is the “justification” of Abraham Was he
perhaps decapitated in public, because you had no other term?’), Giacomo
replies by deploring such distortion of the meaning of justice:

   If that divine justice is neglected in which God rejuvenates and animates us
   divinely and renders us similar to him, good and sanctified, and operating
   in accordance with his wisdom, then one mistakes justice for hanging, quar-
   tering – namely, the kind of justice that I called punitive, which is arrived
   at in uncertain and accidental ways; and this century is certainly so corrupt
   that it knows no other kind of justice. But it was very convenient for Calvin


   18
      Firpo dated the conversations to the early months of 1597. Enrico De Mas drew
my attention to the passage in the Dialogo politico, for which I am grateful.
   19
      Dialogo politico, p. 123.
40        Chapter 3

     and Luther to persuade people that God compels men to do evil so as to
     show his justice. Nowadays, every tyrant thinks that he is being just when he
     condemns many people to death, so much so that the people, especially in
     Naples, now accept that the meaning of the term ‘to justify’ (giustificare) is to
     kill or put someone to death, rather than to sanctify or divinely hearten.20

   A number of crucial and lasting themes are already spelt out in this early
work: the undeniable political importance of religion, insofar as it is the basic
unifying bond (‘whether true or false, religion has always mastered hearts’);
the fact that ‘everyone makes God in his own image, such that, being parti-
san and disloyal, Luther preaches a God of that kind’ and attacks unity for
political reasons. Unity turns out to be politically fundamental (‘unity is more
important than anything else, because without that one cannot govern’), and
the guarantor of that unity cannot be anyone other than the Roman Pontiff,
who ‘unites the earth with Heaven, as a bridge joins the two banks of a river.’
In these pages, Campanella wrote a very long and eloquent encomium of the
Pontiff, emphasizing how his prerogatives and functions are completely inde-
pendent of the possible weaknesses of particular individuals. If some Pontiffs
erred, many were good and holy. Thus, when one sees ‘the sun of the holy
church eclipsed,’ one ought to think that ‘these are momentary clouds in front
of the sun that do not destroy it, but for a time obscure it before departing
quickly, for the seat of the holy church remains pure and eternal.’21


                                Philosophy and Poetry

In 1596, still in the convent of Santa Sabina, Campanella composed the Italian
Poetica, which he dedicated and sent to Cinzio Aldobrandini, a powerful car-
dinal and nephew of Clement VIII, who had a reputation as a generous patron
of scholars and was the protector of Tasso. Soon thereafter, Campanella would
be dispossessed of his own work, which he would have the chance of seeing
again only years later (in 1618, in the prison of the Castel Nuovo at Naples) and
in a surprising form: a Spanish author, who remains to this day unknown, had
translated the work into his own language, putting it about in his own name.
Campanella tells us that he laughed at this awkward and easily revealed pla-
giarism: in a footnote the Spanish author, in fact, was forced to justify the con-
tinual citation of Italian authors. He laughed also because he judged that distant
draft to be an ‘unripe fruit’ (immaturum partum), having already planned to
rewrite a Latin Poëtica.22 In truth, on other occasions he found himself bitter

     20
       Ibid., pp. 126–127.
     21
       Ibid., pp. 158–159.
    22
       Cf. Syntagma, I, 2, p. 40; Poëtica, in Scritti letterari, p. 1216; perhaps the Spanish
translation remained in manuscript.
                                                               The Palace of Atlas         41

and disdainful on account of disloyal attempts to appropriate his own writings,
taking advantage of his position in jail. In the prefatory letter of the Atheismus
triumphatus addressed to Schoppe, he warned him in sorrowful tones against
appropriating works that he had entrusted to him. Such an appropriation would
constitute the theft of ‘children not of the body, but of the soul,’ a crime there-
fore all the more heinous. And such thievery is precisely what Schoppe would
later practice. Worse, he would use Campanella’s texts extensively in the con-
text of an aggressive polemic against the reformers.23 Other authors too would
not be ashamed to plagiarize with impunity from unpublished texts.24 And in a
beautiful letter addressed, at the end of 1614, to Ottavio Sammarco, who was
intent on publishing as his own the Aforismi politici, Campanella warned him
not to do something so base, and gave him a highly moralizing lecture.25
    Beginning in the early Italian Poetica, Campanella articulated a number
of principles that would remain central even in subsequent discussions. In the
form of a strong polemic against a hedonistic and gratifying conception of
poetry, these principles address the relationship of poetry to truth and philoso-
phy, together with the ethical and social role of the poet.26 The poet, charged
with an educational mission, ought to be ‘the instrument of the legislator and
ought to help him to spur the world to living well.27 The marvellous linguistic
instruments that he uses – which are capable of inducing extraordinary effects
even on uncultivated souls, with a kind of powerful magic – and the tales which
he can make use of in particular circumstances have to be deployed in all cases
as vehicles of the truth and should aim to highlight virtue and castigate vice. The
true poet is a prophet, for the prophet is not so much – or only – he who fore-
sees future events, but also he who ‘chides political leaders for their malignity
and vileness, and the people for their ignorance, seditiousness, and bad habits.’28
It is up to the prophet, thanks to poetry, ‘to make the sciences flourish,’ and to
light ‘the ardent love of virtue and reason.’ He who, like the ‘perfidious and



    23
       Lettere, p. 111; there is some information of Schoppe’s use of passages from
Campanella in Mario D’Addio, Il pensiero politico di Gaspare Scioppio e il machiavel-
lismo del Seicento (Milan, 1959), pp. 288–319.
    24
       Rodolfo De Mattei, ‘Materiali del Campanella nell’opera del Canonieri,’ Accad-
emie e Biblioteche d’Italia, 35 (1967), pp. 291-316; see ch. 6, note 6; on the use of material
from Campanella by Mersenne, cf. Gianni Paganini, ‘Mersenne plagiaire? Les doutes
de Campanella dans la Vérité des sciences,’ XVIIe Siècle, 57 (2005), pp. 747–767.
    25
       Lettere 2, pp. 65–68; see ch. 9, note 40.
    26
       Long held to be among the lost writings, the Italian Poetica was rediscovered and
edited by Luigi Firpo (Rome: Accademia d’Italia, 1944); there is a second edition in
Scritti letterari, pp. 317–430, which I have used.
    27
       Poetica, p. 325.
    28
       Ibid., p. 359, 357.
42        Chapter 3

lying’ Greeks, turns to false tales so as to mock religion, corrupt good customs
and ridicule virtue, does not deserve to be called a poet and is only welcomed
in a state that is ‘tyrannical, where lies are bought and sold in order to make the
people ignorant.’29 False poets are the favorite instruments of tyrants, because it
is thanks to them that people can be held in ignorance and slavery. Meanwhile
the poet-prophet who teaches and educates on behalf of liberty is abhorred and
persecuted by them. In this regard, Homer is depicted as the negative model
representing the perfidious tales of the Greeks. He persuades and entices an
uneducated and child-like populace like a charlatan and huckster, touting vices
rather than educating the people as the poet-philosophers do:

     Homer … beneath the beautiful words and delicate figures and graceful man-
     ner of story-telling, which is well-adapted to the debased populace, confounds
     impiety with piety, good with evil, virtue and vice, and ruins everything with-
     out a second thought, because he was a huckster. In order to take in the oafish
     plebs, in the manner of our own charlatans or “the blind man of Forlì,” he
     would spin yarns in the piazzas that so tickled Greek vanity that they made a
     poem out of it. Thus, it is a childish and plebeian thing to think that a charlatan
     is a poet, placing him under the protection of the gods, as if he were inspired
     by God to tell his stories and to say that there is no one who really tells the
     truth, thereby denying the title of poet to Pythagoras and Empedocles.30

Along with Homer, Aristotle is severely criticized as a codifier of and herald
for the Greek ‘tales.’ Conversely, the Bible – particularly the Psalms of David,
wondrous on account of the nobility and variety of their contents (which Cam-
panella had been attempting to paraphrase or translate since his youth)31 – is
taken as a positive model of excellence. Another model is Dante, in comparison
to whom ‘all others are poetasters and are like a gondola compared to a galleon
with respect to grandeur of subject and for their great usefulness and the good
taste that purified philosophical (and not pedantic) ears derive from him.’ Cam-
panella had always understood Dante to be educating the public – ‘Dante had
something of the Pythagorean about him, given that he always told tales for the
benefit of the people’32 – and thought he had not received the appreciation he
was due precisely because he was an advocate for truth and virtue:

     In a good republic, one ought to love Dante, given that he is the great praiser
     of goodness and the great critic of evil, a great analyst of things political and


     29
       Ibid., p. 320.
     30
       Ibid., p. 352. Cristoforo Scanello, known as ‘il Cieco da Forlì,’ was a sixteenth-
century chronicler and poet; see Adamo Pasini, Vita e scritti di Cristoforo Scanello
detto ‘il Cieco di Forlì’ (Forlì, 1937).
    31
       Poesie, pp. 449–450, 488, 676.
    32
       Poetica, pp. 347, 428.
                                                            The Palace of Atlas        43

   a great conjuror for his readers of time and place and the historical per-
   sonage who is speaking. As a portraitist of all manner of conditions, he is
   industrious to the point of wonder and yet he is little understood and little
   appreciated by the common people who are enemies of virtue.33

As far as the moderns were concerned, Campanella showed himself to be very
critical of Tasso. In a sonnet, while praising the correspondence between ‘the
beautiful vestment’ and the ‘exquisite, rarefied concepts’ of Dante and Petrarch
and especially the ‘fire in their chests’ that generated such virtue, he rebuked
Tasso for the fact that his formally impeccable verses., failed to raise up hearts
towards the ‘worthy objects of the human mind.’34 In the Poetica too, Campan-
ella emphasized the contrast between the beauty of his words and the ‘com-
monplace and stolen concepts,’ between the elevatedness of the style and the
coldness and artifice of the content, which he found to be derived more from
Homer and the Greek tales than from the nobility and novelty of his subject
matter.35 In contrast, Ariosto is very good precisely on account of his felicitous
capacity to stay close to what is natural and reproduce it. He turns out to be
‘admirable in all the parts of his poems for the sublimity of the tales, for the
personifying of the heroes, … for the descriptions of beautiful countries, rivers,
mountains, seas, storms and every other kind of thing, such that one seems to
have everything in front of one, as he paints it singing sweetly.’36 His poem runs
the risk of something else, however; it risks losing itself in multiple tributaries,
losing sight of the central singularity that is indispensable for conferring har-
mony and unity to the composition, a center that in fact is certainly present in
the works of Virgil and Dante as they represent the theater of human life, even
as they are complex and varied as far as characters and places are concerned.
    In the Poetica, Campanella goes beyond the polemic against rules and ped-
antry and his attack on Aristotle and false Greek fables. One finds a number
of interesting points, such as the precise references to the Monarchia dei
Cristiani and the reflection (Stoic in origin) on the correspondences between
social roles and virtue. These correspondences prefigure, or echo, the themes
of some sonnets in the Scelta.37 Above all, Campanella insists on the educational


   33
      Ibid. p. 328. Numerous studies have been dedicated to the relationship between
Dante and Campanella, beginning with Vincenzo Spampanato, Il culto di Dante nel
Campanella, in Sulla soglia del Seicento (Città di Castello, 1926), pp. 128–160; see
Anna Cerbo, ‘Theologiza et laetare.’ Saggi sulla poesia di Tommaso Campanella
(Naples, 1997), ch. 5 as well as the bibliography cited there; Ead., ‘Dante Alighieri,’ in
Enciclopedia, vol. 1, coll. 230-240.
   34
      Poesie, p. 464.
   35
      Poetica, pp. 342, 337–338.
   36
      Ibid. p. 378.
   37
      Ibid. p. 331; Poesie, pp. 69–73.
44        Chapter 3

role of the poet, as he recalls the Lucretian image of the bitter medicine
offered in a chalice with sweet edges. The poet is also compared to the physi-
cian, who, without ever losing sight of his own duty, should never become like
an obliging cook who, pandering to the taste and whim of his young patient
rather than curing him, ends up making the illness worse.
    Memories of Calabria emerge from the lines, as when the author evokes
the figure of Giacomo di Gaeta once again and the contacts with the Acad-
emy of Cosenza, emphasizing how in the ‘prize’ of this Academy the figure
of the old woman was more beautiful than that of the young Danae, because
more effectively represented.38 Fragments of the stay at Padua emerge too,
with allusions to Sperone Speroni and to ‘dances in Paduan villas.’39
    After multiple supplications and requests, Campanella was permitted
to move to the convent at Santa Maria sopra Minerva at the end of 1596.
In Naples, however, a common criminal called Scipione Prestinace of Stilo
feigned religious revelations so as to obtain a stay of execution and accused
Campanella of being a heretic. As a result, Campanella was then once again
imprisoned in the jails of the Holy Office. This is what Firpo identifies as the
‘fourth’ trial, the last one prior to the one that followed the Calabrian con-
spiracy of 1599.
    At the end of October 1597, with the death of the last Duke, Alfonso II,
who had no direct heirs, the question of the succession at Ferrara began. As the
Pope was preparing a military expedition (which would end with the annex-
ation of the city), Campanella was discussing the event with Cardinal Del
Monte and others.40 He interpreted it as a harbinger of the progressive con-
stitution of an ecclesiastical unity. Campanella addressed a sonnet (thought
by Amabile to be one of the ‘worst to appear, with a utterly banal ending’) to
Cesare d’Este, cousin of the dead Duke, who was pressing his claims to the
city. The Pope, who was not recognizing d’Este as the legitimate successor,
was ready to excommunicate him and Campanella addressed Cesare with the
exhortation not to oppose himself to the claims of the Pontiff and to abandon
‘so foolish an arrogance.’41 Restored to liberty at the end of the year, Campan-
ella was consigned once again to his Dominican superiors, who ordered him
to return immediately to Calabria.42


     38
       Poetica, p. 401 (cf. ch. 2, note 1).
     39
       Ibid. p. 409.
    40
       Cf. Dichiarazione, p. 112.
    41
       Poesie, p. 478; Amabile, Congiura, I, p. 88.
    42
       An annotation added to the letter written from Stilo to Cardinal Santori reads
as follows: ‘17 decembris 1597 cum cautione de se repraesentando si libri et scripta
prohibeantur. Consignetur suis Superioribus qui illum retineant in aliquo loco sine
scandalo. Prima sententia maneat in suo robore’ (Baldini and Spruit, p. 185).
