5. The Conspiracy


                               The Utopia of Liberty

In the second half of July 1598, Campanella set out for Calabria. At the end
of the month he reached Nicastro, where he had the opportunity of seeing
once again some old friends – the brothers Ponzio and Giovan Battista da Piz-
zoni. Immediately, he became involved in the complex jurisdictional conflicts
between ecclesiastical and state authorities. In the course of several months of
relative tranquillity at Stilo, he was able to complete some works that were later
lost (fifty Articoli against the doctrines of Luis de Molina, a tragedy about Mary
Stuart, representing her as a martyr for Catholicism, and a short work entitled
De episcopo). He was also able to work on the Monarchia di Spagna once again.1
On 11 November he sent a short letter to Cardinal Giulio Antonio Santori. He
asked that at Christmas the remaining period of punishment be remitted, in view
of the six years of ‘trials’ that he had endured. He declared himself ready to obey,
although he was very ‘tired.’2 But in the first months of 1599 a tumultuous and
difficult period began. It would continue to intensify in the spring and summer,
and concluded with the catastrophe of the accusation of conspiracy, the tragic
consequences of which would mark the rest of Campanella’s life.
    On 10 August, approximately one year after his arrival in Calabria and
precisely a month before the day designated for the beginning of the planned
insurrection, two citizens from Catanzaro (Fabio di Lauro and Giovan Battista
Biblia) set about disassociating themselves from the conspiracy about which
they had been informed by Dionisio Ponzio. They signed a document in front
of the fiscal advocate Don Luise Xarafa de Castillo affirming that

   brother Tommaso Campanella of Stilo and of the Dominican Order, a per-
   son who is held throughout the world to be a leader in the sciences, together
   with Dionisio Ponzio and in collusion with many lords, lay and ecclesiastical,


   1
    Firpo, Bibliografia, pp. 182–184.
   2
    The letter is in Baldini and Spruit, p. 185. On Santori, see Saverio Ricci, Il sommo
inquisitore. Giulio Antonio Santori tra autobiografia e storia (1532–1602) (Rome,
2002).


G. Ernst, Tommaso Campanella, International Archives of the History                  67
of Ideas /Archives internationales d’histoire des idées 200,
DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3126-6_5, © Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2010
68       Chapter 5

     both with the Pope and the Turk, have attempted and are daily attempting
     to raise a rebellion and deceive the people in order to turn them against
     the King our lord, denouncing him as the tyrant of the entire world. With
     persuasive words they spread the notion of the unacceptable wickedness of
     his ministers, who put human blood, justice, and everything up for auction,
     tyrannically stealing the labor of the poor with the many tributes and pay-
     ments and murders that take place in the Kingdom of Naples.3

The leaders of the revolt, the accusation went on to say, maintained that the
kingdom, feud of the Holy Church, was unjustly occupied by the King of
Spain, and that the time had come that it please God to ‘excise the filth of so
many tyrannies and servitudes’ through the work of his Vicar. In exchange
for a modest tribute, that Vicar, ‘empathizing with the disasters of the peo-
ple, resolved to place them in the pristine liberty of a republic,’ so that they
might place themselves in God’s service, whose help was assured by revela-
tions and prophecies. The leaders of the revolt spread the opinion that, while
those who governed (‘not much of a government and one of mediocre tal-
ent’) were blinded, the people were ready to fight and shed blood for God,
the Holy Church, and liberty. Beyond practical advantage, they would win
‘eternal fame for centuries to come.’ Moreover, Di Lauro and Biblia revealed
that a primary role in the plot was being played by Maurizio de Rinaldis, a
young man of noble extraction, who had promised the support of two hundered
armed men and who had close ties with the Turks and their commander Cicala,
who had committed a fleet of sixty ships. A detailed list of the numerous
adherents to the plot followed. On that list, there were many ‘exiles and
plebeian leaders,’ feudal lords and bishops. But the weapon in which they put
the most store was preaching and persuasion.
   The picture represented by the accusation was not far from the truth.
Until the middle of the nineteenth century, information about the conspir-
acy remained confused and vague. It fell to Luigi Amabile to present, with
extraordinary passion and dedication, the most complete and minute recon-
struction of the facts and persons connected to that event. His reconstruc-
tion appeared in three hefty volumes – the first two treating the narrative,
the third consisting entirely of documents.4 In this way, texts and materials
became available to scholars that to this day constitute an inexhaustible gold-
mine and an essential point of departure and point of reference. The need for a
thoroughly documented study of the conspiracy became apparent to Amabile


     Amabile, Congiura, I, pp. 226–228; III, doc. 7, pp. 15–17.
     3

     In 1887, Amabile published his two-volume Castelli which was intended to com-
     4

plete Campanella’s biography. The second volume included texts and short works,
most of which had never been published before.
                                                                The Conspiracy         69

after dissatisfaction with hasty and uncertain judgments passed on the events
in Calabria by scholars such as Michele Baldacchini, Alessandro D’Ancona,
and Domenico Berti (whose biography of Campanella had just appeared).5
In 1844, Count Vito Capialbi, a renowned Calabrian scholar, had put out two
previously unpublished texts from Campanella in his own hand – the Narrazi-
one and the Informazione – that had been redacted in 1620 at the prospect of
a liberation that he thought was imminent.6 Those writings, even though they
were put together many years after the events, did not differ much from his ini-
tial defense. The author understandably played down and softened the events
in which he had been a protagonist and insisted on inserting those events into
a prophetic context. Some scholars (starting with Capialbi himself) invoked
these texts in order to absolve Campanella of responsibility for the conspiracy.
    Amabile was convinced on the contrary that there certainly had been a con-
spiracy, that it had been glorious, and that, therefore, it constituted neither
a stain on the philosopher’s reputation nor an infamy from which to excuse
him, ‘as if having attempted to liberate the country had been an ignomini-
ous action.’ He gathered together and published a fairly abundant mass of
documents, drawn from multiple sources, for the purpose of proving both the
reality of the attempted insurrection and also the central role, as inspiration
and organizer, played by Campanella. With praiseworthy scrupulousness he
combed archives and libraries (both in Italy and further afield) so as to track
down every last piece of useful information. He also had the good fortune of
locating important private collections of documents relating to the heresy trials,
which he was able to reorder and transcribe into six volumes that he donated
to the Biblioteca Nazionale of Naples.7
    From Amabile’s narrative there emerged a portrait of the places and times
that constituted the background of the event, which was characterized by

   5
      Michele Baldacchini, Vita e filosofia di T. Campanella (Naples, 1840) with subse-
quent revised and augmented editions; on Alessandro D’Ancona, see the Discorso
della vita e delle dottrine di Tommaso Campanella, a good 320 pages, added to the
first of the two volumes of the collected Opere di Tommaso Campanella edited by
him (Turin, 1854); Domenico Berti, ‘Tommaso Campanella,’ Nuova Antologia di
scienze, lettere ed arti, s. II, vol. XL (1878), pp. 201–227, 605–616; vol. XLI, 1878, pp.
391–415.
    6
      Vito Capialbi, Documenti inediti circa la voluta ribellione di F. Tommaso Cam-
panella raccolti ed annotati (Naples, 1845).
    7
      Many documents are drawn from the Archivio di Stato di Firenze, where the Stro-
zzi papers conserve a precious if uneven collection of documents belonging to Jacopo
Aldobrandini, nephew of Pope Clement VIII and Nuncio of Naples from 1592 to 1605.
Other documents are drawn from the correspondence of residents and ambassadors
(from Florence, Venice, and Constantinople) with their governments; those conserved
in the Archives of Simancas, which include the correspondence between the court of
Madrid and the Viceroy of Naples, are of particular interest.
70         Chapter 5

conditions of grave disorder and widespread violence. The elements of great-
 est prominence in that portrait were the following: the heavy and continual
 jurisdictional conflicts between ecclesiastical and state powers, as a result
 of which bishops and state functionaries, jealous of their own prerogatives,
 confronted each other by inflicting punishments and excommunications;
 the conflict between the various factions of citizens, who bloodied the cit-
 ies with a long sequence of crimes and vendettas; the resulting phenomenon
 of bandits and exiles, who often found protection in convents and churches,
 enjoying ecclesiastical immunity; the bad habits of the men of religion and the
 maladministration of the Spanish government, which Campanella did not tire
 of denouncing (a theme visible in the Monarchia di Spagna and ever more
 explicit in subsequent works); and above all an intolerable economic decline
 and an iniquitous systems of taxation, which caused exasperation in subjects
 who were put in dire circumstances.
    In this atmosphere heavy with tensions and conflicts, anxieties of revenge
 and vendetta coagulated into a widespread aspiration for change. Campanella
 gave voice to and expressed suffering, resentment, and expectation when he pro-
 claimed the coming of a period of profound change, a change predicted by a rich
 prophetic tradition, by unusual astral events, and by natural signs that in their
 aptness seemed to confirm that the time for change was not only coming, but
 was imminent and close at hand. In documents in which he defended himself,
 Campanella would later express regret that his message – which he intended to
 put forward as general and philosophical – had been misunderstood and misin-
 terpreted in the light of narrow and personal interests. He would not hesitate to
 censure even Dionisio Ponzio (his best friend and closest collaborator) for hav-
 ing spoken in a thoughtless manner and for having grossly misunderstood the
 true nature of his words: ‘you were speaking of things you did not understand.’8
    Initial reports and subsequent depositions would concur in identifying
 Campanella as the true spirit of the conspiracy. Campanella’s extraordinary
 intellectual gifts and his immense knowledge were emphasized: he was said to
 be an ‘extremely famous scholar,’ ‘one of the chief men in all the sciences,’ ‘the
 most eminent scholar in the world,’ ‘extremely intelligent.’ Emphasized also
 were his gifts of eloquence, with which he was able to persuade and seduce the
 people. He possessed ‘arts capable of moving the spirits of men as he wished
 with natural reasonings and … the entire people followed him, and wherever
 he appeared in the countryside to preach he moved spirits so greatly that he
 was able to make statutes and laws for those people, who understood him
 and were ready to obey him.’9 The accusation would be immediately corroborated:


     8
         Appendix ad amicum, in Art. proph., p. 295.
     9
         Amabile, Congiura, III, doc. 244, pp. 130–131.
                                                              The Conspiracy         71

thanks to his knowledge of astrology and prophecy, he was convinced that –
beginning in 1600 – great changes would come about, innumerable wars and
revolutions overturning states, above all in the Kingdom of Naples and in
Calabria. From this followed the exhortation to be ready and armed, so as to
win liberty, and escape from subjection and from the tyranny of the King of
Spain by transforming the province into a republic. The insurrection would
have been sustained by the arms of outlaws and by the Turkish fleet, while
Campanella – ‘the most eminent man of the world, legislator and messiah’ –
would have promulgated ‘new laws and returned every man to natural liberty.’
In the spring and in the summer of 1599, meetings and discussions between
friars, the preaching of imminent changes, and agreements with powerful local
lords became more intense and feverish. At the same time, the organization of
armed support became better defined, support guaranteed by Maurizio de
Rinaldis and by pacts made by him with Scipione Cicala, the Turkish captain
of Genoese extraction, who was responsible for raids on the Calabrian coast
and who was to bring arms and weapons on his ships.10
    When the detailed accusation came before the Count of Lemos, who had
been invested as the new Viceroy of Naples little more than a month earlier, he
hurried to notify the Spanish Ambassador at Rome and through him the Pope,
who authorized him to transfer the friars to Naples, putting them in the hands of
the Nuncio. Also worried at the ‘extravagance’ of a plot in which the Pope and
the Turks were said to be involved, the Viceroy quickly decided to send two com-
panies of Spanish soldiers to Calabria under the command of Carlo Spinelli with
the pretext of protecting the coast from Turkish incursions. He vested Spinelli,
who was distinguished both by his military valor in numerous campaigns and for
his forethought and juridical competence, with full powers. But after these initial
precautions, the secret was quickly revealed. Reaching Catanzaro at the end of
August, Spinelli ordered the imprisonment of a member of the conspiracy who
succeeded in escaping on account of the thoughtlessness of Alonso de Roxas, the
governor of the region. Shortly thereafter, however, he would be found strangled
in a vineyard and the episode revealed the true purpose of the expedition to the
sharp disappointment of Spinelli. In this way, a vast operation began that took
advantage of the close collaboration of local lords, who – after being promised


   10
     On Scipione Cicala – who was born at Messina to a Genoese father in 1544,
taken prisoner as a young boy by the Turks and raised as a Muslim, and went on to
have a brilliant military career in the service of the Sultan – see the entry by Gino
Benzoni in DBI, vol. XXV (Rome, 1981), pp. 320–340. Regarding the role that he
played in the Calabrian conspiracy, see Amabile, Congiura, I, p. 134ff. On the relation-
ship between the Turks and the City of the Sun, see Noel Malcolm, ‘The Crescent and
the City of the Sun: Islam and the Renaissance Utopia of Tommaso Campanella,’
Proceedings of the British Academy, 125 (2004), pp. 41–67.
72         Chapter 5

lavish rewards – were ‘commissioned’ (that is to say, authorized) to give chase
to those under suspicion with bands of armed men. Suspects were subjected to
interrogation on the spot by ad hoc tribunals, empowered by Spinelli himself, by
a chancery secretary, and by the fiscal advocate Xarafa.
    Immediately, the suspicion arose that the crime of rebellion and high trea-
son was accompanied by the crime of heresy. As early as 14 August, brother
Cornelio of Nizza11 (against whom Campanella would later express the harsh-
est judgments, accusing him of having despicably betrayed the friars and hav-
ing brought them to ruin) wrote to the General of the Dominican Order and
to the powerful Cardinal Inquisitor of Santa Severina, Giulio Antonio Santori,
informing them of the vileness with which, as he had heard it, Campanella was
stained. A parallel trial for heresy was initiated after a witness was forced into
making a formal accusation. This was a trial that was even more ferocious –
and without doubt more iniquitous – than the trial for rebellion. Alternating
intimidation and terrible threats with flattery and promises of indulgences
and reward, the trial went as far as extorting confessions and admissions from
witnesses and suspects. In their denunciations of the blasphemy and heresies
maintained by the two principal prisoners (Ponzio and Campanella), these
confessions exhibited similarities that were suspiciously strong, almost as if
the detainees had responded to a kind of preset questionnaire, as was common
practice in witchcraft trials. The two main defendants, however, were never
summoned to testify.
    Campanella was arrested in the evening of 6 September. Warned by Ponzio
of the danger but refusing to become an exile, he had taken refuge at Stignano
with his confrere Domenico Petrolo. In tears, his father had said that he would
prefer to see him ‘dead rather than in exile.’ Thus, both fled to Roccella Ionica,
where for three days they lived hidden in a country cottage, with the hope
of being able to find some embarkation, following promises from Antonio
Mesuraca, who had welcomed them in the name of an old debt of gratitude. In
a betrayal that would later be held against him in a sonnet, Mesuraca reported
them to the Prince of Roccella instead, who hurried to send a company of
armed men to capture the two of them. Having taken them into custody, he
put them in the prison at Castelvetere, where some days later, Campanella
made an important Dichiarazione on the events in Calabria to Xarafa, who in
turn was accused of the worst infamies and cruelties in a series of sonnets.
    In mid-September the appearance of Cicala with thirty ships off the Calab-
rian coast seemed to confirm the conspirators’ plans. Unaware of the course
of events, he dispatched two feluccas as a patrol and they released flares. Not



     11
          On Brother Cornelio, see Firpo, Ricerche, pp. 33–36.
                                                          The Conspiracy       73

receiving any response, they had no option but to turn back. After the usual
stopover in the ditch of San Giovanni, the fleet – which, it was said, was car-
rying many men, a hundred pieces of artillery, and a great quantity of spades,
pickaxes, and forks’ – abandoned the Italian seas to return home.
    The number of arrests continued to grow in the course of an ever more
ruthless man hunt. Desperate attempts to flee failed, such as that of Ponzio
who was arrested on the coast of Apulia while he was trying to board ship.12
The increasing number of prisoners meant that the tribunal had to be moved
first to the Castle of Squillace and then to Gerace. On the journey from one
locality to the other, Campanella responded to the Spanish leader of the sol-
diers escorting him in chains (who tormented him with the worst kind of death
threats) with a philosophical reflection that death does not exist, since every-
thing is transformation: ‘Campanella also said to a company leader when he
was being escorted from Squillace to Gerace that there was no such thing as
death and that there was instead a mutation of one being into another …’13
    Initial caution was then replaced by a fierce repression, with mass arrests
and spectacular executions. At Catanzaro, two men thought to be among the
leaders of the revolt were ‘abused, tortured, strangled at the foot of the gal-
lows, and then hung up by one foot, quartered two days later, their heads
being posted in cages of iron above the city gates.’14 At the end of October,
the prisoners were forced to march in chains to places of embarkation. In a
most beautiful passage of the Theologia, alluding to how many had wanted to
take for themselves strips from the clothes ripped from Christ, Campanella
would later remember that the soldiers cursed him as a heretic and rebel, and
yet admired him in the confines of their own hearts and secretly asked for
his blessing and for remedies to cleanse their evil deeds, and for many other
things that they pretended to detest.15 And when the torture of the veglia
(‘vigil’) would later be inflicted upon him, even as many torturers would hate
him, others in their hearts would experience admiration for the force of his
spirit: ‘Some of those present cursed me and intensified the pain, tugging on
the ropes; others admired the strength of my spirit in their hearts.’16
    On 8 November, four ships reached the gulf of Naples with a load of more
than 150 prisoners and the horror of four men who had been hung dangling



   12
      But three years later, he would break out prison in Naples, heading for
Constantinople, where he would die a short time later in a brawl with a Janissary.
   13
      Amabile, Congiura, III, doc. 319, p. 272; I, p. 327.
   14
      Ibid., III, doc. 181, p. 93.
   15
      Vita Christi, Theologicorum liber XXI, ed. R. Amerio (Rome, 1962), p. 118;
Romano Amerio, Il sistema teologico di Tommaso Campanella, p. 229.
   16
      See note 33.
74        Chapter 5

from the bows of the ships. Entering the port another two would be ‘quar-
tered alive by four ships so as to strike fear into the people of that city, who
gathered in almost infinite numbers after rumors of these spectacles began to
circulate.’17 Years later, Campanella would give an explanation of the mean-
ing of this act, suggesting again a comparison with the life of Christ. If Christ
was put to death between two thieves, in order to show that he was a com-
mon criminal, the execution of the four conspirators also had a demonstra-
tive aspect and ought to have served to show to the King that ‘there was a
rebellion and that the ensuing judgments dared not absolve the leader whose
supporters had been so harshly punished.’18


                          Heresy, Rebellion, and Prophecy

As soon as they became aware of the conspiracy, the residents hurried to
inform the relevant authorities. On 8 September 1599, the Tuscan agent in
Naples (the same Giulio Battaglino who in 1592 had already been consulted
with regard to Campanella) let the Grand Duke know that it had become nec-
essary to dispatch troops to Calabria, not so much and not only ‘on account
of a fear of Turkish ships’ (as was at first thought) but ‘so as to remedy a very
grave situation.’ It had been discovered that in Calabria, at Stilo, ‘there was
a conspiracy involving many people that ended in the armed uprising of that
province as well as the dissolution of obedience to the King.’ The hotbeds
of the revolt had been attacked in various places and he predicted that ‘this
nascent tragedy … will end in the punishment of many.’ Among the known
leaders, there was a Dominican, a certain Tommaso Campanella, who ought
already to be known to the court as a ‘bizarre brain.’ Battaglino remembered
well the dealings of the earlier years, when the Grand Duke was thinking
of taking the young friar into his service and had asked him for informa-
tion. Seven years later, that initial diffidence reemerged. The earlier negative
impressions had been confirmed and he expressed the warmest praise for the
Viceroy, who with his timely intervention ‘discovered and remedied in a very
opportune fashion a fire set by Turkish arms and heresy’ that would rapidly
have consumed the entire province. Battaglino urged the Grand Duke to send
his own official congratulations for ‘such an important service,’ something
that the Grand Duke did not fail to do. He had his secretary of state write a
long letter in which he rejoiced warmly with the Viceroy for having ‘rid this
Kingdom and all of Italy from such a great disturbance.’19

     17
        Amabile, Congiura, III, doc. 184, p. 94.
     18
        Amerio, Il sistema teologico di Tommaso Campanella, p. 230.
     19
        Amabile, Congiura, III, doc. 184, 94.
                                                          The Conspiracy       75

    A report deriving from the earliest stages of the events – that Firpo
described as ‘journalistic reportage, written by a cultivated and well-informed
person’ on account of its immediacy and precision – described Campanella as
a man ‘of the most profound and universal learning in many fields of knowl-
edge.’ As usual, the report insinuated suspicions of a non-human origin for
Campanella’s doctrines (said to be ‘infused with the work of the devil’). It
described him as a man of ‘restless spirit and no devotion,’ who, disgruntled
by the punishments inflicted upon him by the Holy Office, had thought to
immortalize himself by introducing a new religion in order to satiate his own
boundless ambitions.20 He maintained that Calvin and Luther were merely
grammarians, who had possessed neither the great spirit nor the high-minded
thoughts to found new laws, whereas he intended ‘to liberate the entire King-
dom from obedience, which he called his majesty’s tyranny.’ The new religion
that he wanted to preach ‘consisted entirely in a liberty of living in a republic,
full of heresies, without knowing either God or church.’
    A second, more hostile report described how ‘a certain Tommaso Cam-
panella’ – a Dominican friar ‘of great stature, pale face, black hair, and rare
teeth, but commonly judged to be mad and ignorant’ – had predicted the
coming in 1600 of changes in state and kingdom ‘necessitated by the constel-
lations and the influence of the stars.’ Swept up in his own ‘delusions and
fantasies, not without the persuasion of the devil, with whom he held himself
extremely familiar,’ he had preached the recovery ‘of that ancient liberty …
that had been lost on account of the tyranny of powerful men and lords.’
To Spinelli, who compared the heresies of which he was accused to those of
heretics ancient and modern, Campanella confirmed having a low opinion of
the reformers, whom he judged to be ignorant men who limited themselves to
conjuring up glosses and to stretching the sense of the sacred texts. ‘In truth,
those of his kind had other things in mind: they wanted to establish new laws
themselves and lay down rules by which one should live. He claimed that this
was the business of great men, chief among them himself, for he had come into
the world as a new Messiah for the good of mankind.’ Emphasizing the effect
of his speeches on those who listened (‘in the first argumentation he would
embarrass the brain; in the second souls were captivated’), the observer lin-
gered on the pacts with the Turks, emphasizing affinities of dress and custom.21
Already, the previous report had related that in the new city instead of hats –
which ‘denoted subjection and little life of the spirit in the head’ – the wearing
of ‘well-fastened headgear’ would have become common. The second report


   20
      Luigi Firpo, ‘Appunti campanelliani. XXXI. Tre relazioni contemporanee sulla
congiura calabrese del 1599,’ GCFI, 41 (1962), p. 386ff.
   21
      Ibid., p. 395.
76        Chapter 5

confirmed that ‘a white vest down to the knee with long sleeves’ was being
worn ‘but that underneath one could wear silk and brocade, while on the head
a small hat with cloth wound around it was being worn.’ And with Campanella
maintaining that ‘the sin of the flesh is not sin,’ he was reputed to be bent on
‘taking for himself eight or ten of the most prominent women of the province,
first murdering their husbands and then creating a harem in the castle at Stilo.’ To
the men sent to capture him, he was supposed to have proclaimed with pride:
‘you have captured a man, but that does not mean that what was supposed to
happen will be prevented.’ Already in custody, he warned that ‘at least lords
will learn to govern their vassals well, because of us, and they will not fall into
excess as long as they see that the people resent them.’22
    The trials in Calabria were followed by those in Naples, which were char-
acterized by extremely complicated jurisdictional conflicts due to the fact
that the accused included both laymen and members of the clergy. Many of
them, moreover, had been charged with a double crime – high treason and
heresy. The records of the trial for rebellion would relatively quickly be lost
or destroyed. But the documentation of the trials for heresy turned out to be
much richer. In fact, the accusations of heresy pose the most delicate prob-
lems, in that amidst the intrigue of the testimonies it becomes particularly
difficult to distinguish truth from falsehood, equivocation from exaggeration.
Even leaving aside the most vulgar and blasphemous gestures against the cru-
cifix or the Host on the part of Dionisio Ponzio, the depositions refer from the
outset to doctrines that amount to a rationalistic and unscrupulous critique of
the supernatural and sacramental aspects of Christianity. According to such
testimonies, for Campanella the sacraments ‘were not set down by Christ’
but were instead introduced for reasons of state, so as to induce fear and
obedience in the people. In particular, the Eucharist is ‘an absurdity and it is
craziness to believe in it.’ Demons do not exist, but are rather the products
of mental illnesses and alterations in the body (‘they are madnesses, sooty
spirits or cold humors that wane’), just as heaven and hell do not exist either.
Miracles are nothing but the ‘imaginations’ of those who believe in them. The
crossing of the Red Sea took place thanks to a low tide, while the eclipse at
the death of Christ was ‘natural and not miraculous, and … particular rather
than universal.’ Campanella himself was said to believe that he was capable of
true miracles: he was supposed to be convinced that ‘he could not be wounded
and that he could revive the dead and other extraordinary things.’ Christ was



     Ibid., pp. 392, 397–98. The third report is taken from the unpublished Istorie
     22

veneziane of the Doge Nicolò Contarini (1553-1631); for the reactions to the con-
spiracy of the Venetian government, see Gino Benzoni, ‘Campanella e Venezia: qual-
che appunto, qualche spunto,’ in Congiura di Calabria, p. 43–60.
                                                          The Conspiracy       77

not the son of God and was not resurrected. His body was hidden and taken,
as had happened with other legislators. Thus, ‘Christ was stolen; he did not rise
again, and … not letting their bodies be found was customary with legislators;
the same had been done with Moses, Pythagoras, and others; and so it was
done with Christ too.’ He denied the virginity of Mary, said that Martha and
Magdalen were the ‘lovers’ of Christ and that ‘the venereal act was licit.’ He
pointed out in this example that just ‘as a man may use an arm or a foot, so
he is able to use his member.’ According to him, the trinity was an ‘illusion,
depicting a body with three heads’ and that the Antichrist foreseen by proph-
ecy was the Roman Pope, whose authority was ‘an usurped and tyrannical
authority.’ He maintained that God did not exist and ‘he proved this by say-
ing that it was unbelievable that some Christians might be saved and that the
remainder would be damned because in comparison with the world the Chris-
tians are just a fingernail; that only some might be saved was not credible.’
Those who put credence in all these tales were, in his opinion, awkward and
ignorant asses, who could not understand that ‘the Apostles told them these
stories in order to inculcate the faith, not with reason but against reason.’23
   When he became aware of such compromising depositions, Campanella
would assert that the insistence on the heresies and their exaggeration was
nothing but a clever expedient on the part of the brothers in order to be trans-
ferred to Rome and judged there by the tribunal of the Holy Office. With an
affirmation that was at once disquieting and highly suggestive, he said that the
heresies were modeled on a scheme of such heresies set out ‘by one who was
in the Holy Office at Rome.’24 One cannot help but think of the encounter
with Bruno in the jails of the Roman Holy Office. Even if it is difficult (except
in the libertine and atheist theses reported and criticized in Ateismo trion-
fato) to trace the continuation of such evidently heterodox affirmations in the
later works, some claims turned out to be recognizable and plausible.25 They
included the Machiavellian conception of religion as a political bond, the
‘cold faith’ and the absence of interior adherence to dogmas that he preached,
the sexual licentiousness (which also echoed possible sympathies for Islamic
polygamy), and the acceptance of sodomy, which would later be harshly con-
demned in The City of the Sun.
   Regarding the accusation of rebellion, Campanella’s defensive strategy
found its strong-point in denying absolutely the crime of high treason and
insisting instead on the prophetic character of his message. Right from the


   23
      Amabile, Congiura, III, doc. 278, pp. 200–201; doc. 279, pp. 204–205.
   24
      Narrazione, p. 301.
   25
      See ch. 7, note 72; see also Vittorio Frajese, ‘L’Atheismus triumphatus come
romanzo filosofico di formazione,’ B&C, 4 (1998), pp. 313–342.
78         Chapter 5

beginning of the declaration that he made immediately after his arrest, he
consistently stressed his foremost interest in prophecy:

     I, brother Tommaso Campanella … make it manifest to anyone who will
     see this that I, having been in the Dominican religious order for fifteen
     years, was interested in diverse fields of science and prophecy in particular.
     On this account, I was fascinated with those things that give some indica-
     tion of the future, according to what the Lord God has placed as signs of the
     future in the things of the world.26

The document went on to record how, in the preceding months, he had devel-
oped the conviction that in the entire world (and in the Kingdom of Naples
in particular) great changes were at hand – changes that had been announced
by multiple, concordant signs. The astrologers expected upheavals in the state,
in light of an unusual sequence of eclipses and because the great conjunc-
tions – that is to say, the encounters of Saturn and Jupiter – had returned after
800 years in signs of fire, beginning from Sagittarius, just like in the times of
Christ and Charlemagne. Changes were announced also in the Prognosticon
de eversione Europae by the physician and astrologer from Ferrara Antonio
Arquato. The text was addressed to the King of Hungary Matthias Corvino in
1480 and was one of the most famous prophetic texts in the sixteenth century.
With a disconcerting precision that made modern scholars speculate about a
post eventum redaction, it seemed to anticipate some of the most unsettling
events of the first decades of the century, from the arrival of a ‘great heretic in
the North’ to the sack of Rome and the coming decline of the Turkish empire
– of which it was said that in the reign of the fifteenth sovereign it would be
divided into two realms, one of which would convert to Christianity. Saints and
prophets – from Saint Catherine of Siena to Bridget of Sweden to Joachim of
Fiore to Denis the Carthusian to Vincent Ferrer to Savonarola – were said to
have hoped for a profound reform of the Church. A metallic sheet had been
found recently with the prophecy of a certain Ubertino of Otranto, announc-
ing great upheavals in the south of Italy. To these prophetic indications were
added numerous natural signs that seemed to underscore the imminence of
the crisis and a kind of fever of the world: comets, destructive earthquakes,
rivers topping their banks, torrential downpours and floods, an invasion of
grasshoppers, and visions in the sky – as in that of ‘a black ladder above which
there was a cypress.’ To all of that was connected the restlessness of the people
and the wide-spread expectations of change: ‘I knew that everyone I talked




     26
          Dichiarazione, p. 102.
                                                                  The Conspiracy          79

to was ready for change and on the street every peasant was complaining: for
this reason I became ever more convinced that this had to be.’27
    In organizing his defensive materials in the following months, Campanella
maintained the assertion that his own preaching in Calabria and the conver-
sations he had with friends could not qualify as rebellion against Spain. He
had not acted with malevolence towards the King. On the contrary, he had
written in his favor, bestowing upon him the role of the gatherer of peoples
and proclaiming that the Catholic sovereign ‘would play the role of Cyrus …:
that with his sword he would in fact liberate the Church from the Babylon
represented by the Turks and by the heretics, rebuilding Jerusalem – that
is, Rome – and that he would institute the “perpetual sacrifice” all over the
world.’ Nor had he acted out of ambition. In fact it was clear that ‘no one
could decide to do things that are impossible, even if he desired them in
the abstract.’ How could he, a little unarmed friar, challenge the lord of two
worlds? Not even a madman could think of drinking the sea or carrying a
mountain on his shoulders. Furthermore, he had always abstained from posi-
tions of power and riches, preferring to live ‘as an ordinary philosopher.’ Nei-
ther resentment, nor lust for power therefore had been the motive for his
action. Instead, he was moved by prophetic inspiration. The desire that the
Kingdom of God come and that the earth be made according to his will (as is
invoked in the Our father) was not yet realized. It would have its completion
when ‘Christ expels all the single princes, instituting a priestly monarchy.’
The project in Calabria, however, was inserted in a precise prophetic context:
Campanella did not intend ‘to inaugurate a republic for his own advantage,
but rather to institute for the Pope and for the King a seminary of men excel-
lent in letters and arms, which the King and the Pontiff could use in matters
of peace and war. He wanted to offer almost a preliminary example of the
great universal republic one ought to work towards.’ In doing this he had fol-
lowed a divine inspiration, judging that he would have behaved wisely if he
should have used the imminent and predicted calamities for a good end: ‘yet
everything that brother Tommaso said was a warning against an impending
evil and not an attempt at rebellion; nor would he have instituted a republic
except after the future transformation.’28




   27
       Ibid., p. 108; on the signs, see also Prima delineatio, p. 133ff; Poesie, p. 496; Art.
proph., pp. 295–296. On the prophecy of Arquato, see Germana Ernst, ‘Aspetti celesti
e profezia politica. Sul Prognosticon di Arquato,’ B&C, 11 (2005), pp. 635–646, and the
bibliography indicated there.
    28
       Prima delineatio, pp. 123ff.
80        Chapter 5

                       Madness, Reason and Dissimulation

The first period of his Neapolitan incarceration was the most dramatic, and
Campanella was conscious of the extremely high risk of being put to death.
Rejecting every other defensive strategy, he turned to what seemed to him
the only possibility of saving his life – namely, simulating madness. The law in
fact forbade putting madmen to death. Given that madmen were incapable of
repentance, their executioners would be responsible for the eternal damna-
tion of their souls. Having found himself in a rather desperate situation, Cam-
panella was ready to resort to any expedient. In a sonnet he recalled the great
characters of antiquity – from Cato and Hannibal to Cleopatra – who had
preferred death to a life that they considered worthless. With suicide rejected,
however, he instead resorted to simulating madness, a measure used by other
wise men (from David and Solon to Brutus) in order to escape the violence of
tyrants.29 He compared himself to Jonah, symbol and figure of the death and
resurrection of Christ, who had accepted being engulfed in the stomach of a
whale so that he might later escape to complete the divine command. Just so,
Campanella chose to debase himself in prison (which later he would not hesi-
tate to describe as ‘worse than a thousand deaths’), in order to preserve, along
with his life, the prophetic message of which he was the vessel.30
    On Easter morning 1600, Campanella was found by his jailers face-down on
a half-burnt mattress, uttering disconnected sentences in a cell filled with smoke.
Thus began a simulation that would be maintained tenaciously for many months,
even though the prisoner would be put under surveillance and surprised by noc-
turnal interrogations that were supposed to cast doubt on the pretence of mad-
ness. At the beginning of June in the following year, the juridical test of madness
would be implemented when Campanella was subjected to the extreme torture
of the veglia, an ordeal that lasted for thirty-six hours. The official written report
of the torture cannot be read without horror at this violation and at all the physi-
cal suffering inflicted on the suspects. When the moment came to sign a dec-
laration, a disfigured Dionisio Ponzio would have a pen placed in his mouth
because he could not use his hands. In the long hours during which his body had
been disjointed and broken (between the prayers, the pleas for help, the calls for
basic physical needs to be met), Campanella uttered pregnant phrases – such
as ‘ten white horses’ or ‘1600’ – that recalled the plan for the coming of a new
age. To those who asked him why he was so worried about his body and not his


     Poesie, n. 62, pp. 259–260; Rhetorica, p. 839.
     29

     Poesie, n. 72, p. 291; n. 62, p. 260. On the relationship between Giona and
     30

Campanella, see Germana Ernst, ‘“Nascosto in ciclopea caverna.” Natura e condizione
umana in Campanella,’ in Il Neoplatonismo nel Rinascimento (Rome, 1993), pp. 65–81
and then in Ead, Il carcere, il politico, il profeta. Saggi su Tommaso Campanella (Pisa-
Rome), 2002, p. 11–34, esp. pp. 31–34.
                                                               The Conspiracy          81

soul, he replied with sublime simplicity: ‘the soul is immortal.’ Equally famous
is the utterance that Firpo described as ‘filled with plebeian vigor.’ This was an
utterance ‘with which he confirmed his own pride at having survived the terrible
ordeal’ and that was reported by a jailer who was supporting Campanella as he
was returning him to his cell: ‘what, did they think I was a berk who wanted to
talk?’31 In a passage of the Medicina, he would later recall the prison doctor (vir
bonus – ‘a good man’) with sober gratitude, for being able, against all hope, to
make him well. Presented with a case of bruising ‘deep … and measureless,’ he
found a way to separate the healthy from the damaged flesh, rendering the dam-
aged parts completely rotten so as to be able to remove them, all to the end of
avoiding an infection and permitting the reconstitution of the flesh, and also so
as to restore the two pounds Campanella had lost.32
    Later, these biographical events would take on an exemplary significance.
From the fact of having succeeded in not confessing, even as his body was sub-
jected to extreme physical treatment, he drew the conclusion that the human
will is not determined by astral influences, which must be much less violent than
the tortures he had endured in prison. We find a passage to this effect already at
the end of The City of the Sun, written immediately after these events. But even
many years later Campanella would remember the event and its meaning in a
very precise description:

   Even he who has been subjected to torture cannot be compelled to support
   evil, in thought or in actions … I had experience of that when, for forty hours,
   I was strung up from behind with a rope, with my arms twisted and bound
   by other thin ropes that cut me to the bone. Sitting on a sharpened piece of
   wood, if I wanted to hold myself up with my arms I experienced an insuffer-
   able pain there – at the shoulders, in the chest, and on the neck – and if I low-
   ered myself my buttocks were cut by the piece of wood. Out of the lacerated
   flesh from the neck of the bladder to the roots of the genitals a great quantity
   of blood poured out, until finally they gave up torturing me after forty hours,
   leaving me half dead. Some of those present abused me and intensified the
   pain, tugging at the ropes; others in their hearts admired the resistance of
   my spirit. From this experience I know that forfeiting or not forfeiting virtue
   depends on us. Indeed, I never gave in on anything, nor were they able to
   extort from me even a single word. Aristotle would have called me unhappy.
   But if I had followed his principles in order to avoid death, I would have been
   defeated – enslaved to fear and unworthy of life.33


    31
       Firpo, Processi, pp. 265, 267: ‘Che si pensavano che io era coglione, che voleva
parlare?’
    32
       Medicina, p. 590. For his entire life, Campanella would bear on his body the signs
of the violence he had suffered, as testified to in the famous lines of the Curiosites
inouyes by Jacques Gaffarel: see ch. 11, note 40.
    33
       Quaest. morales, I, p. 8.
82        Chapter 5

Beyond these meditations on the independence of virtue and the liberty of the
will, the events that followed the Calabrian disaster led him to reflect on the
role and fate of the prophet. When society is dominated by madness and the
overturning of values, prophets – who are uncomfortable bearers of a truthful
message – cannot but be persecuted and put to death. Such distortion of their
message and persecution is the work of ‘politicians,’ who deride prophecy and
brand the learned as rebels. They judge everything from their own point of
view and project their own personal vision of the world onto others. Domi-
nated by the reductive logic of power, they hold that every human initiative
is driven by personal ambition for power. Fearful of losing the object of their
desire, they become more prudent and suspicious than the most jealous of
lovers: ‘Indeed, jealousy of one’s kingdom is stronger even than the jealousy
one experiences for a woman when her lover fears she may be taken away
from him by a passing fly.’34
    This reflection on the conflict between politicians and prophets (and on
all the implications and tensions that it carried with it) was central to Cam-
panella’s thought. In the first years of his detention, he wrote a Latin treatise
divided into two parts, which is often alluded to but unfortunately lost.35 The
first analyzed the deep reasons underlying the inevitability of this conflict and
the execution of prophets. But the second showed how prophets – despite
and, indeed, precisely on account of the drama of their end and their apparent
defeat – were reborn, after death, because of the loftiness of their message.
While their persecutors were hated by all for all time, they were restored to a
more enduring life. And that is what is said, with effective simplicity, in the final
terzine of the sixteenth sonnet in the Scelta:
     He who knows that he is fit for serving
     Persecutes he who appears fit for ruling:
     Martyrdom is a sign of royal virtue.

     Such men rule even when they are dead and gone;
     You see tyrants and their laws perish,
     While Peter and Paul rule at Rome.36

     34
        Prima delineatio, p. 163.
     35
        Firpo, Bibliografia, n. 76, p. 187. On the theme of prophecy, see Ernst, Il carcere, il
politico, il profeta, pp. 61–102; Ead., ‘profezia,’ in Enciclopedia, vol. 1, coll. 303-317; the
collected volume Tommaso Campanella e l’attesa del secolo aureo (Florence, 1998);
Lina Bolzoni, ‘Prophétie litteraire et prophétie politique chez T. Campanella,’ in La
prophétie comme arme de guerre des pouvoirs (XV–XVII siècles), ed. A. Redondo
(Paris, 2000), pp. 251–263.
     36
        Poesie, p. 71: ‘Chi si conosce degno di servire,/persegue chi par degno da imper-
are:/di virtù regia è segnale il martire./ Questi regnan pur morti, a lungo andare: vedi
i tiranni e lor leggi perire,/e Pietro e Paulo in Roma or comandare.’
                                                               The Conspiracy         83

   Campanella returned to these themes several times – above all in his let-
ters – to explain and clarify to his interlocutors the meaning of his experi-
ence. Among others, one passage in a beautiful Latin letter to the Pope and
the Cardinals is highly significant. This was a letter in which he subtly laid
bare the perversity of the mechanism by which prophets – chief among them
Christ himself – are put to death by satraps and Pharisees, who are fearful of
being unmasked and of losing their own privileges:
   And now these Machiavellians, according to whom religion is nothing but
   a deception made for the purpose of ruling, judge my own intentions on
   the basis of their own [ex proprio animo coniectarunt de animo meo] – and
   perhaps your own too – and they go about saying that I have said these
   things in order to set myself up in power. Yet is it perhaps not true that all
   the prophets and all the wise men – myself among them – have been hit
   with these same accusations at crucial junctures in history? The satraps and
   Pharisees (adulators who grow fat off their princes) rise up immediately.
   They see that sages are announcing the inauguration of a new age and are
   instilling belief on account of the integrity of their morals, and seeing also
   that their deceits will be revealed, and that the shadows in which they are
   shrouded for the purpose of doing evil things will be dispelled and that it
   will be they who lack the life-blood of lying and deceit. Given that such
   satraps and Pharisees are not able to say anything against the holy ways
   of these sages, they recourse to the accusation of rebellion and heresy and
   attack such men for what they have said simply because it does not accord
   with what they themselves say. Thus did they rebel against Jeremiah … and
   against Isaiah and others; thus did they rebel against the apostles, as if the
   apostles were deceitful pseudo-prophets, seducers of the kingdom and lust-
   ing after it – and Christ is the exemplary figure for all of this.37

In an upside-down world in which violence and madness take the place of
wisdom, simulation becomes an indispensible shield against persecutors. As
Campanella explained in a letter, he feigned madness ‘not in order to prolong
my life, but for the public benefit to which I am consecrated.’38 The necessity of
dissimulation is expressed well in a famous sonnet, which revisited the parable
according to which astrologers – foreseeing thanks to their expertise that a coun-
try would be driven crazy by malignant influences – decide to flee, so as to return
after the event and ‘then rule the injured peoples in a sound manner.’39 Anton
Francesco Doni, editor of the Italian translation of More’s Utopia (the work of
his friend Ortensio Lando), reported the parable in a lively fashion, when he

   37
      Lettere, p. 67.
   38
      Ibid., p. 79.
   39
      See Lina Bolzoni, ‘Le città utopiche del Cinquecento italiano: giochi di spazi e di
saperi,’ L’Asino d’oro, 4 (1993), pp. 64–81: 69ff.
84      Chapter 5

told of how the learned emerge from their refuges triumphant and resolute ‘like
Easter candles’ and come to be derided and swept away by dominant infantile
madness. Doni did not refrain from a kind of satisfaction and a sense of bitter and
liberating revenge against those who presumed to hold themselves back in safety
so as then to profit from the situation and rule over a crazed people.40 In Cam-
panella, the parable had a different result. Right from its long and obscure title
(‘Senno senza forza de’ savi delle genti antiche esser soggetto alla forza de’ pazzi’:
‘Knowledge without the power of the wise men of ancient peoples is subject to the
power of madmen’), the sonnet alludes to the tragic destiny of unarmed prophets,
to the inevitable defeat of ‘wisdom’ unsupported by power in its desperate fight
against brute force – and, of course, one is not dealing with ‘ancient peoples,’ but
with quite recent events. When the wise return to give their good counsel, they
are punched and kicked. If they want to avoid a worse end, they are forced to stay
quiet and simulate, because the greatest madman occupies the throne:
     Such that, forced to do so the wise became used
     To living as dullards, in order to cheat death,
     Because the greatest madman sat on the throne,

     They lived, their wisdom shut up behind locked doors,
     Applauding in public with their words and their deeds
     The mad and twisted whims of others.41

In the most dramatic moment of his life, Campanella was forced to recourse
to the simulation of madness. This is one of the stratagems used by the wise
man in order to save himself from tyrannical violence, as Cardano had already
pointed out in a beautiful passage of the De sapientia:

     The simulation of madness has proved to be of great use to those who are
     forced to live under irrational and brutal tyrants – just like Brutus, who see-
     ing his relatives murdered by Tarquin, was able (thanks to the simulation
     of madness) not only to escape the violence of the tyrant, but also to expel
     him from the kingdom. Thus, simulated madness is equivalent to a double
     wisdom and in all of human wisdom there is nothing to be found that is
     greater than the opportune simulation of madness.42


    40
       Anton Francesco Doni, I Mondi e gli Inferni, ed. P. Pellizzari (Turin, 1994), pp.
158–161.
    41
       Poesie, pp. 63-64: ‘Talché, sforzati i savi a viver come/gli stolti usavan, per schifar
la morte,/ché ’l più gran pazzo avea le regie some,/vissero sol col senno a chiuse porte,/
in pubblico applaudendo in fatti e nome/all’altrui voglie forsennate e torte.’
    42
       Girolamo Cardano, De sapientia, III, in Opera omnia, cura C. Sponii, 10 vols.
(Lugduni: I.A. Huguetan & M.A. Ravaud, 1663), I, p. 556; see now the edition of De
sapientia by M. Bracali (Florence, 2008), p. 207. For Bruto see Livius, I, 56, 7; there is
praise for the simulation of madness in Nicolò Machiavelli too, Discorsi sopra la prima
Deca di Tito Livio, III, 2.
