6. Prophecy, Politics and Utopia


                                  Articuli Prophetales

The bare bones of the apologetic document Secunda delineatio defensionum
would be developed further as the Articuli prophetales, a title which had already
been used as a sub-title for the original work.1 The structure of the text lists
works by saints and prophets, scholars, philosophers, astrologers, and Sibyls in
order to prove the legitimacy of the expectations of the coming of a new golden
age, with the following corollaries: the future Christian republic would be saved
by a single King and Priest, holder of both spiritual and temporal power; that rul-
ers would take on the role of defenders and ministers of the single monarch; and
that the Catholic sovereign is to be identified with the mystical Cyrus, to whom
fell the highest task of reunifying the Christian flock.
    In order to clarify his own thinking on the ‘first resurrection’ and on the
kingdom of the saints, Campanella specified that three positions could be dis-
tinguished. The first position – that of the millenarian heretics – maintained
that after the defeat of Gog and Magog a paradise would establish itself on
earth. It is from this opinion (condemned by theologians and prophets) that
Muhammad derived his conception of a carnal paradise. The second posi-
tion, rejected by most theologians, although not officially condemned by the
Church, was the one maintained by the ‘very meek’ Fathers of the Church
of the first centuries (such as Papias, Irenaeus, Lactantius, Justin Martyr),
according to whom holy men alone will rise again before the resurrection
of everyone and they will rule with Christ for 1,000 years. But Campanella
maintained a third position: the first resurrection was to be identified with
the reform and renewal of the Church and in the golden age saints would rise
again – not bodily but in spirit and in repute. This reform began in the time
of Constantine and would be completed after the defeat of the Antichrist. In
that age of peace and justice, ignorance, tribulation, hunger, war, disease, and




   1
       Secunda delineatio, pp. 173–213.


G. Ernst, Tommaso Campanella, International Archives of the History              85
of Ideas /Archives internationales d’histoire des idées 200,
DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3126-6_6, © Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2010
86         Chapter 6

the gross sins that now reign would all be extinguished. In this republic Christ
would rule with the Apostles, not visibly but in an invisible way, thanks to the
observance of their doctrines. In the fourth chapter of the Articuli the author
offers a Clavis mirabilis that permitted the unveiling of divine prophecies that
were latent in Holy Scripture. He explained the legitimacy of interpretation
per figuras and identified all the possible analogies between sacred history
and human history. Following the Clavis, there came its concrete applica-
tion, in which the author performed a re-reading of the entire history of the
Church, establishing elaborate correspondences between the days of creation,
the millennia of the world, the ages of the synagogue and those of the church,
and at last the angels, seals, trumpets, and phials of the Apocalypse.
    In the Articuli, considerable space was reserved for astronomy and its
results. Campanella believed Copernicus to be ‘extremely wise,’ ‘preferable to
everyone,’ and took Sibyl from the Progymnasmata of Tycho Brahe the proph-
ecy of the Tiburtine Sibyl, which had assumed a particular significance after
the appearance of a new star in 1572. Against Aristotle, who held the heavens
to be unchangeable and the motions of the stars to be perpetual, new phe-
nomena in the heavens demonstrated that the machina mundi did not remain
immobile and immutable, but rather moved in space and underwent change.
Campanella attempted to reinterpret the great events of history in the light of
such changes, so as to be capable of making reasonable conjectures about the
future. The final chapter of the Articuli (which would later be identified as the
Prognosticum astrologicum sent to Galileo to which Campanella alluded in
a letter of 1611) was dedicated to this ‘unusual astrology’ of the cosmos. This
unusual variant integrated traditional astrology (based on the great conjunc-
tions, eclipses, and comets) with the interpretation of other astronomical facts,
from the precession of the equinoxes to the displacement of the apogees and
the progressive constriction of the solar obliquity.2 More worthy of emphasis
was the fact that the variations of the velocity of the stars turned out to be
irregular. The heavenly bodies moved ‘now more quickly, now more slowly
ad nutum Dei (‘according to God’s will’). If we ask ourselves why the anom-
aly was quicker in the times of Muhammad and Saint Gregory, while now it
is slower, we do not find any reason other than divine will: ‘the heavens do
not move according to our measures (which until now have always remained
deceptive and erroneous), but rather according to the measure of divine prov-
idence.’ If calculations of the life-span of the universe (on which chronolo-
gists, astronomers, and theologians have exhausted themselves) turned out to
be discordant and did not offer certainty, if it is true that the end of times for
the world is unknown just as the day of our death is unknown to us, then – so
Campanella affirmed – it was necessary to remain always vigilant. He was
convinced that the end was nigh and that all the signs that would announce it
     2
         See the introduction to the Art. proph., pp. XXXVIIff.
                                            Prophecy, Politics and Utopia       87

had appeared, including those ‘of the sun, moon, and stars,’ as prophesied in
the Gospel according to Luke.
    The fourteenth chapter of the Articuli is dedicated to the Antichrist, a
subject that in those years had acquired a pressing actuality on account of
the polemics with the reformers, who identified the Antichrist with the Pope.
In these pages, Campanella occupied himself with an exacting hermeneuti-
cal interpretation of passages from the Book of Revelation and the prophet
Daniel, so as to specify who the precursors of the Antichrist had been in his-
tory and in the various kingdoms, and so as to formulate relevant conjectures
on the coming of the last, more terrible figure. The central figure in this dis-
cussion was Muhammad, who is to be identified with the beast with seven
heads and ten horns referred to in Book of Revelation. From his seed would
originate the ‘little horn’ (cornu parvum), the last Antichrist who would reca-
pitulate in his person all the evils and the persecutions suffered by Christian-
ity in the past. The last and most renowned of the precursors of the Antichrist
was Luther, whose doctrines presented (and not by chance for Campanella)
notable affinities with Islamic beliefs: they both sharply circumscribed human
liberty and proposed a tyrannical God, who commands us to do good but
pushes us irresistibly to do evil. This is a God made in their image and simili-
tude – ‘impious, deceitful, tyrannical, cruel, fraudulent, and jealous.’3
    Another amply treated point dealt with the desolation of Rome, a punish-
ment that would probably be inflicted by the Turks, to whom fell the role of
flagellum Dei (‘scourge of God’). Some very harsh pages are dedicated to this
thematic. These are pages that present an extremely dark picture of Christianity,
giving the Articuli some rather gloomy, threatening tones. The authority most
cited in order to confirm the catastrophe of Rome is St. Bridget of Sweden, ‘the
most illustrious of the Sibyls,’ whose Revelationes were an important step in
his own intellectual and spiritual autobiography, as Campanella himself indi-
cated. In chapter eight, passages from the Swedish saint are recalled concerning
the reunification of peoples in a single faith and the appearance of a universal
reformer (whom Campanella suggested ought to be identified with the angelic
Pope predicted by Joachim of Fiore). Chapters nine and ten included passages
that threatened the most extreme punishments for Christians who had strayed
from the evangelical message, but above all for the clergy and for the Pope,
who, on account of cupidity for riches and ambitions for power, had reduced the
Church into a crumbling edifice, close to a ruinous collapse, in a field where only
discord and weeds grow, ready to be rooted out by a powerful ploughman.
    Amidst this forest of texts and authors, Campanella paid special attention
to his Dominican brothers, convinced that his own order (identified with the



   3
       Art. proph., pp. 202–203.
88         Chapter 6

third quadriga of the vision of Zachariah and the white horse of the Apoc-
alypse that appears victorious at the opening of the first seal) was to play
a prominent role in the anticipated reform of the Church. He manifested a
particular attachment to Catherine of Siena and cited Raymond of Capua,
St. Vincent Ferrer, and friar Rusticiano with pride. In the Articuli, we also
find a reference to Savonarola. In truth, Campanella (in a somewhat reticent
fashion) preferred to abstain from judgment on the person of Savonarola and
his undertaking (sive bonus, sive malus, ‘whether good or bad’). But he did
not fail to cite the Oracolo della renovatione della Chiesa, which the faithful
disciple Luca Bettini had recovered from Savonarola’s sermons and prepared
for the press. But the text was, in turn, put on the Index in 1558. Against the
background of such caution, which understandably resulted from the risks
involved in praising a condemned and controversial figure of the likes of
Savonarola, one can perhaps also detect fear of a dangerous conflation. Cam-
panella insisted on distinguishing prophecy from political initiative in his
defensive declarations. He was extremely careful to repel every suspicion
of having wanted to exercise political power personally. The same accusation
had been leveled at Savonarola, and shone through in the famous judgment
of Machiavelli regarding unarmed prophets. In the eighteenth chapter of the
Atheismus triumphatus (aimed at demonstrating how the teachings of Machi-
avelli might in truth prove themselves to be ineffectual and unsuccessful),
Campanella rejected the derision heaped upon prophets by the Florentine
Secretary: they move on a completely different level from that of politicians,
since they speak on God’s power (Dei iussu) and not on the human cause
for domination (dominandi causa). The politician is not able to understand
the prophet. Applying to him his own criteria and perspectives, the politi-
cian judges him to be someone easily defeated. In truth, the contrary is the
case and it is politics that is in need of prophecy, which must be integrated
and the absence of which condemns politics to failure and disappointment.
Entrenched behind the suspension of judgment, Campanella could do no
more than express a deep admiration for the touching commentaries on the
Psalms written by the Dominican friar on the eve of his tragic end: ‘Shortly
before his death he showed great penitence and sanctity, writing emotively
of the consolation of death in a commentary to Psalms 31 and 50. A coun-
terfeit Machiavellian would not have been able to read let alone write
such words inspired as they were by fervor of spirit and by a kind of lived
experience.’4 In a few, intense lines of the Syntagma, Campanella expressed a
frank recognition of the extraordinary gifts of Savonarola, whose power as a
preacher ought to be contrasted to the vacuous facility of Cornelio Musso and

     4
         Ath. triumph., p. 235.
                                             Prophecy, Politics and Utopia        89

the other moderns who ‘flower but do not bear fruit.’ The judgment on the
incisiveness of Savonarola’s style became a judgment on the exceptionality of
the person: ‘even if on many points he fell into error, Savonarola was a great
preacher: he inflamed the spirits of his listeners, forced the seeds of virtue to
bear fruit, actively rid the soul of futile thoughts, and finally exposed vice and
gutted them.5

                                  Political Bonds

Two brief but extremely intense pieces date back to the earliest period in
prison: the Aforismi politici and the Città del Sole. Together they represent the
two poles of Campanella’s political thought – the one ‘realistic,’ shot through
with echoes of Machiavelli, and the other prophetic and utopian.
    For the dryness of its style and the acuity of its contents, the Aforismi is
one of the most successful of Campanella’s political tracts. In all probability,
it was composed at the end of 1601. Given to Schoppe in 1607, the text was
not published as expected but circulated in a number of different manuscripts,
which were read at once, used and also conspicuously plagiarized.6 Later
translated into Latin, extended and reorganized, the work would come to
constitute the third part of the Philosophia realis under the title De politica.7
It would have an exceptional reader in Hugo Grotius, who glossed the text
with acute, even if often critical and prickly, observations.8 In a text that was
seen as his only treatment of political science ‘going beyond every particu-
lar contingency, intent on locating general principles,’ Campanella adopted
a terse and edgy mode of expression. He analyzed questions concerning the
constitution and organization of every kind of political community, formu-
lating rules and counsels regarding their acquisition, preservation, decline,
and death. The text makes precise use of exempla drawn from history both
ancient and modern. Above all, however, it draws on the principles of Cam-
panella’s own philosophy – thereby rendering even the treatment of tradi-
tional themes strikingly original.9
    The aphorisms follow on from each other in a concise and cumulative
rhythm. They begin with the assertion that the ‘naturalness’ (as opposed to



   5
     Syntagma, IV, 3, p. 98.
   6
     See Rodolfo De Mattei, ‘Materiali campanelliani nella Philosophia regia di G. A.
Brancalasso,’ GCFI, 26 (1947), pp. 373–393; see ch. 3, notes 23, 24.
   7
      There is now a modern edition with an Italian translation of the De politica
by A. Cesaro (Naples, 2001).
   8
      The Observata of Grotius can be found in Aforismi pol., p. 229ff.
   9
      Luigi Firpo, introduction to the Aforismi pol., p. 10.
90      Chapter 6

the ‘violence’) of a dominion over a community presupposes that this
community is itself natural in the sense that whosoever brings them together
does so ‘for the mutual natural good’. Natural communities exist on several levels:
the most immediate level of man and woman, then that of families, those of
cities, of kingdoms and finally ‘of all men in the human species.’ Campanella
reaffirmed that ‘dominion and community is more natural where the good is
more common to all; that dominion is more violent where such commonality
is absent.’ The articulation of one of the central and recurrent principles of
Campanella’s thought follows – namely, that of the three kinds of bonds that
bind the members of a community together (the goods of the soul, the goods of
the body, and the goods of fortune, or riches). The healthiest bond is the first. The
goods of the soul are obtained and conserved by ‘rational religion, which is the
soul of politics and which derives from natural law.’ It has the capacity even
to unite nations that are extremely different and distant. Virtue determines the
degree of ‘naturalness’ in the person who commands: ‘he rules by nature who
is first in virtue. He who lacks virtue by nature serves. Where one does the
contrary, there is violent dominion.’ In turn, virtue in politics is connected to
force of spirit, or body, or both. An exemplary case of the predominance of the
former is Ulysses; for the second, Ajax; for the two combined, Caesar. Commu-
nities are classified according to dominion, defined as ‘the highest power of the
republic,’ which is nothing other than ‘the power of mercy, that is power over
life and death,’ held by one alone, by many, or by all (or in a mixed form). The
author discussed diverse types of government (and their positive and negative
forms), together with the internal and external causes of their transformation.
    In the aphorisms that followed, Campanella announced themes that would
later be taken up and developed further, asserting that ‘only non-sophistical,
genuinely philosophical – not hermitic, but civil – wisdom rules well and natu-
rally.’ ‘Wisdom’ has the function of integrating and also of inverting the ‘natu-
ral’ relations of dominion – for example, between male and female, the strong
and the weak. Thus, underlining the diversity of those natural attitudes in differ-
ent persons, Campanella identified the fundamental characteristic of the best
republic as the correspondence between natural inclinations and social roles
– which signifies the greater value of reason over chaos: ‘the best republic is the
one in which each is elected to perform that duty for which he was born, so that
in this way reason may reign. That republic is worst in which each individual
performs duties contrary to those for which he was born, so that chaos reigns.’
In the following aphorism, which deplores the allocation of duties and honors
according to incorrect criteria, the point is rendered more precisely:

     Where from early childhood duties are allocated according to natural apti-
     tude by wise and unperturbed public experts, there the republic becomes
     most flourishing. But where people enter offices by chance – that is, they
                                                 Prophecy, Politics and Utopia           91

   become king because they are the sons of the king, they are officials because
   they are the sons of the nobility, or because they are relations or friends of
   the ruling class, or because they are rich and buy their way into power, and
   not because they are good and wise – there the republic is always ruined.10

The realization of this correspondence (which is vital for the state) requires
the law, which is described as ‘the consensus of the reason that is common to
all, written and promulgated for the common good and conforming to eter-
nal reason.’ The eternal law is the law of nature, which ‘is a rule and reason
implanted in us and in the world; it is the art of God.’ Human laws, which have
contingent aspects directed at resolving particular problems and addressing
particular needs, ought to follow natural law. It is that connection with eternal
law that confers the quality of justice and equity on civil law. If political law
can in some cases contravene the letter of the eternal law (but not its deeper
sense), then the reason of state of modernity is instead a kind of counterfeiting
and distortion of equity: ‘Reason of state is a name dreamt up by tyrants on
the model of epichea or equity. It appeared to them that in order to conserve
the state they might transgress any law, and do the same in order to acquire
a state. But the difference is that while equity looks to the public good, the
reason of state considers the private good of the ruler.’11
    The best laws are always ‘few and brief.’ They have to adjust themselves
not simply to the common good but also to the customs and characteristics of
the people, taking into account the diversity of climates and temperaments.
For northern peoples (‘fierce by nature’ and intolerant of any restriction)
liberal laws will be suitable, while for southern peoples, ‘on account of the fact
they are physically weak and cunning, only principalities that command by
the rod and with severe laws are appropriate.’ Guardians of the laws will be,
according to a precise order that is not to be altered, the honor of those who
observe it, the love of the useful that goes to those who observe it, and the
fear of punishment of those who transgress the law. One of the primary ends
at which the law must aim is that of establishing an ‘equality, beneficial to the
republic’ and to eliminate ‘destructive inequality.’ As would be reaffirmed later
in the The City of the Sun, ‘people who are too poor are rapacious, scheming,
and perfidious,’ while ‘people who are too rich are arrogant and dissolute.’
Likewise, ‘people who are too ignorant are ruinous,’ while ‘people who are
too shrewd are extremely unreliable.’ From here derives the extremely lofty
role of the legislator, to whom it falls to coordinate all the sciences and arts
of the republic and to know ‘the customs of the country and the good and


     Aforismi pol., 28 and 29, p. 99.
    10

   11
     Ibid., 35, p. 102; see Germana Ernst, ‘ragion di Stato,’ in Enciclopedia, vol. 1, coll.
317–329.
92         Chapter 6

bad fortunes that ordinarily come to that country from the stars, or from the
earth, or from its neighbors.’ But the true secret of the legislator – defined as
he ‘who founds a state under new religious and legal auspices, arms and rites’
– is that of being the messenger of God, like Moses, or presenting oneself in
that way, as Minos, Muhammad, Jupiter, Osiris and other highly astute politi-
cians did. These were politicians who ‘pretended to be sent by God in order to
gain credit, because the legislator must be very highly praised, extremely wise,
divine, religious, and superhuman.’ The wisest human legislator will take the
human body as a model of the republic:

     As its soul, the republic has wisdom and religion. As its body, it has the sen-
     ate and the council and all those who may take office. As external goods, it
     has soldiers, mercenaries and auxiliaries, if they do not partake in govern-
     ment or possess some office. As the spirit that connects the soul and the
     body, it has the law. For its eyes, the republic has the wise investigators of
     the sciences. For its ears, it has merchants and spies. For its tongue, it has
     preachers and ambassadors. For its hands, it has soldiers; for feet, artists and
     farmers. As sustenance for the goods of body and soul, it has the goods of
     fortune – that is servants, provisions, and moneys.12

Articulating one of the other fundamental motifs of his thought, Campanella
affirmed that there are three instruments for ‘acquiring, preserving, and gov-
erning’ states: language, arms, and wealth. He also lingered for a time to ana-
lyze the duration and stability, strength and weakness of political formations in
relationship to the impact of such factors. Taking up themes that were already
present in the Monarchia di Spagna, the author emphasized the fittingness
of mixing peoples, ‘planting them like trees so as to make them stronger, and
destroying old stock and dying plants.’ He delineated a doctrine of three
causes, that govern every political formation in modes and proportions that
are different and more or less evident: God, prudence, and chance. From the
insufficiency of human prudence derives the necessity, which extends to every
political formation, to establish a communicative relationship with divinity,
through oracles and prophets. From here came the importance of the role
of priests, whose characteristics – of wisdom, force, and mercy – are made
prominent in aphorism eighty. The soul of politics is thus religion. Religions
and sects, like republics, ‘have their own cycles.’ When they arrive at athe-
ism, denying the immortality of the soul or divine providence, then is ‘born
the final evil inflicted on the people and the end of the wrath of God.’ This is
followed ‘necessarily by reform or change,’ as many examples will confirm,
and as the most recent examples of the Reformation will also illustrate. On
the basis of such principles one is able to affirm the power of the Papacy – ‘the

     12
          Ibid., n. 58, p. 109.
                                             Prophecy, Politics and Utopia          93

armed Christian priesthood’ – which is necessary for Christian princes. The
Pope is ‘the just arbiter of war and peace, and intervenes with arms on the
part of he who has right on his side, and forces he who is in the wrong to con-
cede, and unites them both against the enemies of Christianity.’ In contrast,
no single ‘Christian king has ever been able to maintain a monarchy over all
of Christendom by himself, because the Pope is above him and arranges and
lays waste to his plans.’ Having condemned every apostasy and heresy, Cam-
panella foresaw that with all the cycles of all the changes completed, ‘one will
come to the first natural, divine reign, the rule of a King and a Priest in one.’
He foresaw that one would reach ‘a prime, innocent, natural state’ through
prophecy and by means of ‘the cycle of things.’
   Campanella insisted on distancing himself from the principles of the
reason of state. Aphorism ninety-six is dedicated to a precise comparison
between prudence and cunning, so as to underscore how the first (which
follows with divine wisdom) aims at the well-being of the collective, while
the second (daughter of egoistic individuality) concerns itself solely with the
benefit of he who holds power:

   Prudence is the mark of a true king, to whom – after God – the kingdom
   belongs, and prudence is the opposite of cunning, which is the mark of the
   tyrant. Prudence agrees with God, that is with the primary intelligence,
   whereas cunning agrees with one’s own will. Prudence is magnanimous,
   while cunning is arrogant and vile. Prudence exalts the great, the wise, and
   the strong. But cunning casts them down and kills them in order to rule
   without healthy dispute. Prudence invests in the minds of men and large
   numbers, whereas cunning invests in money and strong walls, diminishing
   its vassals … Prudence studies in the religion of nature, while cunning is
   immersed in a superstitious religiosity that oppresses the minds of men so as
   to rule over them in a contemptible manner. Prudence takes the customs of
   a people and the nature of a climate into account, as well as the variations
   that have existed in the past and continue to exist in the present throughout
   the world in comparison to that which holds steady amidst so many varying
   things. Cunning, on the other hand, considers only that which is important in
   its back garden and only that which is important to its own household and
   time … Prudence concentrates on steering; cunning, on the rowers … Pru-
   dence passes laws that are for the good of all, while cunning passes laws that
   are good for itself alone … Prudence deceives people for their own good
   and once discovered it is loved all the more. Cunning deceives people only
   in order to benefit itself and when it is discovered it becomes hateful.13



  13
     Ibid., pp. 122–123. For studies of the relationship between Campanella and
Machiavelli, see ch. 4, note 75.
94      Chapter 6

Notwithstanding the polemics and attempts to distinguish his own thoughts,
there are undoubtedly echoes of Machiavelli in the Aphorisms as in the Mon-
archia di Spagna, the unscrupulousness of which is justified insofar as these
texts are inserted into and justified within a Christian and religious context.
Recall, for example, the counsel to extinguish the nobility and the royal line
(as the Turks do), so as to render succession more secure; or recall the advice
of not inflicting punishments in person, except for those desired by all ‘as in
extinguishing usurers and rapacious officials’; likewise, recall the counsel of
exposing governors and ministers who have exasperated and extorted their
subjects to the wrath of the people, as Cesare Borgia did. As Machiavelli
noted, Borgia ordered the quartering and displaying in the main square of
Cesena of his own lieutenant Ramiro de Lorqua, so as to vent upon him the
populace’s hatred;14 or again, recall the radicalness and speed of the suggested
measures in the occupation of subjugated countries:

     He who acquires a new kingdom ought to inflict the following evils on his
     subjects – that is, cast down their leaders, change the laws, raise their for-
     tresses to the ground, extinguish and exile the royal family. All these things
     ought to be carried out on the day of victory itself, by the hand and in the
     name of the victorious soldiers and captains. Rewards are to be handed out
     one at a time, not all together, gradually after victory, by one’s own hand
     and in one’s own name.15

In the final part of the Aforismi, Campanella dwells at some length on an
analysis of all the possible causes of change and the decline of kingdoms and
republics. It surveys the diverse problems that can present themselves, with
precise references to episodes from ancient and modern history, and suggests
opportune remedies from time to time. Among the principal causes of change
was the appearance of new prophets (‘where prophecy inclines, so inclines
the state’), contests between aristocratic and popular classes, problems con-
nected to the army or to an excess of taxes and tributes, and many others.
Also sketched is the danger constituted by a possible ‘conspiracy of strong
and wise men’:

     As a remedy, wise and strong men ought to be separated under the pretence
     of honoring them with high office in diverse regions. Their loyalty must be
     secured by means of rewards, they should not be extinguished but co-opted
     into the government, because ruin is more certain when the worthless and
     the ignorant are taken into government and given distinction. Just so, it is


   14
      The episode, recalled frequently by Campanella, is taken from ch. 7 of Machiavelli’s
Principe.
   15
      Aforismi pol., n. 100, p. 124.
                                                 Prophecy, Politics and Utopia           95

   more dangerous when virtue hides itself, fearing the tyrant, because when
   the opportunity comes such virtue will arm itself against the prince, as Brutus
   and other wise men did. One must always put courage in the limelight, for
   the hidden fire does more harm.16


                        The Body Politic: The City of the Sun

Some three years after the fateful events of Calabria, it took Campanella six
months to recover from the damage done to his health by the tortures he had
suffered, and he was now in a state of mind of renewed hope after having
managed to save his life by overcoming such terrible ordeals. He immediately
started writing his most famous work, the short poetical dialogue which he
called The City of the Sun (Città del Sole).
    As has been acutely said, the work presented itself as both the program
for a failed insurrection and its philosophical idealization.17 In giving it to
the press in 1623 (when it appeared, in Latin, as an appendix to the Politica),
Tobias Adami – struck by its purity and luminosity – defined it as a precious
stone and identified the superiority of this ideal community with respect to
the models proposed by Plato in antiquity and by Thomas More in recent
times insofar as it had been inspired by the great model of nature. In fact, the
references to nature, understood as an expression of an intrinsic divine art,
and the critique of society, as it then existed (unhappy and unjust precisely
because it was distant from that natural model, or because it did not imitate it
in the right way), are the keys to a more simple and more persuasive reading
of Campanella’s utopia. In other political works, Campanella analyzed (often
in a completely disenchanted manner) the harsh reality of his time and sug-
gested remedies for correcting and holding in check the worst ills. In The City
of the Sun, he adopted a different point of view. On a blank slate he sketched
a map at once simple and detailed of a city that did not exist – ‘a philosophical
idea of a republic’ and ‘a poetical dialogue’ – so as to suggest the criteria and
the norms of a possible community in which men might live a more just and
harmonious life. Aristotle himself, while emphasizing the differences between
poetry and history, had pointed out that while history relates the particular as
it happened, poetry deals with the universal and with what might happen.18
    The city would be more united and happy the more it was a ‘political body.’
In proposing a new model of knowledge (based on direct investigation of

   16
       Ibid., 129, pp. 134–135.
   17
       Norberto Bobbio, introduction to his own edition of the Città del Sole (Turin, 1941),
pp. 31–34. There is a bibliography of the various editions of the work in Margherita
Palumbo, La Città del Sole. Bibliografia delle edizioni. 1623–2002 (Pisa-Rome, 2004).
    18
       Aristotle, Poëtica, IX, 1451b.
96         Chapter 6

nature and not only on the books of philosophers), Campanella often recalled
the image of the ‘book of nature.’ When he dealt with political association he
made use of another great naturalistic image – that of the ‘body,’ apt to com-
municate a multiplicity of significations. The ‘republic’ is a living organism
that ought to aim at preserving and improving its own health (including its
physical health). Like all organisms, it is made up of multiple members that
are differentiated by duty and function. Yet they are all working towards the
well-being of the whole, a well-being that was the condition and horizon of
the well-being of the individual parts.
    Protected and defended by seven circles of walls, in which the dwelling
places are incorporated, the city is located in a place with an ideal climate that
is favorable to its physical well-being on the slopes of a hill so that the air is
lighter and more pure. One of the most important aspects of this community
is the conception and distribution of work. Once again, Campanella explicitly
criticized Aristotle, who excluded artisans, peasants, and anyone who worked
at manual labor from both the class of citizens who enjoyed full rights and
also the highest levels of virtue. In the Syntagma, Campanella urged ‘diligent
consultation with painters, dyers, blacksmiths, jewelers, goldsmiths, peasants,
soldiers, artillerymen, weavers, distillers, and other artisans,’ so that in their
workshops and in their activities there would exist ‘a philosophy more real
and true than in the schools of philosophy.’19 For the Solarians, no activity is
vile or base and everyone has equal dignity. In fact, those from whom greater
labors are required (such as the blacksmith and the builder) are more praise-
worthy. Everyone learns every trade and then each one practices that for
which he shows the greatest aptitude. Even those who have physical disabili-
ties contribute according to their capabilities. The Solarians have no slaves.
They can fulfill their own needs, and no service is held to be undignified: ‘no
one holds it a dishonor to serve in the dining hall, in the kitchen or elsewhere;
instead they call it learning, and they say that just so it is an honor to walk
on one’s feet and equally an honor to see with one’s eyes.’ They find lazi-
ness alone despicable, coming thereby to privilege the dignity of work and
to overturn an absurd notion of nobility, bound up with inactivity and vice.
Thus, ‘he is held to be the greatest noble, who learns the most trades, or does
them better. For this reason, the Solarians mock us for calling artisans igno-
ble and for describing as noble those who learn no skill, are lazy, and hold so
many servants in a sloth and lasciviousness that ruins the republic.’20
    Owing to the equal division of labor, it is sufficient that each person dedicates
him or herself to work activities for four hours a day. But it is imperative


     19
          Syntagma, II, 5, p. 78.
     20
          Città del Sole, pp. 23, 13.
                                           Prophecy, Politics and Utopia         97

that everyone work, because the laziness of some would have repercussions
for the exploitation and labor of others. This imperative follows from the most
resentful observation in the dialogue, in which the outside world with all its
injustice and suffering erupts violently into the serene atmosphere of the City
of the Sun:

   There are three hundred thousand souls in Naples; yet barely fifty thou-
   sand of them are working; and these fifty thousand struggle with a quantity
   of work that is enough to kill them. The others become prey to idleness,
   avarice, lasciviousness and usury, and corrupt people by holding them in
   servitude and poverty.21

With regard to possessions and property, the Solarians own nothing. Every-
thing is communal – from the meals to the houses, from the learning of the
sciences to the exercising of political functions, from honors to entertainment,
from women to children. There is an official who is charged with the distribu-
tion of all things and who makes sure that this happens in accordance with
justice, but no one is permitted to appropriate anything. According to the
Solarians, the possession of a house and of a family cannot but reinforce the
‘love of self,’ with all the sad consequences that this generates: ‘they say that
all property derives from making a house apart and taking children and wives
for oneself, whence comes the love of self, which – so as to raise a child to
riches and titles, and leave an heir to wealth – makes everyone either a public
bird of prey (if, being strong, he has no fear) or avaricious and scheming and
hypocritical (if he is weak).’ They have chosen community, ‘living philosophi-
cally together,’ also because they are aware of the negative repercussions,
both moral and social, of an unequal distribution of wealth: ‘they also say that
great poverty makes men vile, cunning, thieves, scheming, outlaws, liars, false
witnesses; and that riches make men insolent, arrogant, ignorant, treacherous,
disillusioned, and presumptuous about things they do not understand. Yet the
community there makes everyone both rich and poor: rich, because they have
and possess everything; poor, because they do not become attached to serving
things, but instead let things serve them.’22
    One of the most spectacular and imaginative features of The City of the
Sun, which immediately strikes its readers, is the description of the painted
walls. The seven walls are not only circles for enclosing and protecting the
city. They are also the wings of an extraordinary theater and the pages of
an illustrated encyclopedia of knowledge. Among the promises listed in his



   21
        Ibid., pp. 23–24.
   22
        Ibid., p. 25.
98        Chapter 6

letters, Campanella made a commitment to build ‘a city admirable to the
 King, healthy and impregnable, which would impart all the sciences histori-
 cally just by looking at it.’23 The external walls of the buildings are decorated
with images of all the arts and sciences.
     Starting with the wall supporting the columns of the temple and all the
way down the various circuits of walls (in a manner parallel to the order of
the planets from Mercury to Saturn), we encounter the representation of the
heavens and of the stars, of mathematical figures, of every country of the earth
‘with its rites, customs, and laws.’ After that we come across all the wonders
and secrets of the mineral, vegetable, and animal worlds and eventually reach
men: on the internal wall of the sixth circle are represented ‘all the mechanical
arts and their inventors.’ Campanella expressed the greatest interest in every
ingenious discovery and in the city he provided many examples of his curious
devices – from vessels capable of sailing without wind to carts with sails to
stirrups that permit one to guide horses using only one’s feet, thereby leaving
the hands free. On the external wall of the same circle are represented ‘all the
inventors of laws and sciences and arms.’ And it is here that the Genoese sailor
of Columbus – who is one of the interlocutors of the dialogue, together with
the Hospitaller 24 – recognizes Christ and the twelve apostles, in ‘a place of high
 esteem’ (alongside Moses, Osiris, Jupiter, Mercury, and Muhammad).
     Knowledge is not closed up in books kept in separate spaces like librar-
 ies. Instead, it is displayed before the eyes of all. Visualization favors a more
 rapid reception of things and so the Solarians would learn in one year what
 among us is learnt in the course of ten or fifteen years. Visualization renders
 learning easier and more effective, in that it is connected to the art of mem-
 ory, which insists on the evocative and emotive force of images. From a very
 tender age, children experience this theater of knowledge with appropriate
 guidance and according to a suitable rhythm and itinerary, and they learn
 with joy, as if playing, without effort or pain. The Metaphysician, the political
 and spiritual leader, ought to be the wisest of all. To the possible objection of
 the incompatibility between politics and philosophy (‘he who attends to the
 sciences cannot know how to govern’), the Solarians reply that it is always
 better to entrust oneself to a wise man who, even if not an expert, will not be
 malicious, unlike ‘you who suffer the ignorant, thinking that they are well-
 suited because they are born lords or are elected by powerful factions.’ But



    Lettere, p. 28.
     23

    A knight of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, also known as the Order of Malta.
     24

On the character of Hospitaller, see Jean-Paul De Lucca, ‘Prophetic Representation
and Political Allegorisation: the Hospitaller in Campanella’s The City of the Sun,’
B&C, 15 (2009), pp. 387–405.
                                                     Prophecy, Politics and Utopia              99

the real response emphasizes the different conception of knowledge held
by the Solarians, who do not hold that ‘he is wise who knows most grammar
and logic from Aristotle (or any other author), in which case one only needs
a servile memory, whence man makes himself inert, because he does not con-
template things but rather books, and abases his soul in those dead things.’
The Metaphysician is ‘swift of mind in all things.’ He knows ‘all the histories
of the peoples and rites and sacrifices and republics and inventors of laws and
arts.’ He knows all the mechanical arts and all the sciences. And above all it is
important that he be a ‘metaphysician and theologian, who knows well the
source and proof of all the arts and sciences, together with the similarities
and differences of things.’25
    Beyond the sharing of possessions and the painted walls, another aspect
distinguishes the City of the Sun. It is a problematic and disconcerting point,
one that Campanella himself presented as ‘difficult and arduous’ – namely,
the sharing of women. The solution adopted by the Solarians addressed a spe-
cific problem: reproduction. Echoing the Pythagorean teachings of Ocellus of
Lucania, Campanella said that the Solarians ‘laugh at those of us who concern
ourselves with the breeding of dogs and horses while neglecting our own.’26
Reproduction is a basic problem for the city, and as such ‘it is regulated reli-
giously for the public and not the private good.’ The reproductive act carries
with it a great responsibility on the part of he who reproduces, and if that
responsibility is exercised in an incorrect way it can give rise to a long chain
of sufferings. Moreover, there is a tight connection between natural ‘complex-
ion’ (which is primordial and not modifiable) and moral virtue, which in order
to take root and prosper requires suitable terrain: ‘they say that the purity
of the complexion, out of which virtues develop, cannot be acquired by art
and that only with difficulty can moral virtue take root without a natural dis-
position. They also say that men of an evil nature act well out of fear of the
law and, in the absence of that, they destroy the republic both openly and
secretly.’27 For that reason, reproduction will have to respect precise norms,
and should neither be entrusted to chance, nor to individual feelings. Indeed,
the Solarians distinguish between love and the exercising of sexuality. The
attraction between men and women (which is founded on friendship and
respect more than ‘ardent concupiscence’) is expressed honorably and with
a considerable gentleness that is very distant from sexuality. If ‘a man falls in
love with a woman, it is licit for them to speak to each other, to write poems,
and to exchange jokes and floral arrangements.’ In the evening, after dinner,


   25
      Città del Sole, p. 13.
   26
      See ibid., p. 10; Quaestio quarta politica, art. 3, note 10, in Città del Sole (1996) p. 155.
   27
      Città del Sole, p. 21.
100     Chapter 6

when ‘hymns of love, wisdom, and of every other virtue are being sung,’ ‘each
man takes the woman that he loves the most, and they dance under the beau-
tiful cloisters.’28 Reproductive sexuality has to respect an entire series of condi-
tions, concerning above all the arrangement of ‘judicious mating’ with respect
to physical and moral endowments and with respect to the choice of the right
time (set by astrology, which in the City of the Sun plays a fundamental role,
in that it is a kind of cosmic watch that indicates the best times for putting
human events in agreement with the requisite celestial configurations).29
Some of the most curious stipulations concern philosophers and priests, who
are not permitted to reproduce ‘if they do not fulfill a number of other con-
ditions for many days.’ Aristotle had already observed that the children of
great men are often of limited value, and Campanella explained that wise
men have weak animal spirits. Given that they are always engrossed in con-
templation, during the sexual act they hold back the finest and most noble
spirits of the brain, releasing only those lowest spirits: ‘on account of the
large amount of speculation, they are weak in animal spirits and they do not
release the valuable spirits of the head, because they are always thinking
about something, and because of this they make unfortunate progeny.’30 In
the City of the Sun, mating happens in a rarefied and cold atmosphere, in a
context of precisely calculated astral positions: the union is not the expres-
sion of a personal relationship, and it is completely devoid of affective or
passionate drives other than those of the social responsibility involved in
generation and love for the collective.
    Beyond the role of reproducers, women have an important function in the
City of the Sun. Freed from the burden of raising and educating children indi-
vidually, they engage in the same practical activities as the men – avoiding
only the most tiring. They learn the speculative sciences and they can dedi-
cate themselves to the arts, such as painting or music. Nor did Campanella
exclude women from an auxiliary and defensive military role. Recalling the
example of the ancient Amazons and of modern warrior-maidens defending
the African empire of Monopotapa, he rejected the criticisms of Aristotle and
of his Telesian friend Giacomo di Gaeta, who held that the use of arms was
unnatural for women and incompatible with their natural role as mothers. The
beauty of the Solarian women is an expression of the energy and health that
derive from appropriate physical exercise. It is on this account that the inhab-
itants are banned from wearing clothes and shoes that render them clumsy,
and they punish the use of make-up severely. On other occasions too, Cam-
panella did not fail to deplore the use of female make-up, with which women

   28
      Ibid., pp. 23, 45.
   29
      Ibid., pp. 20, 22.
   30
      Ibid., pp. 20–21.
                                                  Prophecy, Politics and Utopia          101

are forced to mask the paleness that comes from a lazy and unhealthy lifestyle
that is damaging to one’s health and therefore to future off-spring.31
    The Solarian religion (which recognizes fundamental Christian principles
such as the immortality of the soul and divine providence) is a natural religion
that sets up a kind of osmosis between the heavens and the stars. The temple is
open and not closed in with walls; in a poem Campanella promised that ‘I will
make a temple out of the sky, with the stars as an altar.’ In the prose commentary
that accompanied the poem, he explained that ‘God ought to be adored in spiritu
et veritate (in spirit and in truth), and not under roofs of mud that lightning bolts
and even the nests of birds put to shame.’32
    On the inner surface of the cupola of the temple, the stars are represented
with their correspondences to terrestrial entities. There is only one altar, in the
form of the sun, and on it are placed, side by side, the two globes of the heavens
and the earth. Prayers are addressed to the sky. The function of the twenty-four
priests that live in cells located in the highest part of the temple (which is also
a kind of astronomical observatory) is that ‘of watching the stars and noting all
their movements with astrolabes and the effects that they produce.’ They ‘stipu-
late the times for reproduction and the days for sowing and harvesting, and they
serve as mediators between God and men.’33
    Notwithstanding the undoubted affinities between the Calabrian initiative
of 1599 and the subsequent utopia, unscrupulous heterodox doctrines are com-
pletely absent in the pages of The City of the Sun. Instead, a chaste naturalism
dominates Campanella’s dialogue, which possesses no polemical or aggressive
tone. Even if in the course of years the text would be subjected to a process of
attenuation, there was nothing from the first version that was not later taken
up again and explained by the author. Already in these pages Campanella had
embarked upon the road that he would continue to travel, communicating the
intuition that he would later develop and perfect: between nature and religion
there is no conflict or antagonism, but instead continuity and harmony. Nature is
not presented as a weapon with which to unmask religious imposture. Religion


   31
       See ch. 10, p. 183. See Città del Sole (1996), note 46, p. 58; note 73, p. 64; Quaestio
quarta politica, art. 3, note 5, ibid., p. 149. On the persistence of more traditional atti-
tudes towards women, see Lina Bolzoni, ‘Tommaso Campanella e le donne: fascino e
negazione della differenza,’ Annali d’Italianistica, 7 (1989), pp. 193–216; on the role of
women in Campanella, see also Margherita Isnardi Parente, ‘Tommaso Campanella e
la Repubblica di Platone,’ Archivio Storico per la Calabria e la Lucania, 46 (1999), pp.
93–111; Jean-Louis Fournel, ‘Le contrôle des mariages et des naissance dans la pensée
politique de Campanella,’ B&C, 7 (2001), pp. 209–220; Germana Ernst, ‘donna,’ in
Enciclopedia, vol. 2 (forthcoming).
    32
       Poesie, p. 327.
    33
       Città del Sole, p. 44.
102      Chapter 6

is a divine art and a divine reason, and it is bound up in every last fiber of nature.
The more delicate problem has to do with the relationship between Christianity
and natural religion. In this regard too, Campanella did not hesitate to affirm
that there exists no tension. Christianity, the expression of a divine rationality,
cannot but coincide with natural religion. The addition of dogmas and sacra-
ments does not aim at destroying nature, but rather at perfecting it. And this is
without doubt one of the most subtle, difficult, and elusive passages in Campan-
ella’s thought. This depiction of Christianity as the highest and most complete
expression of rationality and of natural religion is, more than the affirmation of
an existing reality, an implicit exhortation and an indication of the road to be
taken, of the task to be realized.
    The Solarians live according to the pure law of nature, prior to revelation.
The result of such a condition is that they would have no difficulty in complet-
ing the passage to Christianity: ‘when they come to know the living truth of
Christianity, proven with miracles, they will consent to it, because that truth is
most sweet.’34 If between natural religion and Christianity there is no hiatus or
break (and there ought not to be, because there is no reason for it), the con-
sensus of the ‘very sweet’ Solarians contains a warning to Christians. It exhorts
them to agree with this serene faith in nature, which offers itself spontaneously
to the perfecting influence of revelation, and to become aware that the unifying
power of Christianity resides precisely in pursuing a reconciliation and har-
mony with nature. Christianity offers itself as a vehicle of natural and rational
values: ‘if these people, who follow only the law of nature, are so close to Chris-
tianity, that nothing is to be added to natural law except the sacraments, I take
from this relationship the argument that the true law is the Christian law and
that, once its abuses are removed, it will be mistress of the world.’35
    Campanella discussed various aspects of his political theory in four quaes-
tiones that appeared in the Paris edition of his Philosophia realis. In the fourth
question, titled De optima republica, he addressed the problems and objec-
tions that had been raised against the proposed model for an ideal city. The
first of the three articles deals with general problems such as that of the very
possibility of discussing a city that had never been seen and that probably
would never be seen, so as to reassert the legitimacy of sketching an ideal
model independently of its practical realizability. It also deals with more spe-
cific objections, regarding the place and climate of the city, or the isolation and
the excessive austerity of the life of its inhabitants. The other two articles deal
with two of the dialogue’s more controversial points: the sharing of posses-
sions and women. Regarding the first issue, Campanella made use of patristic


   34
        Ibid., p. 25.
   35
        Ibid., p. 54.
                                                 Prophecy, Politics and Utopia        103

and scholastic sources to argue (against theologians of the time such as the
Spanish Dominican Domingo de Soto) for the superiority and importance of
sharing possessions. Such sharing took its foundation from the original right
of nature, while division and private ownership had historical origins and took
shape as a concession and a lesser evil arising from human law. Regarding
the other controversial and harder to defend aspect of the dialogue (namely,
the sharing of women), Campanella, in order to avoid misunderstandings,
reaffirmed that it concerned the norms that regulate reproduction, which was
one of the basic issues in the city and ought as such to be ‘observed strictly
for the public good, and not the private.’ Aiming at good reproduction that
avoids the damages and the sufferings (for individuals and for the city) that
derive from unfortunate offspring, such unions have nothing in common with
unregulated and promiscuous unions, or with the practices of certain heretical
sects, modern or ancient. The sharing of women, understood correctly, is also,
like the sharing of possessions, completely in tune with the law of nature, in
the light of which the only criterion for the licitness of sexuality is reproduc-
tion. Sexuality becomes illicit only when it becomes prohibited, for pragmatic
reasons, by prescriptions of positive law.36
    Questions have often been raised about the origin of the work’s title and
several possible sources have been highlighted. Beyond the verse from Isaiah
19.18 – ‘there will be five cities in Egypt … and one of these will be called the
city of the sun’ – the image of the sun is very present in the sixteenth century, in
various authors and contexts. Authors well known to Campanella had spoken
about it – such as Marsilio Ficino, who, in the context of resurgent interest in
Platonism and Hermeticism, exalted the sun as the most appropriate image of
the good and of divine goodness, because its extremely pure light penetrated
everything, giving life and movement to all things.37 Likewise, travel accounts
and descriptions of distant lands that spoke of astral cults in Africa and in the
New World had emphasized the image of the sun. Girolamo Benzoni spoke of
how Atabalipa, the last king of Peru, responded to a speech of the Dominican
Vincenzo de Valverde that exhorted him to submit and convert. He said that
‘regarding the subject of religion … he would never leave his own religion,
because if they believed in Christ (who had died on the cross), he believed
in the sun, which had never died.’38 Likewise, the scholar Girolamo Ruscelli,
while speaking of the emblem of Philip II of Spain, warmly praised the sun
that was represented on it:

   36
      Quaestio quarta politica, in Città del Sole (1996) p. 145ff.
   37
      Liber de Sole, in Marsilii Ficini Opera (Basel, 1576), I, p. 966; Italian translation
in Marsilio Ficino, Scritti sull’astrologia, ed. O. Pompeo Faracovi (Milan, 1999), pp.
187–188.
   38
      Girolamo Benzoni, La istoria del mondo nuovo (Venice, 1565), p. 121.
104     Chapter 6

   It opens the pores of the earth, nourishes bodies, renews plants, reinvigorates
   grass, instills natural understanding in men, moderates and tempers the
   other planets. Whence it is not without reason that the philosophers, theo-
   logians, and poets came to refer to the sun now as the eye of the world, now
   as the king of nature, now as the beauty of the day, now as the measure of
   time, now as light, ornament, and heart of the heavens, now as father, fount,
   and bestower of the sciences, of the virtues, and of divine glories.39

Without doubt Campanella was well aware of these and other echoes. But it
is the Solarians themselves who remind us that the sun is the effigy of God,
whom ‘they served … under the sign of the sun, which is the sign and the face
of God, from whom comes light and heat and everything else.’ The Solarians
say that ‘God displayed his own beauty in the heavens and in the sun, as his
trophy and image.’ The elegy that concludes the Scelta of Campanella’s poems
is titled Al Sole (To the Sun). The author is conscious of the emotive contrast
between the return to life (in spring, of waters, plants, and animals, which
thanks to the sun throw off their wintry sleep), and his own painful situation,
which made him envy the reawakening of vipers and worms. Yet, he could not
help writing a hymn full of admiration to the star that is the face of God and
the emblem of his own philosophy:
   You are a living temple, a statue and revered face
   Of the true God, the supreme pomp and torch.
   Father of nature and blessed ruler of the stars,
   Life, soul, and sense of all secondary things,
   Under your auspices an admirable school
   I erected for the Supreme Intellect through my philosophy.40




   39
      Girolamo Ruscelli, Le imprese illustri (Venice, 1584), p. 191.
   40
      Poesie, n. 89, vv. 39–44, p. 455: ‘Tempio vivo sei, statua e venerabile volto,/del
verace Dio pompa e suprema face./Padre di natura e degli astri rege beato,/vita, anima
e senso d’ogni seconda cosa;/sotto gli auspici di cui, ammirabile scola/al Primo Senno
filosofando fei.’
