7. In the Cave of Polyphemus


                                      The Poesie

In the very first lines of the Syntagma, Campanella recalled his own preco-
cious and natural aptitude for poetic expression. As an adult, this aptitude
took on a certain poignancy and sharpness, and came to be directed towards
the expression of difficult philosophical matters. The poetic production that
has come down to us was transmitted primarily in two collections. The first
included the poems of his youth, completed prior to 1601. The second con-
sisted of compositions put together and published under the title Scelta di
alcune poesie filosofiche. The poems of Campanella’s youth survived in the
so-called “Ponzio Codex,” located by Amabile in the nineteenth century.1
They include eighty-two poems, mostly sonnets, of which only fourteen would
be included in the Scelta. The codex is named after Ponzio because it con-
serves the poems that Campanella’s friend and fellow prisoner Pietro Ponzio
collected, until the codex was confiscated in the prison of the Castel Nuovo in
August of 1601, after a violent argument between the inmates. All that Cam-
panella himself tells us is that many of those compositions were written in
the earliest days of the imprisonment, for the purpose of instilling courage in
his fellow detainees and friends and so as to help them resist the terrors of
torture. Transposing episodes and characters from the events in Calabria into
verse, Campanella expressed his certainty about being on the side of reason
and justice. He refers to the conspirators as noble and chosen spirits, united
in their determination to fight against the violence and ignorance of tyranny
in the name of liberty and truth and united in disdaining – with the aid of the
‘ardor’ of reason – the most atrocious tortures and persecutions.2 The poems
exalt friends and companions, such as the three brothers Ponzio (Dionisio in
particular for the courage with which he confronted and derided ‘so horrible
a torment/that undid his entire body/ limb by limb’), the loyal Pietro Presterà,
and Domenico Petrolo, for not having hesitated to simulate terrible things so
   1
      The collection of poetry was published for the first time in Amabile, Congiura, III,
doc. 436–517, pp. 549–581.
   2
     Poesie, p. 519.


G. Ernst, Tommaso Campanella, International Archives of the History                  105
of Ideas /Archives internationales d’histoire des idées 200,
DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3126-6_7, © Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2010
106     Chapter 7

as to help him and to save his life.3 At first, Maurizio de Rinaldis is exalted
as a ‘generous man’ on account of the courage he showed in resisting torture:
‘for six nights and six days he prevails/torments old and new he disdains’; he
endured ‘… suffering for 300 hours/unusual torments with a magnanimous
heart, alone and naked.’ In a later palinodic madrigal, he came to be detested
and labeled ‘extremely vile’ and ‘devoid of virtue,’ because of the confession
that he rendered at the point of death so as to cleanse his own conscience.4
    In contrast to the heroic figures of the conspirators, who fight and suffer for
high ideals, negative figures are harshly condemned – figures such as Antonio
Mesuraca. Having promised to help Campanella, Mesuraca instead betrayed
and denounced him, delivering him tightly bound to his master’s men (‘why, in
binding me, do your associates turn on me ferociously?’).5 But above all others
loomed the fiscal lawyer Luise Xarava, for whom the harshest epithets – ‘impi-
ous monster,’ ‘without a human mind,’ ‘lying snake’ – were not spared, because
he had combined violence with the most subtle arts of intrigue and deceit.6
When writing about himself, Campanella speaks of a prophet and interpreter of
signs, a champion of a just cause and not a rebel: ‘He who reprimands degener-
ate representatives/Conspires neither against God nor against King.’ He did not
hesitate to protest against God, who ‘appeared to be sleeping,’ consenting that ‘his
white champion, be oppressed with false testimonies,/that represent his devotion
as evil.’7 In other verses, inspired by the Psalm 129 Saepe expugnaverunt me (‘Much
have they oppressed me’), Campanella felt himself to be under God’s protection
against the persecutions that had afflicted him since childhood, and he pronounced
himself sure of the approaching defeat and punishment of the tyrants:
   The day is coming, on which haughty heads
   Together with subservient necks and lying tongues
   Will make a meal for tigers, bears, and panthers.8
The Ponzio Codex also includes early poems that predate the conspiracy.9 One
sequence addresses political themes, such as the role of Christian Rome and the
universal monarchy of Spain. Other verses are addressed to noble female fig-
ures. Other poems – not inelegant if somewhat conventional – are of an amorous
nature. The most original and realistic sonnet alludes to an erotic relationship
imagined despite the painful physical separation of the lovers (‘Me standing
behind bars, she outside’).10 The strongest and most evocative poem (titled

    3
      Ibid., p. 519.
    4
      Ibid., pp. 490, 492, 494.
    5
      Ibid., p. 504.
    6
      Ibid., p. 498ff.
    7
      Ibid., pp. 528, 500.
    8
      Ibid., p. 488: ‘Vicino è ’l dì, che le cervici altiere/e i colli torti e le lingue bugiarde/
farà pasto di tigri, orsi e pantere.’
    9
      See ch. 3, notes 5, 34, 41.
                                                     In the Cave of Polyphemus          107

Sdegno amoroso) is presented as a definitive break from the amorous condition
and from its deceits. Betrayed in the sincerity and depth of his own feelings, the
amorous heat of his heart hardens into the chill of hate and into a cold marble.
The break from ‘amorous intricacy’ is translated into a proud commitment to
self-sufficiency – ‘I draw sustenance from myself’(‘me di me nutrico’).11
    The most important nucleus of Campanella’s poetic activity, however, is con-
stituted by the eighty-nine pieces that were published in 1622 in a work titled
Scelta di alcune poesie filosofiche di Settimontano Squilla, cavate da’ suo’ libri
detti La Cantica, con l’Esposizione. The text was prefaced by a dedication from
Tobias Adami that is signed ‘Paris, in the year 1621.’ It was sent to three Ger-
man friends – Wilhelm von Wense, Christoph Besold, Valentin Andreae – with
the certainty that they would enjoy this ‘gift small in appearance, but truly great
in its reality,’ on account of the ‘sublime conceits’ conveyed in the poems. Only
six exemplars are known still to exist and of those two are in Italy, both at
Naples. Not only rare, the edition is obscure in several respects.12 The author
hides behind a pseudonym that alludes to his own surname and to the seven
“mountains” of his head. The edition is also devoid of typographic information
and only recently was it confirmed that it was published in Germany at Köhten,
in Saxony, under the auspices of Prince Ludwig von Anhalt-Köhten.13



   10
       Poesie, p. 564.
   11
       Ibid., pp. 568–571.
    12
       Regarding the known copies, see Francesco Giancotti, ‘Note e Tavole sul Testo,’
in Poesie, pp. C–CIV; Id., ‘Postille a una nuova edizione delle Poesie di Campanella.
1–3,’ B&C, 4, 1998, pp. 423–426. The Neapolitan exemplars are held in the Biblio-
teca Croce and the Biblioteca Oratoriana dei Padri Girolamini. This second copy – on
which, see L. Amabile, Il codice delle lettere del Campanella … e il libro delle Poesie
dello Squilla della Biblioteca dei PP. Girolamini in Napoli (Naples, 1881) – is of the
highest importance, because it contains autograph corrections by Campanella, which
have been for the most part lost following the havoc wrought by an inept restoration
justly deplored by Firpo; see ‘Storia della poesia campanelliana,’ p. XI, in the anastatic
edition of the Scelta published by him (Naples, 1980).
    13
       See Arnaldo Di Benedetto, ‘Da Campanella a Manzoni: Due Note. I. Sul luogo di
stampa della Scelta d’alcune poesie filosofiche di Settimontano Squilla,’ Giornale Storico
della Letteratura Italiana, 112 (1995), pp. 421–425; ‘Notizie campanelliane: Sul luogo di
stampa della Scelta d’alcune poesie filosofiche,’ B&C, 3 (1997), pp. 154–158. Even before
the Scelta was sent to press, Johann Valentin Andreae had translated and published six
sonnets in German in 1619 (see Italo M. Battafarano, ‘Attorno ai sonetti di Campanella
tradotti da J. V. Andreae,’ Annali dell’Istituto Universitario Orientale di Napoli, Sezione
Germanica, XX, 1977, pp. 7–45). In 1802, Johann Gottlieb Herder would translate and pub-
lish twenty-seven of the poems (then in Sämmtliche Werke, ed. B. Suphan, vol. III, Berlin,
1881, pp. 332–354). But only in 1834 would Gaspare Orelli, professor of philology at Zurich,
succeed, after years of fruitless research, in tracking down a copy of the extremely rare old
edition in Wolfenbüttel and in editing a modern (if imprecise) version of the Scelta, which
A. D’Ancona inserted into the edition of the Opere that he put together.
108   Chapter 7

   The collection of eighty-nine poems, selected and arranged with care-
ful and sophisticated attention, presents itself as a complete cycle of great
originality, an example, extremely rare in the Italian poetic tradition, of
philosophical and metaphysical poetry. The author achieves results of an
exceptional value and vigor that has increasingly been acknowledged by an
attentive scholarly tradition that has gradually liberated itself from limited
judgments about the presumed incompatibility between philosophy and
the supposed ‘brusqueness’ of Campanella’s poetic expression.14 The asser-
tion in the Syntagma that Adami chose the contents from a larger corpus
of poems iuxta ingenium suum (‘according to his liking’) is rather perplex-
ing and should not be taken literally.15 There is reason to believe that the
choice of poems was the product of collaboration between Campanella and
Adami to select and organise the most philosophically important poems.
The poems are, in many cases, extremely difficult on account of their pro-
fundity and speculative sublimity. In view of the publication, Campanella
added a helpful exposition in prose, so as to render the comprehension of
his own poems easier.
   One of the things that is at first sight rather surprising (but that can in
fact provide a key to the reading of the complex spiritual experience of the
author) is the fact that the most intense compositions stem from the period
of the hardest isolation – namely, the years of the tragic seclusion in the
dungeon of Castel Sant’Elmo (1604–1607). This was a period in which the
prisoner was forced to live in conditions of absolute privation, in a damp,
unhealthy, gloomy cell, feeding on food that was ‘measly and dirty.’ This
was a situation that made writing extremely difficult and at times impossi-
ble. Over and above presenting the most philosophically important themes
of his thought in a remarkable way, the Scelta is shot through with intense
autobiographical motifs, which trace the dramatic stages of the intellectual
and spiritual journey of the author, who is represented as an exemplar. It
depicts radical inner upheaval, from the proud declaration of his own ideas
and the fracturing of certainties, to the moments of crisis and doubt, fol-
lowed by the humble acceptance of the inscrutable (but always wise) plans
of divine providence.16



  14
     For the vast bibliography on the poems, see the fine list in the Poesie, pp.
CLI–CLV.
  15
     Syntagma, p. 42.
  16
     See ch. 8, pp. 154–155.
                                                In the Cave of Polyphemus        109

    In a dense, corporeal but also refined idiom, the Scelta attempts to translate
the most important themes of Campanella’s thought into a poetic language.
Cultivated terms are mixed together with more popular expressions and
images. The aim is to arrive at an effective correspondence between words
and things. A programmatic sonnet, functioning as an introduction, announces
the intentions of the author. In the name of a true philosophy, he intends to
call ‘the raving world, in revolt against itself’ back to divine and natural val-
ues. The Scelta opens out into a planned sequence of sonnets and canzones.
Cast in madrigals, the canzones are charged with addressing the most com-
plex metaphysical themes. In conformity with the principles of the Poetica, the
‘prophetic’ role of the poet, bearer of a message of truth is underlined. The
work addresses the investigation of the world of nature, which – as the ‘book
in which the Eternal Intelligence/wrote its ideas’ (n. 6) – is represented as the
original model to which the opinions of men refer in order to be judged. For
this reason, we have the exaltation of Telesio, who emancipates a philosophy
understood as a direct reading of the infinite book of nature from the yoke of
Aristotle’s philosophy, which is said to be based on nothing more than words
and opinions that have lost all connection with nature (n. 68). The reference
to nature serves also to denounce the injustice and irrationality of an upside-
down social world, the contortions and sorrows of which have their origin in
the fact that the roles of the social comedy are assigned according to chance
and fortune, rather than by reason and in conformity with natural attitudes.
A harmful and painful break is set up between being and appearing when
human skill imitates badly the divine art that is intrinsic in nature. Thus, false
kings come to be prized, such as Nero, who ‘was a king in appearance on
account of chance,’ while wise men such as Socrates – a king ‘in truth and by
nature’ – are put to death. In a society where the inversion of values rules,
the prophet cannot but be persecuted by those in power, because he is an
inconvenient witness and a messenger of virtues and truths that have been
suppressed and replaced by hypocrisy, sophistry, and tyranny. Moreover, the
prophet is rejected by the plebs, which possesses a strength of which it is una-
ware (the plebs ‘is a diverse and massive beast/that ignores its own strength’).
The masses are held in a condition of unconsciousness and ignorance by the
‘spell’ cast by sophists, a bad magic that induces torpor and corrupts their abil-
ity to perceive reality clearly: ‘They cast a spell, that swells their senses’ and in
this way they hold subjects chained in a kind of perverse complicity with those
who are in power and exploit them. From here derives the painful astonish-
ment of the wise man who is persecuted and killed (n. 33), precisely because
he attempts to awaken the masses from this abasement and to render them
conscious of their own power (‘everything between heaven and earth belongs
110    Chapter 7

to them’).17 Reduced to silence and forced into dissimulation, in order to save
his own life and to preserve his message against tyrannical violence (n. 13),
the prophet appears to be condemned to an inevitable defeat. But this defeat
is only apparent, in that the prophet’s message outlives him. Campanella is
moreover persuaded of the necessary arrival of a ‘golden and happy age,’
anticipated by a dense prophetic tradition. This is an age that – with the aboli-
tion of private property and of the evils that begin in blind ‘love of self’ – her-
alds the instauration of a form of living together that is based on the values
of a common love.
    From a more general point of view, this human ‘comedy’ is placed in the
context of a ‘universal comedy.’ This is one of the most complex themes in Cam-
panella’s work. It joins difficult metaphysical nodes together, such as the necessity
of tension and discord (in order to achieve a ‘felicitous harmony’ at the level of
the whole), the relation between the first divine Idea and the infinite modes of
its manifestations, and above all the problem of evil, which turns out to be con-
nected to the necessary limitation and distinction of single parts, the suffering of
which is to be considered in the context of the universal life of the whole – ‘but
the part that groans smiles at the whole’ (n. 3, v. 102). If every evil and destruc-
tion is the expression and the condition of the unfolding of the infinite forms of
being, then the suffering of the individual parts is connected to and derives its
meaning from the universal comedy: ‘In the end, this is a universal comedy,/and
he who philosophizing unites himself with God/ and sees with him that every
ugliness and evil/is a beautiful mask, that man smiles and rejoices.’18
    The moment of the crisis, which constitutes a watershed between the ear-
lier period of his youth and the later more mature period, is conveyed with
particular intensity by the four canzones titled Dispregio della morte, which
recall Hermetic and Platonic motifs. The author turns to his own soul, so as to
comfort it and exhort it not to be affected by desperation and fear of death.
The tyrant can be cruel only to the body, which is the soul’s ‘prison by birth.’

    17
       Regarding this famous sonnet entitled ‘Della plebe,’ see G. Ernst, ‘Sapiente e
popolo in Campanella. Rileggendo il sonetto “Della plebe”,’ in Bene navigavi. Studi
in onore di Franco Bianco, ed. M. Failla (Macerata, 2006), pp. 283–294. For a fuller
version, see G. Ernst, ‘“Il popolo è una bestia varia e grossa.” Passioni, retorica, e
politica in Tommaso Campanella,’ in Renaissance Learning and Letters, ed. D. Knox
and N. Ordine (forthcoming). For an English version of some of the compositions in
the Scelta, see The Sonnets of Michael Angelo Buonarroti and Tommaso Campanella,
translated by John Addington Symonds (London, 1878); a recent reprinting of that
translation (complete with the Italian text and Campanella’s own prose exposition)
can be found in T. Campanella, Sonnets, ed. S. Draghici (Washington DC, 1999).
    18
       Scelta, n. 29, madr. 10 in Poesie, p. 144: ‘Alfin questa è comedia universale;/e chi
filosofando a Dio s’unisce/vede con lui ch’ogni bruttezza e male/maschere belle son,
ride e gioisce.’
                                                  In the Cave of Polyphemus         111

The evils and the trials that the soul suffers cannot but liberate it and resurrect
it from its corporeal ‘tomb.’ Invited to consider the human condition in rela-
tion to the entire cosmos, the mind is presented with the image of an immense
space, ‘completely saturated in serene light,’ in which are gathered the lumi-
nous celestial bodies, where the blessed spirits live ‘in happy liberty.’ Only the
earth is obscure – the earth, which is an ‘exile and sentence’ for fallen spirits. At
the center, ‘the most rebellious’ are punished ‘in eternal night/under the great-
est weight.’ Souls that are sent to the surface, a place of both sorrow and joy,
shadow and light, for the purpose of struggling for their release are closed up
within their bodies as if those bodies – which are derived from the earth (which
itself is a common prison) – constitute individual prisons.19 Nature and ter-
restrial entities – constituted by the encounter between cold and heat, which
forgets the heavens so as to wear a ‘terrestrial veil’ and produce all entities – set
the scene for a comedy that is represented ‘for the amusement of higher spirits’
and in which man plays the central role. Souls are sent into bodies ‘so as to set
the scene with greater prettiness.’ This serves to satisfy the doubt regarding the
sufferings of the good and the triumphs of the evil ‘that contorts every mind.’
To the good, God has assigned ‘the difficult part of the play,/so as to draw them
to greater good from filthy tombs’ (n. 77, madr. 6).
    In this respect, the body – even as it is praised on account of the wondrous
anatomy of its parts – becomes the ‘tenebrous weight’ that tends to hold back
and impede the flight of the soul. Aware of not depending on the elemental
world and claiming its own liberty and autonomy, the soul addresses the body
with epithets that resonate those of a Hermetic dialogue:
   You, living death, nest of ignorance,
   Moving tomb and vestment
   Of sin and torment,
   Weight of concern and labyrinth of errors,
   You pull me down with charms and fears,
   Such that I do not aim at the heavens, my true home,
   And the good that rises above all others:
   Whence, in love with its beauty and overcome,
   I disdain and desert you, an extinguished ember.20
In its dialogue with the body, in its view of the cosmos, in its own aspira-
tion towards and capacity for the infinite, the soul clarifies for itself its own

   19
     Poesie, p. 338.
   20
     Ibid., pp. 363–364: ‘Tu, morte viva, nido d’ignoranza,/ portatile sepolcro e ves-
timento/di colpa e di tormento,/peso d’affanni e di error laberinto,/mi tiri in giù con
vezzi e con spavento,/perch’io non miri in Ciel mia propria stanza,/e ’l ben ch’ogn’altro
avanza:/onde, di sua beltà invaghito e vinto,/non sprezzi e lasci te, carbone estinto.’
112   Chapter 7

role and its own divine nature. In the fourth canzone, the author upholds the
immortality of the soul – a point on which he evidently had nourished some
doubts – on the basis of an anomalous proof. In fact, the author makes refer-
ence to his own direct experiences of demonic evocation, thanks to which he
had reached a ‘higher philosophy,’ by overcoming error and doubt. If the dev-
ils had deceived him, inducing him into false beliefs, they had also rendered
certain the existence of abstract spirits, on account of which the existence of
good angels and of a future life are also rendered certain. This was a future
life in which men would be reassembled in ranks of good spirits and bad, in
accordance with their actions in life. The commentary to the fourth madri-
gal emphasizes that the author ‘knew from experience that there was indeed
another age after death; the many visions and demons manifested to the exte-
rior senses tormented him and sought to deceive him, feigning to be angels.
And then he wrote this canzone and it is dedicated entirely to the true reli-
gion.’21 The anxieties of the soul frightened by the thought of death seem to be
soothed by the certainty of its celestial life and by understanding that wisdom
and happiness consist in adhering to the will of the eternal Intelligence. ‘But
he who in his own mind cultivates the great Wisdom/wanting and not wanting
in accordance with that great Wisdom/dulls every pain and rejoices in Him.’
    The four canzones are followed by that famous poem addressed to Berillo
– namely, Basilio Berillari of Pavia, unofficial dungeon confessor and consoler
of Campanella. The poem, as is announced even in the title, presents itself
as a confession or disowning of the author’s own errors and a declaration of
penitence. The author is no longer astonished by the ‘atrocious martyrdom’ to
which he is subjected. The consciousness of errors and sins no longer allows
him to presumptuously identify himself with Christ and his suffering, which
had led him to believe that his reverses were the result of the message of truth
and justice – of which he felt himself the spokesman. In the most important
madrigal he disowns his own personal prophetic investiture, founded on an
arrogant hope that his own actions were righteous, given that it seemed so to
his human reason, without bothering to verify it or to wait for divine assent:
   I believed that I held God in my hand,
   Not following God,
   But following instead the acute reason of my own intellect,
   Which led to my own downfall and the death of so many.
   Although wise and pious, the human mind
   Becomes blind and profane,

   21
      See madrigals four and five of the Canzone quarta in Poesie, n. 79, pp. 369–370.
For the lines cited below, see madrigal 1, p. 367: ‘Ma smorza ogni doglia/chi nella mente
sua il gran Senno cole,/seco vuole e disvòle,/ di lui se stesso in se stesso beando.’
                                                     In the Cave of Polyphemus          113

   If it thinks to improve the lot of men
   Unless you manifest yourself to its senses, you the true God,
   And you deign to dispatch it and arm it,
   As your messenger
   Of miracles and proofs and testimonies.22
Important too is that ‘wondrous sonnet’ titled Della providenza that fol-
lows shortly after, in which it is affirmed that the order and the beauty of
every part (even the smallest) in the ‘artifice of the world’ proves that eve-
rything is the work of ‘an infinite and excellent Intelligence.’ The evil deeds
and deviations of men and animals generate the suspicion that on account of
negligence or tiredness God does not care about the world, or that he del-
egates his governance to a lesser god. But the final triplet reaffirms the unity
of God, who will put an end to all evil, rending manifest his own reason, which
remains for the moment hidden:
   But there is only one God, by whom will be ended
   So much confusion, and the hidden reason
   Why so many sinned will be made manifest.23
After the declaration and the overcoming of the crisis, the Scelta concludes with
an explosion of four poems in which all creatures (which all are ‘beautiful, good,
and happy’) are invited to celebrate he who has endowed being (‘you, all things,
I invite to celebrate/ he who has made us – what we are /since we were – noth-
ing’). Every aspect of life and love for life is exalted and the poems sketch the
image of a cosmos shot through and coursing – in a manner that is very close to
that of the Senso delle cose – with animated and positive energies. The first hymn
exalts the power and the role of man. Though born crying, naked, and defense-
less, man is later able – as the ‘image of God’ – to imitate divine art and creativ-
ity, becoming ‘a second god, miraculous creation of the first’ and the author of
wondrous inventions such as writing, the watch, and fire. As the poem relates, ‘in
his den he makes it day when it is night; /Oh broken laws – /Oh broken laws!
That is a mere worm/ King, epilogue, harmony, – end of everything’ and he is
capable of establishing laws – ‘he proposes laws, as a god.’24
    22
       Ibid., p. 382: ‘Io mi credevo Dio tener in mano,/ non seguitando Dio,/ ma l’argute
ragion del senno mio,/ che a me ed a tanti ministrâr la morte./ Benché sagace e pio,
l’ingegno umano/ divien cieco e profano, se pensa migliorar la comun sorte,/ pria che
mostrarti a’ sensi suoi, Dio vero, e mandarlo ed armarlo non ti degni,/ come tuo
messaggiero,/ di miracolo e pruove e contrassegni.’
    23
       Ibid., p. 404: ‘Ma un solo è Dio, da cui sarà finito/ tanto scompiglio, e la ragion
nascosa/aperta, onde peccò cotanta gente.’
    24
       Ibid., p. 409: ‘Fa alla sua tana – giorno quando è notte:/ oh, leggi rotte!/ Oh, leggi
rotte! ch’un sol verme sia/ re, epilogo, armonia, – fin d’ogni cosa’; p. 408: ‘Ei legge pone,
come un dio.’
114   Chapter 7

   Three ‘elegies composed in a Latin manner’ were added in an appendix to
the Scelta. These are the only three examples that have come down to us of this
innovative attempt to reproduce the schemes of hexameter and pentameter in
the vulgar tongue.25 The first is titled Al senno latino and it possesses a novelty
of language and of meter that aims at exhorting a general renewal; ‘For the
new age a new instrument, a new language was reborn:/a new generation can
fashion a new singing’. After that, there is a paraphrase of Psalm 111 – Bea-
tus vir qui timet (‘Blessed is the man who fears [God]’). Finally, as a worthy
conclusion to the entire Scelta, there is the splendid elegy Al Sole. The poem
celebrates the springtime reawakening of life ‘in everything, secret, languid,
dead, and lazy’ thanks to the vigor of the sun; thus, ‘the frozen rivers melt into
water/pure, that, being released, is happy and irrigates the earth./ The badg-
ers and dormice awake from a long sleep;/ you give spirit and motion to the
lowest worm’. All of this induces in the prisoner a reflection on the painful
contrast between this renewal and his own situation of exclusion and suffer-
ing: ‘why is it that I, more than everyone, tremble in darkness and in cold?,’
for ‘I live, am not dead, green and not dry I find myself/ although for you I am
buried like a cadaver.’ This is a situation so much more painful in that, forced
to envy all manner of ‘pallid serpents,’ he has celebrated the sun in the higher
world, as a ‘living temple’ and ‘statue and venerable visage’ of God – a star
that confers ‘life, soul, and sense’ to everything and that has been chosen by
Campanella as a symbol and sign of his new philosophy precisely on account
of such characteristics. But in these final poems the contemplation of and the
love for life that returns to show itself and to flow forth seem to prevail, with
a certain melancholic composure, in the shout and protest that in the end are
mitigated and returned to the ‘serene light’ of the sun.26


                        Sense, Spiritus and Natural Magic

One of the most beautiful and original of Campanella’s writings is the Del
senso delle cose e della magia. After the confiscation at Bologna and the dis-
patching of the early Latin version to Rome, an Italian text was composed in
four books towards 1604 in the prison of Sant’Elmo.27 Translated into Latin,


    25
       An attempt that would be appreciated by Giosuè Carducci, who would reproduce
the three elegies in his collection La poesia barbara nei secoli XV e XVI (Bologna,
1881), pp. 401–407.
    26
       Poesie, p. 452ff.; see ch. 6, p. 104.
    27
        The work was handed over to G. Schoppe in 1607, so that he might organize its
publication. But at the end of the following year the German scholar, having encoun-
tered difficulties with the editor Giovan Battista Ciotti regarding a Venetian edition,
advised the author to translate it into Latin and to attempt to publish it in Germany
– something that Campanella did in the course of 1609.
                                                  In the Cave of Polyphemus        115

the De sensu rerum et magia was published in 1620 in a series of works edited
by Tobias Adami.28 The work received a good deal of attention across Europe
and generated discussion after it received some contrasting judgments.29 The
Italian text was edited for the first time only in 1925 by Antonio Bruers. The
anatomically explicit prose of the unpublished work had elicited the severe
judgment of Amabile (‘the Italian style there turns out to be rather rough;
some of the words denoting the sexual organs and reproductive acts could not
be repeated; and one would have to say that the author was feeling the influ-
ence of imprisonment in the tower and in Sant’Elmo’30). In truth, in that work
we find ourselves in the presence of an absolute expressive masterpiece. In a
language of extraordinary power, Campanella extols his vision of a universal
animation, the ‘great chain of the highest universal concord.’31
    The text discusses in great detail the notions of sensus and spiritus, and
all their implications at an epistemological and philosophical level. The text
exhibits a wise orchestration of themes, which, once announced, are then
taken up and developed at different levels of elaboration, as if in a succes-
sion of waves. The polemic against Aristotle is precise and constant; he is
accused of incoherence and abstraction, while philosophers such as Anaxago-
ras, Pythagoras, and Hermes Trismegistus are considered favorably. Even if
atomist doctrines are criticized (because they cannot explain the purposeful
and vitalistic organization of all natural entities), one can nevertheless com-
prehend the late reference of 1635 that we find in a letter to Peiresc to ‘the
Epicurean Lucretius, by me much studied and esteemed.’32
    Right from the exordium, the author announced the explicative principle
of the entire work: ‘no entity can give to others that which it does not possess
itself.’ Since it is confirmed in a completely clear manner that animals are
endowed with sensibility, it follows that one ought to affirm that ‘the elements,
which are their causes, sense.’ All natural beings, without exception, are pro-
duced by the encounter between cold and heat and by the action on terrestrial
matter of solar heat, which modifies it according to various modalities and in
accordance with the divine design that has preestablished the way in which
agent causes are instruments that ‘imprint in matter the various models of


   28
        The work would be reprinted at Paris, in 1636 and 1637, preceded by a dedication
to Cardinal Richelieu and accompanied by a Defensio, in which the author demon-
strated how his doctrine was fully in line with the doctrines of the Church Fathers and
the Scholastics.
    29
       See for example Michel-Pierre Lerner, ‘“Campanellae deliramenta in Tartarum
releganda”: une condamnation méconnue du De sensu rerum et magia en 1629,’ B&C,
2 (1996), pp. 215–236.
    30
       Amabile, Congiura, II, p. 370.
    31
       Senso delle cose, p. 23.
    32
       Lettere, p. 324.
116     Chapter 7

the first idea.’33 The positions of Lucretius and the atomists are criticized. For
them, sense is born in things that are insensate and men, who laugh and cry,
are descended from elements that do not laugh and do not cry. Campanella
claimed instead that ‘laughter and crying do exist in the elements, although
they are not there in the same mode as they are in men.’34 Still polemicizing
against the atomists, Campanella denied that from the chance clash of inert
particles (which are passive and devoid of quality) virtues could derive that
are active and incorporeal – such as heat, light, and cold. Taking up again
the example of Lucretius, Campanella affirmed that the letters of the alpha-
bet, even if they were rearranged innumerable times, would never arrange
themselves in such a way that they composed, by chance, the book that he
was writing in a deliberate fashion.35 If one admits that a sword or a book
is brought into being deliberately and for a particular end, how much more
absurd is it to attribute to chance, rather than to divine skill, much more mar-
velous compositions like the eye, the heart, a plant, or the entire world.
    When Campanella then went on to specify what one ought to understand
by ‘sense,’ he defined it as ‘passion’ in the first place. We sense when we
undergo an alteration, and immediately that being acted upon divides into
two kinds – being either pleasing or displeasing, according to what would be
described as utility or harm from the point of view of preservation: ‘those
things delight that conserve the symmetry of our sensing and in those organs
so adapted, whence it is that a mild warmth (which is a warmth similar to our
own) delights; those things that destroy displease, such as hot iron; so it is with
all objects – if they conserve us, then they please, but if they destroy us, then
they displease.’36 Sense thus turns out to be connected to preservation and
destruction. Campanella specified, against Aristotle, that undergoing can also
be corruptive, and not only perfective. Moreover, as he had already asserted
in the Epilogo magno, that which is sentient does not take into itself the form
of the thing felt, for that would imply a destruction of its own form. Instead,
in the sensing the spirit undergoes a partial change, in virtue of which it is
capable of evaluating the entire nature of the sensed object. Sense, thus, is not
only passion (things can be undergone that are not sensed, as when during
sleep one is bitten by an insect), but rather the perception of passion – always
insofar as it is connected with a capacity to distinguish the useful from the



   33
      Senso delle cose, pp. 3–4.
   34
      Ibid., p. 7.
   35
      Ibid., p. 8.
   36
      Ibid., p. 11. On the concept of sense, see Massimo L. Bianchi, ‘senso (sensus),’ in
Enciclopedia, vol. 1, coll. 351–364.
                                                In the Cave of Polyphemus        117

destructive. If these first elements and the entities to which they give rise do
not sense, then all the world would be an indistinct chaos. The connection
between self-preservation and a sensing that is sufficient to realize it is the
chain that links the diverse levels of reality – and the explicative principle of
those diverse levels. It turns out that every entity participates in life and sense,
albeit to different extents and in distinct ways.
   A confirmation of the pervasiveness of sense is to be found in the fact that
every entity abhors a vacuum, which is perceived as a threat to the integrity
both of individual beings and of the whole: things ‘enjoy reciprocal contact’
and for the common good lay down particular repugnances. As in the human
body, the individual parts love their own union; just so, the great animal of the
world abhors division and vacuum:

   It is necessary, therefore, to assert that the world is a complete sensate
   animal, and that all the parts enjoy the common life. In us the arm does not
    want to be separated from the humerus, nor the humerus from the shoulder-
    blade, nor the head from the neck, nor the legs from the thighs – instead, all
    hate division. Just so, the whole world abhors being divided, as happens to
    it when a vacuum intercedes between particular bodies.’37

To the repugnance for the void is connected the conception of a space that
is ‘born to be located,’ and attracts bodies with ‘appetizing sense’ to itself.
Campanella recalled that some Arab philosophers (the allusion is to Avice-
bron, the Jewish philosopher believed by the Western world to be Arab) had
identified space with God, on account of the characteristics that seemed to
make it resemble divinity: ‘it sustains everything and is contrary to nothing
and receives everything benignly; nothing ever dies in it or on account of it
and only particular bodies die with respect to other particular bodies. Space is
extremely large, not as a material quantity, but as an incorporeal quantity; and
it is held to be infinite beyond the universe, a lover, and benefactor of every-
thing.’38 Campanella said that space was ‘the basis of every created thing and
that it precedes all beings; if it does not precede time itself, then it precedes
at least the origin of nature,’ while God – infinite, without corporeal dimen-
sion and antecedent to the entities created by him – has greater ‘sovereign
magnitude.’ Campanella then specified that things fill space and obstruct the
void, not only because those things enjoy mutual contact and act in the name of
preservation, but also because, being similar to God, they are endowed with
intrinsic expansive and dilative energy:



   37
        Ibid., p. 24.
   38
        Ibid., p. 26.
118      Chapter 7

   Since we experience in them the love of dilating themselves, multiplying
   themselves, and living a spacious existence, it is to be found that – for the
   purpose of ruling and dilating themselves in space – all things multiply,
   grow, and diffuse themselves in the territory of the enemy, chasing out all
   others and longing to be the only one so that they might conserve them-
   selves, render themselves eternal and deify themselves – since all things
   imitate God who is eternal and they yearn to render themselves similar to
   him, given that he is their cause.39

One of the complex themes discussed in the second book of the Senso delle
cose is the centrality and primacy of the hot and subtle animal spiritus, ana-
lyzed in the entire rich gamut of its vital, passionate, and cognitive functions
and in terms of the relationship it establishes between men and immaterial
and divine mens. Made up of extremely attenuated matter that is purified by
solar heat, imprisoned in matter, and incapable of emanating as it would wish,
spirit is the hot and vital breath that moulds and organizes the organism in
the manner most adapted to its own needs: ‘the soul thus will be hot spirit,
subtle, generated in the humor, inside a gross matter, whence, not being able
to emanate, it shapes and forms that matter to the point that they are able to
live together.’ The body is presented as a wondrous animated machine and
all the organs turn out to be constituted for and coordinated towards the end
of providing for the reconstitution of spirit, which strives to escape and con-
sumes itself continually, through the search for and the assimilation of foods
rendered similar.

   Spirit thus made the mouth so as to imbibe [such foods], the teeth to mash
   them and ready them for passage to those parts where there is a lack, and
   the stomach for cooking, veins to transport it [the spirit], the liver to improve
   and distribute it, the arteries to vivify it, the lungs to ventilate it, the heart
   to attenuate it, the head to house it as the sovereign, bone to structure
   the machine, ligaments to raise that machine up as well as lower it, nerves
   to diffuse the spirits and move the machine as necessary (in the manner of
   a system of cables), feet to carry itself to food and towards friendly beings
   (as well as flee the unfriendly), and flesh to clothe its mass.40

    The sentient soul or anima – from which the word ‘animal’ derives – is
thus identified with the ‘hot spirit ready to take on every passion easily and
to sense and to move the body.’ It is thanks to heat that ‘the eggs of the hen,
placed under a hot dung or in hot sand (as they used to do in Egypt) come
to life just as when the mother covers it with her heat; similarly, when placed


   39
        Ibid., p. 27.
   40
        Ibid., pp. 38–39.
                                                    In the Cave of Polyphemus   119

close to a fire, the egg of the silkworm in Calabria awakens and develops.’41
The hot soul of animals is born therefore from the heat that attenuates mat-
ter and that can give rise in a direct manner to small animals and insects: ‘and
we see frogs produced in water that is thick, viscous, lying in the hot dust of
summer, suddenly made crust and [sensitive] subtlety; and often I have seen
horsehair in hot rain water come to life and become extremely small serpents
…; moreover, in tepid waters you even see the thread and lining of flax turn
into animal insects’; from this, it can be concluded that ‘it is therefore true that
everything is full of soul, since it contains heat.’42
    Beyond describing it as a principle of generation and movement, Campan-
ella insisted on underscoring the unity of corporeal spirit, which – hot, made up
of an extremely subtle matter, mobile, pliable – becomes capable of discharg-
ing multiple functions in diverse organs variously disposed and conformed. As
he had already explained in the Apologia pro Telesio, he rejected the distinc-
tions of Galen regarding diverse temperament and abstract faculties: spirit is
one and has its seat in the brain, whence, running through extremely subtle
nerve ducts, it performs its duties.43 Through the sense organs it comes into
contact with external reality, and from the modifications that it undergoes all
its passions and understandings take their origin. Every sensation is a form of
‘touching’ of the spirit that enters into relation – in the various sense organs
– with the exhalations, motions, and light that derive from external objects.
Beyond taste (which is the ‘most intrinsic touch’ and derives from direct con-
tact with the substance), smell too is made from touch, ‘because the smell is
a subtle substance that emanates from everything, given that all those things
are hot and full of pores, made by heat emanating victorious into the heavens’
and is perceived by the spirit of the nose. Hearing also is a kind of touching,
because the ear is organized in such a way that spirit can notice motions com-
ing from the outside, and some sounds are particularly enjoyable to the spirit,
because ‘the spirit has a mobile nature and enjoys being invited to motion, an
operation that ventilates it, purges it, diffuses and augments it, according to its
own symmetry.’ If some sounds appear to be dissonant to individuals, ‘all the
voices of the world are a music for the entire world.’ Sight ‘is the contact of
light tinted by the things that are illuminated.’44 If every sensation is touch and
if diversity depends on the different size and subtlety of the matter, it follows
that everything senses, even if in different degrees and modes, and that one
ought to suppose that


   41
      Ibid., pp. 39–40.
   42
      Ibid., p. 41.
   43
      For a summary of the lost work, see ibid., p. 47ff.
   44
      Ibid. p. 60.
120      Chapter 7

   The hardest things, such as stones, feel little, because they are not liable
   to be acted upon much, and have a sense that is similar to the bones of an
   animal; and that plants have a greater degree of sense, similar to that pos-
   sessed by flesh; and that some liquids (such as the sanguinary kind), and the
   stomach and the air sense extremely easily, as does the spirit of the animal.
   Moreover, they sense not only when struck from close at hand and with a
   great deal of force, but also from far away on account of the passibility [the
   ability to feel or undergo] that is communicated to them and that moves
   them and on account of the affection for light that is placed within them
   and for the tinting of every figure. It is, thus, necessary to think of heat and
   light as the most sentient things in the world, and that the entire world
   senses in greater or lesser degrees.45

    Perception varies according to the proportions and conformations of
individual things: ‘but in the world there is neither smell nor stench, neither
sweetness nor bitterness, neither music nor cacophony, unless it be relative to
various, particular things; yet considered from the perspective of the entire
world everything is music, sweetness, sweet smell.’
    The sentient soul, because it is corporeal, fine, and ‘passes from sense
to sense’ is not ‘affixed to a particular organ, but remains like the many
soldiers in a ship or people in a house or men in a city who perform their
different duties in various forges, workshops, squares, and rooms.’46 It is
not necessary to postulate differentiated and specific faculties for different
operations, which are all functions of the same sentient soul. In fact, the
soul is able to conserve the modifications and impressions that it receives,
and to reawaken them and reuse them whenever similar situations present
themselves. From this derives memory, in virtue of which when ‘we remem-
ber something painful and nauseating or happy that we have sensed, that
happiness or nausea or sorrow renews itself in us,’ even if with diminished
intensity, ‘because the object is not present and remains only as a scar’ and
‘there are as many memories as there are similarities.’ Imagination too is
connected with memory and sensation: ‘imagining something, all the things
similar to it are awakened and all the passions similar to it are renewed
in extremely subtle spirit.’ In turn, speech is related to imagination: one
discusses ‘things unknown by means of those known to sense.’ Discourse
is a sensing of the similar, a passing and a moving (discurrere) from simi-
lar to similar. As many kinds of similitude as there are (of essence, quality,




   45
        Ibid., p. 61.
   46
        Ibid., pp. 73–74.
                                              In the Cave of Polyphemus      121

quantity, and so forth), there are an equal number of modes of speech and
argumentation. Understanding and the universal too are connected to the
sensate spirit: understanding collects similitudes stripped of particulars and,
on account of being ‘the sense of something absent,’ such understanding is
a distant and confused sense whereas sense proper is ‘understanding from
close at hand.’47
   The dimension of sense also permits comparison between the level
of animals and that of human beings, such that affinities and differences
between them may be noted. Campanella takes delight in underscoring the
extraordinary capacities of animals: equipped with sense organs that are
superior to human ones, they know how to perform wondrous and ingenious
deeds; they adopt forms of collective organization; they know how to use
arts such as medicine or the arts of war; and, beyond that, they are endowed
with forms of reasoning, language, natural prophecy and even, as in the case
of elephants, with religiosity. But such analogies ought not to obfuscate or
put in doubt the distinctiveness and specificity of human beings. Man is not
only furnished with a spiritus that is considerably more refined and pure
than that possessed by animals; it is also able to move with agility between
more capacious brain cells, which allows him to elaborate extremely com-
plex argumentative chains.
   The genuine (and radical) distinctiveness of man consists in the fact that
he is endowed not simply with that spiritus which connects him to all other
natural beings but also with a mens that has a divine origin and that consti-
tutes and gives shape to his specific dimension. The proofs in favor of this
mens (and as a consequence in favor of the excellence and the divinity of
man) are many. Fundamentally, they stem from the principle articulated at
the beginning of the book, according to which ‘no effect can elevate itself
beyond its cause.’ Man does not exhaust all his capacities within the natural
world: ‘man does not stop at the nature of elements and of the sun and the
earth, but understands, desires, and works far above them – such that he does
not depend on them, but depends on a much higher cause that is called God.’
Man’s capacity to extend himself with thought and desire towards the infinite
demonstrates that he is not only a child of the sun and of the earth, but is also
the child of an infinite cause. Thus, ‘when man cogitates, he thinks beyond
the sun and then higher still, and then beyond the heavens, and then beyond
an infinite number of worlds.’ If Aristotle held that ‘it is a vain imagination
to think so high,’ Campanella agrees ‘with Trismegistus for whom it is a non-




   47
        Ibid., p. 81.
122      Chapter 7

sense to think so low.’48 The connection of man with the supernatural world
is confirmed by his capacity to go beyond the immediate limits of natural
self-preservation. The philosopher and the religious man are able to disdain
corporeal goods, honors, and pleasures for the purpose of attending to higher
goods and ends. Moreover, man can take hold of superior forms of prophecy
and ecstasy that are not explainable with reference to physiological or medi-
cal theories. Above all, man is free in his willing, able to resist external pres-
sures, and able both to value and to evaluate the objects of his choosing. Such
objects are usually mixtures of the good and the bad and he is able to choose
the greater good, even if it is not linked to an immediate advantage or utility.
    The third book surveys the different degrees of sense with which each
entity is endowed, beginning with the heavens and the stars, which are com-
posed of an extremely pure spirit and have ‘an exquisite power of sensing.’
Against the Aristotelian doctrine that has heat derive from friction, Cam-
panella did not tire of reaffirming the celestial nature of all heat, which is
reawakened by blows to the stones in which it was imprisoned. It is the same
heat that burns and destroys when it is potent, and that generates beings when
it is mild. Precisely because it is hot, the entirety of the heavens senses and
celestial motions are not the product of separate drives, but are rather the
operations of heat. The heavens are one, the spheres do not exist, and faster
or slower stellar motions derive from diverse quantities of heat conferred by
the sun in accordance with distance or proximity.
    A beautiful page is dedicated to light, which is endowed with ‘the most
acute sense’ and is diffused everywhere ‘in order to multiply itself, gener-
ate, and amplify itself with great delight,’ with a pleasure that is similar to
the pleasure that plants experience ‘in thriving, growing, flowering, bearing
fruit, and spreading’ and similar to the pleasure experienced by human beings
during sex, a pleasure that accompanies the sensation of the spreading of its
own being. Shining ‘through other bodies and each atom of air with infinite
angles and pyramids,’ light attempts to enter even in the darkest caves and
grottos: ‘but in transparent bodies, such as water and crystals, it starts longing
for, enhancing itself and penetrating things that are similar and then savors
and unites and sets ablaze the things that are not white, because they are dis-
similar to it.’
    The air senses, because it is ‘the shared soul that helps all things and
through which all things communicate.’ In the air the movements and pas-
sions of the spirit are conserved as ‘scars.’ ‘Coarse vapors’ in the bowels of
the earth also sense. These are vapors that ‘break out and escape’ with great
force and ‘seem like distressed animals struggling to free themselves.’ Fire too


   48
        Ibid., p. 90.
                                                   In the Cave of Polyphemus          123

senses, for, when it is enclosed in the earth, it ‘expands powerfully, breaks free,
and destroys everything that could cause its own death.’49 Water senses, for
within it grow fish and plants; and the earth senses, the earth which Pythago-
ras compared to a ‘large animal’ – ‘its skin and pelts are the grass and trees,
its stones the bones, its animals are like lice for us.’50 Plants sense and they
are those ‘immobile animals’ that Campanella looked upon with a particular
affection. They have ‘mouths, nerves, veins, hides, bones, tissue, cloths, horns,’
and in summer on account of the excessive heat ‘they are drab, dull, with foli-
age lowered like sickly animals; yet with the arrival of some rain or when they
are able to drink they raise themselves up straight; lifting themselves up, they
come to life, become beautiful, and show a manifest sentiment of happiness
and restoration. They produce flowers and fruit, and ‘so as to preserve their
seeds they close them up in bone and then in pulp; with their leaves, they
protect those seeds from heat and from cold; and with their thorns, they pro-
tect them from animals whenever they can.’51 Even minerals sense (if dimly).
Minerals feed and convert in themselves the liquids of the earth; in time, they
come to construct mountain ranges, ‘like living bone.’ Darkness–the symbol
of matter and of cold–also senses; even the shadow of our body, when ‘draw-
ing close to another shadow, extends itself in the manner of a pyramid so as to
unite itself with that other shadow as quickly as possible.’52
    The fourth book, which would also circulate independently, was dedicated
to natural magic.53 While taking note of the most curious hidden properties
of minerals, plants, and animals, Giambattista della Porta (limiting himself
to dealing with the spectacle of the natural world) had asserted that it was
impossible to offer a rational explanation for the relationships of sympathy
and antipathy that exist among natural entities. Campanella attempted to re-
read and to re-interpret this exuberant tradition in the light of his doctrine
of the sense of things. Having recalled that the ancients defined as magicians
‘those who investigate the occult ways of God and nature (God’s artifact) and
who then, applying those occult ways to human use, are capable of wondrous
acts,’ Campanella could only deplore the condition of abasement and deca-
dence into which this noble doctrine had fallen. In modern times, the name of
“magician” was given to ‘superstitious friends of demons’; ‘tired of investigat-
ing things, such people had looked to demons for shortcuts to do that which
they could not do or could not pretend to do.’ The very learned attempt by


   49
      Ibid., pp. 131, 97, 136, 135, 132.
   50
      Ibid., p. 133.
   51
      Ibid., pp. 159, 98.
   52
      Ibid., pp. 97, 133.
   53
      See Guido Giglioni, ‘magia naturale,’ in Enciclopedia, vol. 1, coll. 265–277.
124      Chapter 7

Porta to restore this doctrine was praiseworthy, but insufficient – in that it
was limited to speaking of the magician only ‘historically,’ in a descriptive
and empirical way, ‘without entering into the business of causes.’ Magic, as
Pliny remembered, is constituted by religion, which ‘serves to purge the spirit
and to make it ready to understand and to make it a friend of the first cause
to instill faith, honor and reverence in the spirits of those to whom it was
applied.’ Magic was also constituted by medicine, ‘by way of understand-
ing the powers of plants, stones, and metals and the sympathy and antipathy
among them and towards us,’ and by astrology, ‘so that one might know the
time that was appropriate for action.’ This is a wisdom that is ‘speculative and
practical at the same time, because it applies understanding to works that are
useful to human kind.’ It is divided into several kinds: supernatural or divine,
natural, deceitful and diabolical. Divine magic consists in friendship and faith
in God, considered as ‘good, holy, and just, as something that can and wants to
do us good.’ If the soul ‘cannot extend itself to know the infinite,’ it can nev-
ertheless believe in God as the cause of all things and render itself unanimous
with him and achieve in that way a new faith that ‘is, one might say, not only
historical,’ but is a faith that ‘has so much power that it changes created things
into that which we desire.’ There is a crucial distinction between a ‘historical’
faith (which is external and cold) and a ‘living’ faith, which calls for purity of
heart and intrinsic adherence to divinity, in such a way as to ‘will and nill in
accordance with him, and in a manner greater than vulgar lovers do with the
things that they love.’ This living faith is one that transforms ‘man into God and
makes him divine.’ It can offer us a key to interpreting the transition from
Campanella’s earlier positions to those that came after the crisis of the years
in Sant’Elmo. This transition consisted precisely in a movement from a cold
and completely exterior faith to an intrinsic faith that is fed by divine love and
that transforms ‘the lover into the object that he loves.’54
    A very lively page describes the most delightful deceits of tricksters and
charlatans and the abilities of tightrope walkers, revealing them to be ‘useless
fictions.’ His interest was entirely concentrated on natural magic. On the one
hand, such magic was connected with the arts and the sciences. At first and
above all to ordinary people (‘as long as the art was not understood’), all discov-
eries or wondrous inventions seemed to be the result of magic. But ‘later such
“magic” would be common science.’ On the other hand, natural magic retained
its particular sphere of rarer and more esoteric knowledge and Campanella
attempted to re-read it in the light of his doctrines of sense, spirit, and the pas-
sions. The magician is he who, knowing the specific quality of sense that belongs
to every being, is able to use it in a useful way and is able to induce particular


   54
        Senso delle cose, pp. 168–169.
                                                In the Cave of Polyphemus        125

alterations in mobile and fine spirits that are ready to undergo and receive any
impression. The basic passions are those of sorrow and joy, love and hate, and
hope and fear. And ‘he who knows how to engender all these effects in man,
with herbs, actions, and other opportune things one may call a magician.’55 That
man will know how to increase vital powers, by suggesting those foods, drinks,
climates, sounds, and herbal and animal remedies that are useful and that fortify
vital energies and by discouraging all those that have anything to do with putre-
faction and death. He will know the secrets of bringing death and life, in that
he knows everything that is either useful to the spirit or damaging (or lethal)
to it. He will know the secrets of reproduction and the secrets of diseases. He
will know how to raise up passions for the purpose of achieving particular ends,
both in people and in particular organs. Campanella presents examples of these
things that are very curious. One such curious example is the remedy suggested
for avoiding an excessive hardening of the liver, which involves generating the
kind of ‘dry blood’ and ‘paucity of spirits and powdery material’ that bring age-
ing and death. So as to keep a liver ‘as soft as the livers of babies,’ it is good to
feed on ‘milk and soft things without excrement.’ It is also advisable ‘to fasten a
vase of water up high and to let some drops of water come down through canals
now and again onto the liver, which is an excellent magical remedy, because the
liver fears and retracts, thereby softening; and the emanating heat no longer
dries it out.’ If one suffers from a swelling of the spleen, then one should place
another spleen that has been dried with smoke on it; this will induce a cure
– and not by some work of the devil, but rather because ‘the emotion of the
patient generates fear in his own spleen, which then retracts itself, squeezes,
and vomits the humor, because it is sympathizing with the other spleen, which
is similar to itself.’56
    The lingering of sense in latent and dormant forms in beings and in the air,
which are then awakened on particular occasions, renders explicable events
that appear to be prodigious, such as the bleeding of a cadaver (in which
there remains an ‘obtuse sense’) in the presence of the killer. As Campanella
explained, ‘men who have been murdered, spew forth blood in the presence
of the murderer and they boil almost out of anger or out of fear, sensing, on
account of the intervening air, the presence of the odious enemy; and this is
the sign used for discovering the killer.’57 The continued existence of affects
and of sensation is connected to the efficacy of the weapon salve, thanks to
which one can cure a wound even at a distance if one treats the weapon that
inflicted the wound, as if the spirit closed up in the wound might acquire faith


   55
      Ibid., p. 177.
   56
      Ibid., pp. 183, 188.
   57
      Ibid., p. 184.
126     Chapter 7

when it senses the cure through the air, and might experience ‘something like
a rejoicing in vengeance.’58 Campanella also dealt with the explanation of a
famous example that is mentioned in every book on magic. In the example, a
drum made out of sheepskin fell to pieces upon hearing the striking of a drum
made out of wolfskin, on account of the reawakening in it of an ancient fear.
In a kind of analogy, a fierce Bohemian captain ordered the construction after
his death of a drum made out of his own skin so as to terrorize his enemies.59
   It is also in the light of the doctrine of sense that it is possible to explain
the true metamorphoses that take place in persons bitten by rabid dogs or in
peasants of Puglia attacked by tarantulas.60 The former, after forty days, ‘faint
and shout’ and bite; they cannot look upon water, for fear of seeing their own
image reflected; in the end, they bark and ‘die rabid and miserable, thinking
themselves to be dogs.’ Regarding the tarantula example, Campanella gave
a precise description, which suggests that he had seen the phenomenon for
himself.61 Those who have been bitten become weak and ‘stupid.’ They dance
and jump to the sound of various instruments, before collapsing, exhausted. In
both cases, the acrid spirits and humors that are introduced by the bite induce
an alteration in the temperament and the imagination of these poor souls,
in whose organism the spirit of the animal that has attacked them gains the
upper hand. In this way, they forget who they were. In the case of tarantulas,
the infected vapors are forcibly expelled by the dancing and the sweating it
induces. But usually the symptoms last as long as the cause that has produced
them and only the death of the spider that has bitten them will lead to a com-
plete remission of the illness. The connection between universal and particu-
lar causes is confirmed also in the peculiar case of a nose graft, completed at
the medical school of Tropea, in a man who, having lost his nose as the result
of an injury, reconstructed it from the meat of the arm of a slave, to whom he
promised liberty in exchange. The new nose took root and grew, but, when the
slave died, it began to putrefy – proof of the fact that the life it received from
the new organism in which it was inserted had not annulled its original and
root connection with the life of the slave. Thus, they are ‘stupid who deny the
duration of a mortal life and the sense and consensus of the entire world.’62
   The general rules of magic are concerned with empowering vital and pre-
servative qualities by all relevant natural means. Music and sounds, which act
upon the spirit, also have a great effect. The intonations and words that – as


   58
      Ibid., p. 188.
   59
      Ibid., pp. 186–187.
   60
      See ibid., l. IV, ch. 10, p. 189ff.
   61
      See ch. 4.1.
   62
      Ibid., p. 197.
                                                 In the Cave of Polyphemus        127

in the case of the poet and the orator – generate passions also have a great
effect, but they can also be changed into superstitious ceremonies and prac-
tices, into which the devil himself can intrude. The final chapters linger on
the relationship between magic and astrology, the understanding of which is
indispensible for acting in accordance with the unfolding of events and in
choosing the right moment and the most favorable astral situations. The work
ends with an Epilogo del senso dell’universo, a lyrical celebration of the world
as a divine moving image, in which life ends and begins in an uninterrupted
vicissitude:

   the world, thus, is all sense and life and soul and body, statue of the Highest,
   made with power, wisdom, and love for his glory. Nothing is to be lamented.
   In him so many die and so many live in order to serve his great life. Bread
   dies in us and is transformed into mass, and then this mass dies and is trans-
   formed into blood, and then the blood dies and is made into flesh, nerve,
   bone, spirit, seed – such that various deaths and births, various pleasures
   and pains are suffered; but they serve a purpose for our lives, and we do
   not lament them on that account, but rather celebrate the process. Thus, all
   things are a source of rejoicing for the world; all things serve and everything
   is made for the whole; and the whole is made for the glory of God.63


                               Religion and Nature

The Ateismo trionfato was written in 1606–1607. It constituted a watershed
in Campanella’s thought and testifies to overcoming his deep spiritual and
intellectual crisis. Among the promises that the prisoner dedicated himself to
realizing, we find a commitment to writing ‘a volume against politicians and
Machiavellians, who are the scourge of this century and the scourge of that
monarchy [the universal monarchy]; this would be a volume that would show
reason of state to be founded on the basis of love of self and that would dem-
onstrate to them with new and effective arguments how deceived they are in
the matter of the doctrine of the soul and in thinking that religion is an art of
government.’64
    The polemic against reason of state and the Machiavellian conception of
religion as a human and political invention and as a useful figmentum (a clever
expedient), developed by a cunning clerisy and by political leaders in order to
gain and maintain power, was connected to the important task of undertaking
a full rational inquiry that would survey and evaluate all religious beliefs and
philosophical doctrines in order to show how religion is, on the contrary, a virtus


    Ibid., p. 235.
   63

     Letter to Cardinal Odoardo Farnese, 30 August 1606, in Lettere, p. 26.
   64
128     Chapter 7

naturalis (natural virtue) inherent in man. The subsequent period of research
would be dedicated to verifying the relationship between natural religion and
Christianity, for the purpose of concluding that there was no contrast but rather
a deep and original concord between Christian law and natural law. After all,
Christ had not nullified or abolished natural law; he had simply added moral
precepts and ceremonies to it that completed and perfected it.
    Writing to Paul V, Campanella asserted that – having examined faith
‘through the philosophies of the Pythagoreans, Stoics, Epicureans, Peripatet-
ics, Platonists, Telesians, and through the philosophy of all other sects both
ancient and modern, as well as through the laws of ancient peoples and those
of the Jews, Turks, Persians, Moors, Chinese, the inhabitants of Cathay, the
Japanese, Brahmins, Peruvians, Mexicans, Abyssinians, and Tartars’ – he had
come to the conclusion that ‘the pure law of nature is the law of Christ, to
which only the sacraments have been added in order to help nature to work
better by the grace of he who had given those sacraments (which are also
natural and credible symbols).’65
    Campanella did not conceal his suspicion of having perhaps been pushed
too far by his rational effort, or of having perhaps committed errors, as might
happen to anyone when taking up an art: ‘I concede that I have been too eager
to examine the Christian law, and I may have erred as happens with every
craftsman in his art, like the tailor who ruins a great deal of fabric before he
knows well how to make clothes, or the doctor who kills many patients before
he becomes skillful.’66 But pointing to the honesty of his research and the
sincerity of the attempt to demonstrate the coincidence of first reason and
Christianity, he declared to the Pontiff his own ability and intention to per-
suade others of such truths: ‘the world over, I will never encounter a sectarian
I could not convince of the falsity of his faith; at once, I reduce it to the natural
law of first Reason, and … arguing on the basis of the moral and ceremonial
precepts of Christ, I show with vivid divine magic that those precepts are in
accord with the law of nature.’ Campanella concluded by revealing that, ‘as I
have convinced myself, so I convince others.’67
    At the beginning of the summer of 1607, the Ateismo trionfato had been
finished and on 1 June 1607 it was dedicated to Kaspar Schoppe, who had
arrived at Naples in the spring in order to establish contact with the prisoner.
Campanella made a gift of it to him with a gesture of profound gratitude
towards the visitor, whom he saw as an angel sent by the Lord in a deeply
desperate situation. In the following weeks, the author made reference to the
volume in a famous letter to Monsignor Querenghi dated 8 July 1607. In that

   65
      Ibid., p. 15.
   66
      Ibid., p. 16.
   67
      Ibid., p. 55.
                                                     In the Cave of Polyphemus          129

letter, he emphasized the particularity of his own philosophy, which did not
rely on ‘human schools’ and on books but instead ‘learned in the school of
nature and in the school of art’ and informed the prelate that he would find
an overview of his thought in the recent book dedicated to Schoppe.68
    Written in Italian, the work was later translated by the author into Latin.
It was then published in that translation in Rome (1631) and in Paris (1636)
and, until recently, it constituted the only known version of the text. But,
thanks to an amazing rediscovery, I had the great satisfaction of locating the
original version of the text, written in Campanella’s hand, and was able to
publish a critical edition of it in 2004.69 In the original version, the text was
called Recognoscimento della vera religione, but it was Schoppe himself who
suggested to the author that he change the title (which emphasized more
the direction in which the research was heading than a truth already pos-
sessed) to the more peremptory one by which the work is usually known.
In the original version, the work was preceded by a dedicatory letter to the
author’s German friend (which later in the Latin edition would be replaced
with a more sober Praefatio), in which he gave an emotional evocation of
the dramatic events of his life. References to trials of his youth, culminating
in the Neapolitan trial following the conspiracy, and the terrible torture, are
combined with a strong contrast between light and dark, between an age of
darkness dominated by reason of state and, on the other hand, the prospect
of ascending to the light so as to permit the distinguishing of truth from error
and thereby restoring man to a new dignity: ‘the age is dark, and it does
not know where the heavens are; the stars are obscured by fog, the lights
extinguished, the sun is in shadow, the moon covered in blood,’ he lamented.
Again, ‘every sect boasts of miracles, prophecies, testimonies, martyrs, and
arguments so as to prove that it is authorized by God: we are in the dark
and we all appear to be the same color, philosophers and sophists, saints
and hypocrites, princes and tyrants, religion and superstition.’ The work was
given to Schoppe as a torch with the following instruction: ‘tighten it into the
hearts of men; perhaps from brushwood they will turn into animals, and from
animals into humans.’70
    The first chapter serves an introductory function and proposes to map the
diversity of possible attitudes concerning religion. At first, Campanella focuses
on those who are the most numerous, for whom the acceptance of native

   68
       Ibid., pp. 134–135.
   69
       L’ateismo trionfato, 2 vols. (Pisa, 2004); the first volume contains the critical edi-
tion of the work and annotations; the second contains an anastatic reproduction of the
ms Barb. lat. 4458 of the Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, repository of the autograph
version.
    70
       Ateismo trionfato, I, pp. 3–5.
130     Chapter 7

religion coincides with an uncritical adherence and a passive acquiescence that
is undisturbed by doubt. He then speaks of those in whom such adherence is
conditioned by the passions, among which are to be numbered the enjoyment
of personal advantages or fear of persecution. There follows the group of those
frail types who do not deny religion and are not bad people and who behave
badly only because they are misled by the bad example set by the majority.
In any case, prostitutes and publicans are certainly preferable to sophists and
hypocrites, who are all intent on simulating ‘a knowledge and kindness that
they do not possess.’ But there are two figures that dominate the scene and
they are represented both as authentic protagonists and also as antagonists –
namely, politicians and philosophers. The first, deniers of God and of his provi-
dence, uphold the political origin of every religion: ‘they do not believe in any
law, and they hold that law is an art of living discovered by astute people.’
For them sin does not exist, and ‘can only be established by the law for the
preservation of the community, and so that ordinary people obey.’ Miracles,
when they are not to be attributed to chance, are produced by ‘illusions of the
ignorant’ or by the ‘cunning of the intelligent.’ Such doctrines, founded in love
of self, are extremely difficult to uproot and constitute the bane of every age, in
that their supporters reject every counter-argument, holed up in the arrogant
certainty of possessing the truth. They are too sure that ‘seeking another truth
is for impoverished people, who do not know how to live, or of astute people
so as to create a new religion as a foundation for the state.’ On the other side,
there are the philosophers, who believe that there is only one law – a law that
is true and certain, natural and common to all. Skeptical with regard to super-
natural dogmas, they live in a virtuous way that conforms to nature. Without
doing harm to anyone, ‘they serve the first cause with good will and perform
works that are at once honest and beneficial to the human race’; they do not
desire honors or riches, but ‘they are happy with little, and derive their joy
from contemplation, and feel better than a king, pope or monarch.’71
    The second chapter, which is one of the most controversial parts in the
entire work, takes us into the heart of the problem. This chapter presents a
long list of arguments against religion in general, and Christianity in particu-
lar. As has been indicated, it takes the form of an ‘extremely full list of liber-
tine propositions’ and ‘an organic expression of the anti-Christian doctrines
of the period.’72 Those objections are then presented in so crude a light and
in a sequence so littered with interrogatives that it elicited perplexity and
unease both before and after the book was published – not just in the Catholic


   71
     Ibid., pp. 17–18.
   72
     Giorgio Spini, Ricerca dei libertini. La teoria dell’impostura delle religioni nel Sei-
cento italiano (19501), new edition (Florence, 1983), pp. 85–86.
                                                In the Cave of Polyphemus        131

camp, but among Protestants too. With the interlocutors described and the
objections listed (to which responses are given in the central and concluding
chapters of the work), the other chapters of the first part – the most limpid –
are dedicated to proving the naturalness of religion, which is intrinsic to every
aspect of nature, which is in turn the expression of divine art. From the cen-
tral point that God exists as Reason and Wisdom diffused throughout all the
aspects of reality derive the following corollaries: the radiating of the ‘trace’
of the Trinity in every natural being; the reasonableness of the Incarnation;
the acting of Providence in the world (which is a theater and statue of divinity
rather than a dark labyrinth of suffering); the non-existence of death and the
relativity of evil, which is connected with non-being and which is therefore
something that is necessary for the distinction of things; the profound soli-
darity of man with nature, even if at the same time his intrinsic divinity and
eminence renders man capable of elevating himself to a higher world. From
here the text moves on to the difficult problem of the immortality of the soul,
a certainty that is attained following paths that are different from those taken
by the Aristotelian tradition. Campanella insisted instead on the particularity
of man as the only being capable of going beyond his own natural limits and
acquiring a consciousness of his own relationship to the infinite.
    In the ninth chapter, it is reaffirmed, against all skeptical attitudes, that the
existence of multiple false religions is not a sufficient reason to conclude that
every religion is radically false. Just as the inexpertness of many physicians
does not prove the falsity of medicine in general, so the fact that many wines
are adulterated does not prove that there are none that are pure. If it is true
that there are differences among the various positive religions (in their rituals
and in their supernatural beliefs), it is also true that ‘it is natural for man to
incline towards justice and to live in religion’ and that therefore one can grasp
with ‘discourse’ and experience with ‘sense’ that religion is de iure naturae (in
accordance with natural law). A strong confirmation of religion’s naturalness
appears in the fact that it is the indispensible foundation and connective tis-
sue of every political community, which without religion could not subsist and
would dissolve.73
    The tenth chapter is, then, concerned with proving that between natural
religion and Christianity there cannot be anything other than a profound and
basic agreement, given that nature is the expression of the divine Word, which
is the principle of every rational value and of every virtue, since Christ – who
is that same Reason made flesh – did not nullify and abolish natural law but
rather added moral precepts and ceremonies to it that completed and per-
fected it. With an audacity that would not fail to raise the ire of censors
(the same audacity that would appear to raise the specter of Pelagius because
   73
        Ateismo trionfato, I, pp. 92–93.
132     Chapter 7

it exalted natural and rational values extended to all humanity), Campanella
affirmed the unity and universality of a single law, in which all men were par-
ticipants insofar as they were rational, from the moment that Christ is eternal
wisdom and first reason:

   We say that Christ is eternal wisdom and first reason, and that everything
   that is against reason is against Christ, and that all those living in accord-
   ance with reason are Christians. Therefore, all nations, recognizing Christ as
   first reason, cannot take other laws, … because every law is reason or a rule
   for reason; thus, every law constitutes the splendor of the light of Jesus (that
   is to say, the Redeemer), because reason or wisdom is that which governs
   and saves all things.74

The criterion by which to evaluate the goodness of a law is thus its conform-
ity with rational values. Such conformity implies, on the one hand, that those
who live according to reason are in fact Christians implicitly, and therefore
participants in the economy of salvation, even if they are ignorant of the
revelation. On the other hand, such conformity implies that the condition
of explicit Christians does not in itself offer guarantees and does not obvi-
ate the duty of living in accordance with rational principles: ‘Thus, all nations
are implicitly Christian, because they all profess to live rationally, and insofar
as nations depart from that rationality they are not Christian, and thus we
explicit Christians are not Christian in those acts in which we distance our-
selves from reason.’75
    The incarnation of Christ took place in order to confirm and restore (after the
original sin) the law of nature, which applies to all humanity, not so as to exclude,
separate, or make enemies of the different faiths: ‘And Christ was made flesh
in order to make us see the universal natural law more clearly through deeds
and doctrine. It is a great wonder that, willingly or not, men are subject to Christ
regardless of whether he is known or not. Thus, the diversity of laws is no argu-
ment, given that positive laws are specifications and applications of that same
first natural law, and their variety does not make them for us either unreasonable
or unchristian.’76 Christianity is not a particular sect among other sects. Instead
it sets itself up as an expression of the ‘same law of nature, pure and innocent’
that is integrated and perfected by supernatural beliefs, dogmas, and ceremonial
elements – elements that, in turn, are not alien to rationality and naturalness.77
Therefore, the Christian religion, both for the simplicity and universality of its




   74
     Ibid., p. 100.
   75
      Ibid., pp. 100–101.
   76
      Ibid.
   77
      Ibid.
                                                  In the Cave of Polyphemus         133

moral message and because its ceremonial apparatus is not contrary to nature, is
more closely conformed to nature, and it is therefore the most universalizable. The
concluding chapters, finally, confront particular aspects of Christianity, regarding
rather delicate points such as the Eucharist, miracles, prophecy, specifying the
‘signs’ and marks that distinguish true Christian belief and confirm its excellence
in comparison with other beliefs. In those final chapters, the polemic is deepened
against the doctrines of Machiavelli and the supporters of reason of state, who
deny the ‘naturalness’ of religion in order to emphasize its political character.
    For Campanella, however, being persuaded of the excellence of Christian-
ity did not entail excluding other beliefs or erecting walls around the citadel of
truth. On the contrary, Christian rationality opens up the possibility of a univer-
sal confluence of every creed in an ecumenical consensus. While holding fast
to the principle of Christian superiority, it remains true that every faith that is
conformed to reason contains some share of the truth; irrational faiths, on the
other hand, are abuses and ‘contorted rules.’ From here, Campanella’s attention
turned to every form of religiosity, wherever and however it is manifested. He
revealed himself to be more intrigued than scandalized when he underlined
the analogy between the Christian sacraments and the rough ceremonies of
the American Indians, who possessed primitive forms of confession and the
Eucharist, even if exterior pressures then forced him into contrite condemna-
tion of the deceits of the devil, simia Dei (imitator of God.)78 In another pas-
sage, recalling an episode in which unarmed Anabaptists succeeded in resisting
the soldiers of an imperial army, he was not able to hide the most vivid emotion,
revealing how the force of faith was irresistible wherever it manifested itself:

   When the Emperor ordered the killing of the Anabaptists, they all knelt
   down in the countryside waiting for death. When the soldiers arrived they
   became stricken with shame, and did not want to lay a hand on them, and
   they let them live; and the Emperor concurred. See how powerful is the law
   of Christ in anyone who observes it.79




    78
       Ateismo trionfato, I, p. 169; see Ath. triumph., p. 175: ‘De Americanis cum
admiratione audivi, quod confessione peccatorum utebantur: plebs principibus,
principes regi, rex Soli confitebantur: Sol autem deo, ut putabant; et panem quasi
eucharistiae manducabant, formantes idolum ex pasta, et distribuentes et communi-
cantes in illo, quem vocabant nomine Dei sui, sicuti nos Iesuchristi. Profecto isti ritus
si fuissent cum cognitione veri Dei, et eius instinctu vel lege a Deo instituta,
nequaquam irrationabiles essent, sed palam est esse commenta diaboli, simiae Dei.’
    79
       Ateismo trionfato, I, p. 105 (Ath. triumph., p. 113); Campanella would refer to
the persecutions brought down on the community by Jakob Hutter based in Mora-
via and chased out of there by Emperor Ferdinand II in 1622: see Roland Crahay,
‘Une référence de Campanella: l’utopie pratiquée des Anabaptistes,’ in Le discours
utopique (Paris, 1978), pp. 179–192: 182ff.
134     Chapter 7

Campanella spoke also of the suggested analogy between Christian and pagan
miracles – such as that of the Vestal Virgin who, in order to demonstrate her
own purity, transported the water of the Tiber to the temple in a sieve. Instead
of simply disregarding or naturalizing the prodigy, he took it as a demonstra-
tion of how divine presence works in every place in every time. Highlighting
similarities between prodigious events did not have a skeptical or natural-
izing aim (as in libertine interpretations); instead, it was directed at empha-
sizing the spatial-temporal continuity of divine presence. The real targets of
this polemic were those who believed that the personal possession of truth is
a motive for separating themselves from others who are held to be living in
error. For Campanella, these are people who are more worried about indicat-
ing boundaries and raising up obstacles than imagining a common project or
a shared adherence to a single school of the First Wisdom. In a fine passage
of the Syntagma, Campanella offered us a persuasive key for interpreting his
positions. In a sober laudatio of Justin (one of the ‘authors’ of the Atheismus),
he said that he ‘demonstrated that religion, which others hold to be planted
only in their own garden, is in fact sown in the entire human species.’80
    In the course of the almost thirty years that passed between the composi-
tion of the Ateismo (1607) and the definitive edition that came out in Paris
(1636), the work encountered endless problems and obstacles, due to the dif-
fidence and the suspicions of the ecclesiastical authorities.81 The Ateismo was
not published by Schoppe (as Campanella had originally hoped); nor was it
among the texts published in Frankfurt between 1617 and 1623 under the
auspices of Tobias Adami. After the failure of these attempts, the author
would consider publishing it in Italy. In the spring of 1621, he sent it to the
Holy Office in order to obtain the necessary approval. At first, the opinion
of Cardinal Bellarmine, who was charged with overseeing all such approvals,
appeared to be favorable. But subsequently the judgment – arrived at by three
different commissioners – was negative. The censors maintained that ‘it is not
appropriate that the said Father Campanella write and publish his works.’82
Campanella hurriedly composed a passionate defense of religion as virtus
naturalis and sent it to Rome – but to no avail.83 When he reached Rome, the
Ateismo was subjected to a full trial, begun in the middle of November 1627
and concluded in March 1628. The propositions submitted to the judgment of
   80
       Syntagma, p. 110.
   81
       See Luigi Firpo, ‘Appunti campanelliani. XXI. Le censure all’Atheismus triumphatus,’
GCFI, 30 (1951), pp. 509–524. See also Ernst, Religione, p. 73ff and the texts cited in the
following notes.
    82
       Enrico Carusi, Nuovi documenti sui processi di Tommaso Campanella, GCFI, 8
(1927), doc. 72, p. 351.
    83
       See Germana Ernst, ‘Il ritrovato Apologeticum di Campanella al Bellarmino in
difesa della religione naturale,’ Rivista di storia della filosofia, 157 (1992), pp. 565–586.
                                                In the Cave of Polyphemus        135

the inquisitorial commission elicited in the censors a profound, indefinable
unease. They concluded that it was hard to say whether it was by ingenuous-
ness or malice (‘either he is very ignorant or he is very malicious’) that the
author appeared ambiguous and evasive – ‘he is as slippery as an eel.’ The
philosophical assertions were said to be absurd, foolish, fatuous, fantastical,
and scandalous, while, at a theological level, the accusation that circulated
ever more insistently was the accusation of Pelagianism. The discussion began
with propositions drawn from the tenth chapter and the censors were unani-
mous in specifying the radical error of the book: the author was said to have
confounded nature and grace, raising the first up too much and binding the
second within parameters that were too restrictive: ‘it exalts nature and abases
grace, and reduces everything to nature.’84
    On 23 March 1628, the Pontiff decided to release the book, which in the
summer was returned to the author, so that he might make the necessary
corrections – or so that, if necessary, he might rewrite it from scratch.85 Cam-
panella did not welcome this last discomforting invitation. Without becoming
despondent, he undertook the punctilious work of revision tenaciously and the
volume was published at Rome at the end of 1630. The author was scarcely able
to rejoice in that success before the work was pulled from circulation, blocked
by fifteen late-arriving queries of an unknown censor – objections that Cam-
panella would refer to bitterly as ‘post-censoring.’86 Under fire in particular
was the crude list of objections against religion and Christianity in the second
chapter. The fifth query argued that while the ‘arguments’ against the Chris-
tian religion were ‘extremely strong and rather pressing,’ the replies from
the appendix added to the chapter were ‘too short and inadequate.’ Despite
defending himself strenuously, Campanella was forced to flank the objections
with ‘brief responses’ that anticipated the contents of those parts of the text
where such objections were answered more fully, ‘so that the reader would
not waver under the blows and would have close at hand an immediate anti-
dote.’87 In spring 1631, the work was put back in circulation. But once again
the success was short-lived. A few months later, the new anti-astrological sen-
sitivity of Pope Urban VIII was triggered by a passage in the text asserting
that the positions of the stars were favorable to the reform of the Church.


   84
        The texts of the debate are contained in Germana Ernst, ‘Cristianesimo e
religione naturale. Le censure all’Atheismus triumphatus di Tommaso Campanella,’
Nouvelles de la République des Lettres, 1989, 1–2, pp. 137–200. On the issue of
Campanella’s suspected Pelagianism, see the last chapter of the recent monograph by
Jean Delumeau, Le mystère Campanella (Paris, 2008), p. 499ff.
    85
       Carusi, Nuovi documenti, doc. 94, p. 358.
    86
       ‘Risposte alle censure dell’Ateismo triunfato,’ in Opuscoli inediti, pp. 9–54.
    87
       Ath. triumph., p. 8b.
136   Chapter 7

So as not to appear stubborn, the author declared himself ready to suppress
the criticized passage, but when Niccolò Riccardi, Master of the Sacred Pal-
ace, advanced new requests for modifications and suppressions, Campanella,
exasperated and conscious of the fact that these were mere pretexts, refused
to yield to further interventions and the book was confiscated. After his flight
to France, Campanella would not fail to express his own bitterness that a text
so fundamental for the fight against atheists would remain ‘boarded up.’ His
requests for a revocation of the sequestration fell on deaf ears and he eventu-
ally took the decision to reprint it. The Atheismus was published, along with
other writings, at the beginning of 1636 in a volume dedicated to Louis XIII.
For the Papal Nuncio in Paris there was nothing to do but communicate to
Rome his disappointment ‘at not having been able to prevent the publication
of the book … titled Atheismus triumphatus.’88




   88
      Carusi, Nuovi documenti, doc. 100, p. 359. On the censorship of Campanella
works, see Saverio Ricci, Davanti al Santo Uffizio. Filosofi sotto processo (Viterbo,
2009).
