8. Christian Unity


                                 Campanella and Venice

The first of Campanella’s letters to have come down to us from the period
of his imprisonment in Naples is addressed to Pope Paul V (13 August 1606).
Description of the painful conditions is combined in these pages with an
account of a recent meeting with the Nuncio. Campanella recognized his own
error and was certain that he could ‘defend Christianity against the entire
world,’ and become thereby ‘an eyewitness of its truths’ as well as ‘extremely
sound in matters of faith.’ Several days later, Campanella added a postscript
to the letter, in which he affirmed having become aware of the ‘news regarding
Venice’ and rushed to give opinions and advice. In the next letter to the Pope,
Campanella specified having found out from a barber and some soldiers at
the castle that the Venetians had been excommunicated.1 Assuring the Pope
that he had many things to say on this extremely grave matter, Campanella
emphasized the necessity of waging a campaign that was not grammatical but
rather spiritual. He predicted a sure defeat for the Most Serene Republic if it
intended to follow the paths of reason of state in order to liberate itself from
the authority of the papacy. The event gave Campanella the chance to recall
the diabolical evocations practiced three years earlier together with attend-
ant prophecies, some of which pertained to the sure ruin of Venice were it
to revolt.2 It is in this context that the shorter works consigned to Schoppe
had their origin – works that Schoppe would felicitously title Antiveneti. It
was above all as a result of this work, found to be full of insults and inju-
ries towards the Republic, that the German scholar would be arrested and




   1
       Lettere, pp. 19–20.
   2
       Letter to Paul V, September 1606, ibid., p. 38ff.


G. Ernst, Tommaso Campanella, International Archives of the History              137
of Ideas /Archives internationales d’histoire des idées 200,
DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3126-6_8, © Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2010
138    Chapter 8

imprisoned in the course of his stay at Venice en route to Germany.3 The work
is divided into three parts, and Campanella made use of diverse arguments
– political, prophetic, astrological – in order to dissuade the Most Serene
Republic from what he took to be its ruinous attempts at religious schism and
political separation.
    Venice constituted a constant point of reference for Campanella’s politi-
cal thought, appearing as it did once again at the center of the final political
writings, during his French period. In the course of his residence at Padua,
Campanella had the chance to know and to come to value the institutions
of the Republic. In one of his political sonnets, Venice is praised on account
of the wisdom and judiciousness of its government (‘time-piece of princes
and a wise school’), and for the fact that it had made itself the sole bearer
of the onerous burden of liberty (‘bearing the weight of liberty, alone’).4 In
the Antiveneti this praise was transformed into a bitter reproach. Campanella
inserted a harsh palinodic sonnet into the text, in which Venice, which had
earlier been identified with the providential ark of Noah, became the ship of
the infernal boatman Charon.5
    In the third part of the Antiveneti (which was probably the first to be con-
ceived and written), the author presented astrological and prophetical argu-
ments, in order to demonstrate how the times were not favorable to republics
in general. From 1603 the major planets, Jupiter and Saturn, had returned to
combine in the signs of fire, as in the times of Christ and Charlemagne. Such
a celestial aspect was favorable to vast empires, such as the universal and
Catholic monarchy of Spain. In the pages titled ‘secret key,’ Campanella iden-
tified Venice’s biblical analogues as Egypt and Tyre.
    In the first part, titled Ragionamenti in spirito and consisting of nine Lamenti
profetali, the harsh reproaches against Venice all turn on the image of rape.
The declared intention of the author is to construct a ‘mystical parable’ and to
refer to biblical models. But one ought also to say that the insistent and artifi-
cial recourse to negative sexual metaphors is evidence of conventional, coun-
ter-reformation idiosyncrasies. Venice is the virgin ‘never raped by a tyrant,
or by a prince, or by a lover, or by a husband.’ Wishing to free herself from the
guardianship of her father, she risks losing all liberty and dignity. Venice is the

    3
      For a vivid and precise reconstruction of Schoppe’s misadventure in Venice, see
Luigi Firpo, ‘Non Paolo Sarpi, ma Tommaso Campanella,’ Giornale storico della let-
teratura italiana, 158 (1981), pp. 254–274, esp. 268ff. Perhaps as a result of this mishap,
after mentioning the work in an index soon after the events (see Lettere 2, nn. 10–13,
pp. 36–37), Campanella would subsequently make minimal and reticent references to
the work.
    4
      Poesie, p. 205.
    5
      Ibid., p. 608; Antiveneti, pp. 38–39.
                                                           Christian Unity    139

‘glorious lady’ whose brutal and shameful love affairs would degrade her and
take from her, along with the flower of her virginity, every trace of youth and
beauty (‘you will make yourself old, emaciated, wrinkled’). Venice is the ‘little
nun of Christ’ who wants to leave the convent so as to prostitute herself ‘in
a brothel with the other whores.’ Paying for the temptation of this false ‘pro-
miscuous freedom,’ she would make herself the victim of every ruffian – and
of Muhammad, ‘a powerful lover.’6 The person responsible for this situation
would be Machiavelli: the generous winged lion of San Marco is transformed
into a dragon with the wings of a bat, which has in its clutches not the Gospel
but rather the books of the Florentine Secretary – who is called ‘a scandal, a
disaster, poison and fire of this age.’ In another passage (in an etymology that
is completely fantastical), Machiavelli is he who defiles tombs (‘macchia gli
avelli’) – that is, the necromancer who calls the derisive spirit of Lucian out
from hell, together with those more sinister spirits of Tiberius and the great
priest Caiphas, so that they might teach disdain for God and religion, ready to
simulate and deceive the people, and to replace justice with personal utility.7
    It is, however, in the second part of the Antiveneti that the most disconcert-
ing pages are located. These are pages in which religion is presented as the
indispensible support that guarantees the obedience of subjects and wards off
sedition. These are entirely unscrupulous pages in which Campanella consid-
ered things from the point of view of pure political advantage. He criticized
those who hold power and make errors in their calculations by undervaluing
the undeniable advantages of religion. Casting the myth of Venice in a fairly
crude light, he revealed that it is precisely religion that compensates for the
violence and the injustice of the oligarchic regime. At a more general level, he
described religion as the secret of political obedience and social stability:

   Now, when princes make blunders and their peoples become discontented
   or are solicited by bandits, religious men are the reason why they do not
   rebel and why they remain obedient. And this is a result of preaching or on
   account of the secret confessions in which they are advised to live well –
   thus, religion detaches them from their depraved wills, comforts them with
   the thought of Paradise, and terrorizes them with the prospect of Hell.8

The author affirmed in no uncertain terms that religion performs precisely the
function of controlling the claims of the people. In other passages, he would
attribute such claims to political leaders of a Machiavellian stripe and those
who argue that religion has the capacity to turn the entirely human appetite
for the goods of the earth towards the kingdom of the heavens.

   6
     Antiveneti, pp. 9–10, 20, 22.
   7
     Ibid., pp. 49, 66.
   8
     Ibid., p. 103.
140       Chapter 8

     Religion is a way of returning to obedience the unhappy ‘scoundrels’ who
would otherwise ‘look with a callous eye’ at the noblemen who sleep ‘fat-bel-
lied in their villas or in their boats.’ The conflict of Venice with religious men
is thus myopic and suicidal, because it is precisely religious men who safe-
guard power from the protests and requests of those classes that are excluded
from the well-being and privileges enjoyed by the dominant classes: ‘But you
Venetians now say that you do not believe in priests; and they, desperate for
paradise, will covet the villas and riches of this world, like you, and they will
do everything so as to bring about change …’9 From this comes the political
short-sightedness of a clash with religious men, whose role remains funda-
mental: ‘do religious men, thus, appear to be useless to the state? But, even
according to reason of state, they are the most useful people even if God
did not exist.’10 In these pages Campanella did not refrain from affirming the
magical force of religion, which remains powerful even if it is false. As he put
is, ‘religion, whether true or false, has also a natural magical power that unites
spirits and capabilities; he who disdains it becomes vile and abominable for
his vassals and soldiers.’ But in a way that is even more unscrupulous and in
tones that are very crude, Campanella showed how the coupling of piety and
obedience was indispensable, and he insisted on the power of religion, includ-
ing the true one, to sustain even an unjust government.11
     Many years later, in a political treatise where the ‘fateful’ role that had
been allotted to the monarchy of Spain would be transferred to the French
monarchy, Campanella reaffirmed the need to demonstrate to the Venetians
‘the utility they would draw from aligning themselves with France and with the
Church, together with the necessity of religion in their state and the necessity
of the Papacy, as well as the grave dangers of atheism, spread among the new
generations by thinkers such as Cremonini and Sarpi, who in the Antiveneti is
referred to meanly as ‘a turncoat theologian’ and ‘the devil’s charlatan.’12 The
warning to the Venetians would have to aim at reaffirming the necessity of
that political and religious bond, independently of the content or truth of that
religion, thereby demonstrating that

   even if religion does not seem to them to be true, they ought not do dis-
   dain it, knowing that religion is the supreme remedy for maintaining a state
   and given that it binds souls together, a foundation on which communities
   and fortunes depend. And they know also that their citizens would kill the
   prince and the senate, if they were to begin to believe that religion is noth-
   ing more than an art of the state by means of which to rule over its peoples.


      Ibid., p. 84.
      9

   10
      Ibid., p. 104.
   11
      Ibid., pp. 109–110.
   12
      Ibid., pp. 36, 37.
                                                                 Christian Unity      141

   They would never be obedient, remaining always discontented, because
   they would have neither material success in this world nor hope of reward
   in the next. There is no greater bestiality in the prince that ruins him more
   quickly than revealing himself to be impious.13


                   The Papal Primacy: The Monarchia Messiae

During his sojourn at Padua, Campanella had already written a Monarchia
dei Cristiani, which is unfortunately lost and to which had been attached a
treatise titled Del governo della Chiesa that Campanella had addressed to
the Pontiff in order to suggest to him the best means by which to constitute
a single flock under a single pastor.14 This is one of the most persistent and
pervasive themes in Campanella’s work, but the treatment of the problem
of the Christian monarchy is also among the most difficult to comprehend.
The Monarchia del Messia is to be understood as a manifesto that constructs
a theorization of Christian monarchy. It finds its real point of reference and
indispensable foundation in the absolute primacy of the Pope and in the
incorporation of supreme spiritual and temporal power in his person.15
   The solemn opening chapter lays out the fundamental coordinates of Cam-
panella’s theocratic thought, setting down foundations and rules for all human
states and dominions (both good and bad) and for universal monarchy. The
preliminary and primary distinction is that of the two modes of dominion: that
dominion which is absolute (which properly speaking belongs exclusively to
God, as creator of every being) and that which pertains to human states – which
cannot be but relative and bound to particular conditions. In fact, man is not
the absolute master of anything, and so much less of other men, because ‘he
cannot in his own way or by his own caprice make use of anything’ if not in
conformity with the rule laid down by the creator. Man can therefore make use
of something within certain reasonable conditions, that is according to eternal
reason, whether natural or written down, but he can never take the material
possessions or the lives of others when it suits him and without cause, because
originally he received everything from God.16 If in animals the foundation of

   13
       Mon. Francia, p. 554. These are themes that would reappear in the treatise
Avvertimenti a Venezia of 1636 (see ch.12, note 26), in which Campanella reaffirmed the
political destructiveness of the doctrine of predestination and polemicized against the
Reformers as well as Spanish Dominicans such as Domingo Bañez and Diego Alvarez.
    14
       See ch. 2.3, note 52.
    15
       In his edition of the previously unpublished Italian text, Vittorio Frajese connects
the composition of the Monarchia del Messia tightly to that of the Antiveneti, and he
interprets the work in the light of a specific polemic with Antonio Marsilio, author of
one of the numerous works discussing the interdict.
    16
       Mon. Messia, pp. 47–48; Mon. Messiae (2002), pp. 54, 56.
142     Chapter 8

dominion is corporeal force or a natural mark, in men (who are not born ‘with
crowns on their heads’17) it is wisdom and love that are the signs denoting the
naturalness of a dominion. On that account, tyranny is defined as ‘lordship
without natural foundation,’ and impiety cannot constitute the foundation of a
natural and legitimate authority, in that impiety is ‘distance and separation from
God, the source of all foundations for authority.’ From these considerations
follows the distinction – also expressed effectively in a number of sonnets – of
those who are princes ‘by nature’ (and possess legitimate and natural gifts and
foundations) from those who are princes only ‘on account of fortune,’ which
means by chance or lot or fate. Wisdom is thus the strongest natural foundation,
and ‘he is most truly a king by nature, when obeying him brings happiness, [and]
is a tyrant or an idiot, when [obeying him] brings unhappiness.’18
    But since wisdom can degenerate into sophistry and since sovereigns are
not always wise, God has provided that states be ruled by law, ‘which is the
wisdom of the whole.’ Such wisdom is divided into two kinds: eternal (which
is the wisdom ‘with which God guides all his creatures to particular ends’) and
natural (which is participation in the first). ‘Thus, no law obliges the republic
unless – by means of the divine law, whether natural or written – it be explica-
tive of the eternal law.’ The law thus has the function of integrating and bal-
ancing the components of the dominion. Tyranny is founded on force, cunning
and love of self, loving others not on account of God, but on account of utility
and glory. But from the moment that ‘the true authority is founded on valor
of spirit and on love of the public,’ law intervenes in order to make up for ‘the
lack of force and wisdom.’ Law intervenes so that ‘authority only benefits he
who loves God perfectly, who loves the people as the children of God, and
who rules for the benefit of others – dedicating his life to them.’19
    Remembering, as in other texts, that there are three means by which to
acquire ‘true or violent dominion’ – by conquering spirits (‘as the wise do
with virtue’), by conquering bodies, or by means of the goods of fortune –
Campanella emphasized how the last two are fragile and ephemeral when
deprived of the first foundation. The wise men, for their part, can lose their
lives, but – echoing motifs that would extend throughout his work after the
conspiracy – he emphasized that ‘even in death, they command the living.’
Since prophets are ‘masters by nature’ (in that they are bearers of truth and
virtue), they are vilified, persecuted, and put to death by spurious princes and
princes thrown up by fortune. But their death is merely an apparent defeat.



   17
      See Poesie, p. 73: ‘Non nasce l’uom con la corona in testa,/ come il re delle bestie…’
   18
      Ibid., pp. 49–51; Mon. Messiae (2002), pp. 60, 62.
   19
      Mon. Messiae (2002), pp. 52, 58, 70.
                                                              Christian Unity      143

In fact, death is ‘a sign of true authority,’ and they continue to rule even after
death, humiliating their persecutors.20
    As a result, government by a single master is preferable, in that this guar-
antees and reinforces unity. It is a good thing if he be chosen by election,
after the death of the incumbent prince. It is also better if he be chosen from
any nation whatsoever (and not only from his own), that he be ‘experienced’
and expert in the ways of government, and that he be unmarried and not ‘dis-
tracted’ by personal or family interests. But the most relevant and auspicious
characteristic is that he also be a priest, as a ‘sign of the strength of spirit,
and of wisdom, and a sign of divine love for God.’ Spiritual and temporal
power should be united in his person, lest he become a sycophant to tempo-
ral princes, so that he has the power to punish bestial transgressors of the law,
and lest he fall victim to heretics ‘and other false scholars.’
    In that context, a reprise of organic metaphors (beyond establishing cor-
respondences between roles and body parts) highlights forcefully the unity
conferred by religion (which is identified with the soul) and the unity in rela-
tions between soul, spirit, and head:

   Religion is the soul of the republic, because it is found in all the parts of the
   republic, … and this soul joins those parts with each other and with God in
   a wondrous bond; it makes that unity extremely strong and most lovable.
   [Its] spirit is the particular law of princes, and these spirits move through
   the nerves of the body politic and have each part execute its office properly;
   they are commanded by the soul to respond to every sign and, when they
   obey its orders, they do not err, whereas when they disobey they fall into
   error and condemn the whole to death. The sacred high prince is the head, in
   which resides the soul and from which the spirits, the nerves, veins and arter-
   ies take their origin – as the most learned Telesio has it, even though Aristo-
   tle says that they come from the heart and even though Galen derives them
   from the heart, the liver, and from the head … The princes and captains are
   the hands; the soldiers, the claws and feet. Peasants are the liver. The secular
   prince is the heart, while the plebs are the bowels, stomach, and flesh that
   complete the body. Bones are the foundations of the republic, which is the
   country itself by which it is supported; the learned are the sentiments, serv-
   ants are the spleen, veins, bladder, and other conduits of filth.21

Moreover, since God constituted the first man as a father, a governor, or a
guide for those who were similar to him, it follows that he who wants to exer-
cise such a role in an appropriate way ought to be wiser than all his subordi-
nates. In this way, he might rule over them and confer virtue on them, be more


   20
        Ibid., p. 53; Mon. Messiae (2002), pp. 70, 72.
   21
        Ibid., pp. 54–55; Mon. Messiae (2002), pp. 76–78.
144      Chapter 8

powerful than them (in order to hold them back from vice), and be a greater
lover of their well-being than his own. As Plato had already said, it is not the
billy-goat that is able to command all other goats, but rather the shepherd who
comes from a superior species. It therefore follows that man can command
naturally only insofar as he is a divine man – that is to say, authorized by God,
the one, true master, receiving his title and foundation from his own authority.
Following the examples of Adam (who was father, king, and priest) and of
Hermes Trismegistus (who united in himself philosophical, regal, and priestly
gifts), the convergence of temporal and spiritual authority in the same person
is excellent and auspicious: indeed, the people obey more willingly those they
believe come from God – his laws are more venerated and observed both in
public and in the hearts of the people.
    The original unity of temporal and spiritual authority, derived from the
unity of God, implies that, following the multiplicity of sects introduced by
the devil and fomented by ambition and by ignorance (which are the causes
of schisms and heresies), the human race returns to a single priestly law, in
which the entire race can come together, beyond divisions and particularities.
The age in which a single priest-king would rule is identified by Campanella
as the golden age in which the evils that afflict men (such as war) will cease
because there is no longer any reason for them to exist. Men would search
after glory not ‘through war, which is against nature among men, but through
philosophy and heroic works undertaken for the benefit of all humanity.’ In
this golden age many evils would disappear: hunger and scarcity, because the
sterility of the countryside and the lack of food could be corrected and rem-
edied by the abundance of produce from other countries; plagues (derived
from the corruption of the air or water) would not claim any more victims,
because migrations of people in healthy countries unaffected by contagion
would be possible; all the sciences would finally know a wondrous flourishing,
on account of greater exchange and communication – for ‘what the one does
not know, the other does’ – thereby bringing with it great advantages to
humanity.22 Division and separation between men are always works of the
devil, who, jealous of the good of unity, induces in men ‘a forgetfulness of the
fact that we are all children of one father, Adam’ together with ‘an oblivious-
ness to fraternity’:

   But the devil, jealous of this gift, wishes that all might remain within the
   borders of their countries, as worms in cheese, so as to make us ignorant,
   deceive us, and not inform each other of what we observe – lest we go
   around from one country to the next investigating the works of God, lest
   we get to know one another, lest we begin to understand. Instead, the devil

   22
        Ibid., pp. 62–63; Mon. Messiae (2002), p. 94ff.
                                                                   Christian Unity       145

   wants us to have different languages and religions, so that with understand-
   ing between us lost we travel from country to country only when making
   war and causing death, in continual fear, without charity towards God as
   our father and without charity among ourselves, who are his children.23

In response to the arguments used by Aristotle to deny the possibility of a
universal government by a single person, Campanella argues that those argu-
ments are without value and that the analogies Aristotle uses are not ade-
quate. Indeed, Campanella argued that Aristotle did not take into account the
fact that religion and not the prince is the soul of the republic – and religion
‘one finds everywhere entirely and in every part entirely.’ The pagan philoso-
phy, ignorant of the wondrous uniting power of the true religion, knew only
‘servile fear and the power of the non-sacred prince … It did not know the
wondrous power of religion and of the age regenerated by God united in
one faith, but rather aimed at the corrupt man and schismatics of its time.’ In
turn, Domingo de Soto repeated ‘stupidly’ with Aristotle that ‘it is contrary
to nature and impossible for power over all the world to be concentrated in
the hands of one single person.’ The assertion is not surprising, given that ‘it
is customary among the Peripatetics to declare contrary to nature that which
does not please Aristotle.’24
    The primary purpose of the Incarnation was to restore nature to its primi-
tive innocence. Christ had promulgated the precepts of a law that was pro-
posed as a law abolishing every particularity and separation, one law common
and universal in which all people could come together, because it was based on
the most universal presuppositions, among which the love of God and neigh-
bor.25 The golden age thus appeared in the form of a union of all men under
a single temporal and spiritual sovereign, so as to recover the original unity
that Christ had come to restore. But so that this prospect could be realized, it
was necessary for Christ to be considered a genuinely universal master and
titleholder of the royal priesthood of Melchisedech (not the simply spiritual
priesthood of Aaron) and that a double power, both temporal and spiritual, be
transferred to his vicar on earth. Campanella was fully aware of the arguments
fielded against this position, in both the Protestant and Catholic spheres, by
theologians, canonists and philosophers alike – and he does not hold back



   23
       Ibid., pp. 65, 62–63; Mon. Messiae (2002), pp. 108, 110.
   24
       Ibid., p. 64; Mon. Messiae (2002), p. 108.
    25
       Campanella’s notion of ius gentium further shows the importance of a universally
applicable law within the context of the ideal of political and religious unity; see Jean-Paul
De Lucca, ‘diritto dei popoli/diritto delle nazioni (ius gentium),’ in Enciclopedia, vol. 2
(forthcoming).
146      Chapter 8

from polemically addressing the doctrines of Dante’s Monarchia regarding
the necessary distinction and separation between imperial and papal powers.
The greater part of the chapters of the Monarchia Messiae are dedicated to
the minute analysis and confutation of whoever holds doctrines that are dif-
ferent from his own with regard to the origin and the capabilities of the power
of the Pontiff, with regard to the manner of the convergence of the material
and spiritual sword, and with respect to relationships with princes.
   In a passage in a letter to Paul V (in which he rejected the subtle distinc-
tions made by the sophistries of human logic with irritated impatience), Cam-
panella asserts the absoluteness of the Pontiff’s power in a decisive manner:

   Christ is first reason, wisdom, word of God the Father. Therefore all the
   things of the world, being guided by first reason, are subject to him in
   heaven and on earth … Therefore if the pope is his vicar he will be head
   and shepherd of the entire church … Therefore the vicar of the first reason
   and of the first wisdom is head and shepherd of all reasonable men – which
   is to say the entire human world.26

In identifying only the aspect of spiritual dominion and moral reform in
Christ, one risks not knowing how to identify him with the Messiah, as in fact
the Jews had failed to do. One risks declaring the rabbis right – that is, the
rabbis who live waiting for the advent of the messianic kingdom. Whereas
they imagine it to be something future, it is instead present and progressively
unfolding under the dominion of the vicars and successors of Christ – as is
proven by the correct interpretation of a dense series of passages from Psalms.
And it is in light of these principles (and in the identification of Christian arms
with those of the Messiah himself) that the legitimation of the conquest of the
New World on the part of the Spanish sovereign is to be found. Campanella
proposed to set out the ius of the king of Spain in that conquest in a Discorso
sulle ragioni del Re Cattolico sul Mondo Nuovo, which was written in these
same years and which, significantly, was added as the last chapter in the Latin
edition of the Monarchia Messiae.27 Independently of the rapacious and cruel
means by which it had been realized (which would be mercilessly denounced
and deplored in later writings), that ius belonged to the king only insofar as
he was performing the biblical role of Cyrus and establishing himself as the
congregator of the Christian flock and the prophetic monarchy of the Mes-
siah. So as to reinforce his position, Campanella did not hesitate to criticize
the positions of some of his illustrious Dominican brothers – starting with



   26
        Lettere, p. 48.
   27
        Mon. Messiae (2002), pp. 424–459; see ch. 12.2, notes 30–31.
                                                          Christian Unity    147

Cardinal Cajetan, who had not specified a single motive for just war in the
conquest. In the famous Relectiones indicae, Francisco de Vitoria for his part
had intrepidly demolished a series of reasons held to be legitimate. He denied
the temporal authority of the Pope, and asserted that the occupation of the
kingdoms together with the expropriation of the properties of the indigenous
populations was not legitimated by their sins; and he denied that the Spanish
could claim any right of occupation after disembarking on American soil. In
his turn, Soto, even as he admitted the enormity of the sins and the violation
of natural law committed by the inhabitants of the New World, denied that
the Pope was a competent judge to punish even such atrocious crimes. The
use of arms could not open the way for the conquest, but it could be tolerated
only in a second moment, in the event that preachers, sent to spread the evan-
gelical message, were maltreated. In Campanella’s view, these positions “adu-
lated” princes, in that they did nothing but suggest to them excuses attempting
to justify the war. For his part, he reaffirmed the fullness of the right of the
Catholic sovereign considered as the executor of the divine plan for the
reunification of the world in the name of the Pontiff.


                   Structures of Ecclesiastical Government

The early Monarchia dei Cristiani was accompanied by a treatise titled Sul
governo della Chiesa. Sent to Cinzio Albobrandini, Cardinal San Giorgio
(nephew of Pope Clement VIII), this writing was also lost in its larger origi-
nal form. Later it was rewritten in an aphoristic and more synthetic form as
the Discorsi universali del governo ecclesiastico, which right at the outset is
presented as a ‘secret treatise for the Pope’ on the paths to follow and the
methods to adopt in order to gather a single flock under a single pastor, with-
out provoking the remonstrances of secular princes. Taking up once again
the theme of the golden age, Campanella affirmed that such an age would
be possible when the ‘most perfect law’ of Jesus would rule over all the earth
before the universal judgment. What he meant was that, once the worldly
princedoms are vacated, the vicar of Christ alone would rule, accompanied by
princes in the capacity of vassals and children.
    The Discorsi intended to emphasize the differences between the two types
of government (the ecclesiastical and the secular) at various levels and in var-
ious respects, both in the acquisition and in the preservation of power. In the
first, the bond instituted by religion is dominant. As Campanella did not tire
of repeating, religion guaranteed the greatest possible compactness and dura-
tion for a state on account of the manner in which it bound the spirits of men
together – even between countries that were very distant. On account of the
venerability induced by religion, the Papacy was invincible. It ‘conserves itself
148     Chapter 8

with love and veneration,’ while ‘the principality does so with fear and pun-
ishment.’ In the former, it is better to have rich, great, powerful, and learned
vassals,’ in that ‘it is a living body, vivified by religion, in which the soul is eve-
rywhere entirely and in every part entirely.’ Contrarily, for the ‘secular state
vassals who are powerful and wise in their own right are harmful, because it is
a dead body and cannot control its great limbs; it is only vivified by religion,
soul of the Papacy; and here are concealed great secrets.’28 Language is the
primary instrument of ecclesiastical government: from here derives the neces-
sity of sending legations to all political and religious leaders, as the author
had done in the Reminiscentur, for the purpose of inviting them to a general
council to discuss with them the true faith, demonstrating that ‘Christ is not
a sectarian (as are the leaders of other nations) but is instead the Wisdom of
God, the Word and Reason of God …; thus, all men – being rational in accord-
ance with the first reason of Christ – are implicitly Christians, and yet they
ought to recognize God in the Christian religion explicitly.’29 Campanella then
insisted on the necessity of favoring collaboration among the wise. They are
to be rewarded and appreciated and not persecuted or humiliated, because
the ‘hidden fire burns one’s hands unobserved.’ The sciences and philosophy
would be reformed in the light of nature and in the light of the thought of the
Fathers, so as to extirpate the discords of peoples and to cut out the scandal
of the doctrines of Aristotle and Machiavelli, which are contrary to Christian
principles. Ecclesiastic schools would open even for laymen (and in this the
Jesuits ought to be imitated), and useful sciences such as medicine, pharmacy,
and legal assistance would be offered free of cost.
    One of the chapters that attracts the most attention is the eleventh. It deals
with rather delicate problems of the day and is also tightly connected to the
biography of the author himself in that it deals with issues such as heretics,
the Holy Office, and prohibited books. The sixth aphorism holds that ‘all the
new heretics ought to be affectionately called to Rome, where they should
be made to abjure as mistaken people and not as heretics, unless they are not
excessively pertinacious.’ The next aphorism emphasizes with acuity that ‘to
the extent that the Office of the Inquisition is more benign with the learned
and more severe with the ignorant, heretics fail to take root.’ And the eighth
aphorism reaffirms that ‘one ought not to make any learned man of great
spirit abjure if he himself does not confess to heresy, and abjuring de vehementi
ought to be avoided.’30 But the aphorism of greatest interest is the eighteenth,


   28
       Discorsi universali, p. 473; the content of the Discorsi are reproduced verbatim
in the De regno Dei, with which the Paris edition of the Philosophia realis closes.
    29
       Discorsi universali, p. 476.
    30
       Ibid., p. 493.
                                                                Christian Unity      149

which is advanced as a vibrant appeal against the prohibition of ‘high and
new doctrines’ and the suffocating of the libertas philosophandi. This kind of
repression severely harmed Christianity, which ought instead to present itself
as the harbinger of the inexhaustible rationality of the Word:

   One ought not to prohibit books containing new and high doctrines, if one
   does not give a time and place for the author to defend himself (and likewise
   for those who follow his doctrine); and, in the absence of that, one ought to
   accept attorneys and lawyers, because to prohibit such representation raises
   the suspicion that the law of Christ is actually like the law of Muhammad and
   other sectarians, who fear being exposed. Actually, in this manner one extends
   to prohibited books a certain kind of reputation, and it gives the author an
   occasion for apostasy. If the authors are good, this actually damages the
   republic, and it is a scandal for the Catholic church – for it takes away the free-
   dom to philosophize. And this is what modern writers want, who are in fact
   merely copyists and not writers, nil altum sapientes (who can reach no higher
   wisdom); it is an insult to Eternal Wisdom (as Saint Leo says) to think that
   every truth has been discovered and that it is necessary to shut the mouths of
   new philosophers.

If there ought not to be any indulgence for books ‘of deceit’ nor for those of
‘lying and lascivious poets,’ it is necessary nonetheless to adopt an attitude of
maximal caution before unwarranted prohibitions – for ‘the more one prohib-
its, the greater the number of heretics.’
     Of great interest also is the twenty-first chapter, which consists of a short
work that Campanella had drafted on the occasion of the conclave of 1623,
in which Urban VIII had been elected. These are exemplary pages, seeking
to prove that reason of state dominates in the heart of Christianity itself and
that ‘political reason’ (according to which ‘everyone seeks to elect as Pope he
who was his own slave, so as then to be able to command him and make him
act according to his wish’) turns out to be disastrous, as usual. So as to exhort
the cardinals to elect a Pope after taking only his real merits and virtues
into account, Campanella showed how a terrible connection is established
between those who are elected to the Papacy and those who have favored
their election as a result of political calculations (with the hope of deriving
from them a personal advantage). The inversion of the relationship between
servant and master, rather than generating gratitude on the part of the ben-
eficiary, unleashes in him an impressive spiral of hate. He who from below
has reached the pinnacle of power wants to enjoy his new freedom fully and
does not tolerate feeling himself chained to anyone. If before ascending to the
pontifical seat he was hiding his true sentiments with a servile guise (out of
fear of not achieving his aim, for ‘every fear induces some servitude’), once he
has become Pope he throws down the mask. The manner in which he will turn
150     Chapter 8

against the disturbing evidence of his old baseness is described in a lividly Tac-
itean passage, shot through with an obsessive crescendo of implacable hate:

   Being then elevated and made Pope with your support, he hates you not
   only intrinsically, but also extrinsically. He will persecute you because he
   thinks that you will hope to command him as you did previously, when he
   was your servant. Being your master, he will disdain you and hate you as a
   person who not only wanted to be his superior while he was in a subordinate
   position (which is in itself hateful), but as someone who wants to remain
   his superior even in the period of his clear superiority, almost as if you do
   not recognize the situation for what it is – something that is extremely odi-
   ous… Thus, the benefices that you expect him to bestow upon you he will
   want to give to others who are naturally similar and debtors and not to you
   out of an obligation – whence it appears to him that he remains your slave
   still, and he hates you … because the benefices that you want from him he
   knows derive from an obligation and obligation is a bond that is contrary
   to native liberty. For this reason, he hates this bond considerably, believing
   himself to be superior and in such a state of liberty that he not longer has
   superiors or equals on the earth and is no longer to be constrained. He will
   wish that it had never been possible to tie him up. Thus, he will be ungrate-
   ful to you at the slightest, trumped up opportunity; he will persecute you
   and hate you, not wanting ever to have you in his sight, just as one would
   not want to lay eyes upon a collector of taxes, levies or debts.31

A final interesting glimpse of an ecclesiastical monarchy is offered by two
Discorsi della libertà e della felice suggezione allo Stato ecclesiastico, which
followed the Latin text of the Monarchia Messiae that was published at Iesi
in 1633. As Firpo observed, the two dexterous shorter works have the singu-
lar distinction of being, apart from the Scelta of the poems, ‘the only piece
published by Campanella in Italian during his lifetime.’32 Their composition
dates back to the last period of his incarceration in Castel Nuovo and is
to be put in the context of the polemics originating in the question of the
devolution of the Duchy of Urbino to the pontifical state. The annexation
appeared inevitable in June 1623, following the sudden death of the young
heir Federico Ubaldo, found dead in his bed, destroyed by a disordered life.
The annexation became even more likely with the accession to the pontifi-
cal seat, shortly thereafter, of the energetic Urban VIII, who worked ever
more insistently on the old Duke Francesco Maria II Della Rovere – with
the result that the annexation took place with the invitation of representa-


   31
     Ibid., pp. 512–513.
   32
     Mon. Messiae, p. 6; the critical edition of the two Discorsi in the anastatic reprint-
ing of the Mon. Messiae, ed. L. Firpo (Turin: Bottega d’Erasmo, 1960), pp. 19–42.
                                                           Christian Unity    151

tives of the Pontiff to the city in 1625, even before the death of the Duke.
The episode had elicited protests and caused some bad blood, with some
harsh criticism being made of the terrible administration of the pontifical
state. In a short work of 1627, Campanella would recall having taken part
in a dispute on such questions, so as to criticize the opinion (widespread
among the people) that ‘the ecclesiastical government is very bad’ and so as
to fight against the sarcastic expression ‘priestly justice.’ Against detractors
of the papal government, Campanella committed himself to show in these
fast-moving pages (which have a certain intrepidness) how in truth the Pon-
tiff constitutes a greater guarantee of justice and liberty in comparison to
secular princes, who rule for their own personal advantage alone, without
any ethical restraint and without any real respect or interest in the well-
being of their subjects.
    In the first discourse (which is the more developed one), Campanella
maintained that the Pope guarantees a liberty greater than that of any other
monarchy or republic, in that he is able to free men from the most ruinous
forms of slavery. He is able to free men from the slavery of sin above all
else, thanks to the Papacy’s more just and rigorous tribunals, which permit
the punishment and repression of public sins as well as hidden and secret
ones. It is undeniable that even at Rome ‘there are sins and hatreds,’ but they
are not so ‘blatant as elsewhere.’ Moreover, the Papacy is more effective in
countering the great scourges that afflict humanity – such as the crimes of
war, famine, and plague. According to Campanella, at Rome one can wander
around at night ‘with gold in one’s hand,’ while elsewhere ‘he who walks in
the city after the Ave Maria is murdered.’ Thanks to the severity of the pun-
ishments in the holy city, there are fewer homicides in a year than there are
elsewhere in a month. Human life is more secure and women more protected;
moreover, women ‘cannot be killed or beaten by their husbands without great
punishment.’ The people are not oppressed by usury, nor sent by force into
war, nor suppressed by the caprices of their leaders. Justice and power are in
the hands of old men expert in government and the laws, ‘not in the hands of
young and ignorant princelings, who know neither how to serve nor how to
command those who do know.’ In any case, it is ‘better to sin by simulation
than by audacity.’ Usually, the Pope does not wage wars of conquest and trib-
utes are used for the benefit of his subjects, while in other states all resources
– all grains, wine, iron, wood, the blood itself of the subjects – are used for
the purpose of ‘venting the passions of the prince.’ Regarding hunger, people
are better nourished at Rome, where it is also true that a greater amount of
money circulates than elsewhere due to the affluence of foreigners. Regard-
ing the dangers of pestilence, remedies from the arts and sciences are sought.
At Rome, one enjoys a greater degree of liberty in comparison to the slavery
present in other governments, mainly because the sciences are cultivated and
152   Chapter 8

everyone has access to them, thanks to schools that are open to poor and rich
alike – and the most ‘virtuous’ (i.e. gifted) can reach the highest offices. Slav-
ery is the daughter of ignorance and for this reason tyrants hold their peoples
down ‘in ignorance and unarmed and in servile games so as to dominate them
more effectively and so as to lead them by the nose having turned them into a
herd of buffalo.’ Campanella maintained that ‘the nerve center of this power
is wisdom, as elsewhere it is ignorance.’ To he who objects to the prohibition
of books, he replied that the only books to be prohibited are those filled with
‘falsities and sophistical and heretical arts’ deriving from a vain curiosity and
not from the true sciences that proceed from studiousness. Even as they have
a natural foundation, the papal prohibition on doctrines such as astrology and
chiromancy derives from the fact that dangerous doctrines are prohibited, not
only false ones. It is the duty of the good pastor ‘to take away poisonous grass
and pastures from the mouths of the sheep in their care.’
    In the second short discourse, the author reaffirmed that while lay princes
use their subjects in order to realize ambitious personal projects, holding
them in ignorance ‘in order to be able to lead them by the nose like buffalo,’
the Pope ‘does not spill the blood or waste the possessions of the people in
order to acquire distant territories.’ He governs his own subjects with greater
wisdom and virtue. In response to protests of nobles who lament the exces-
sive severity of the laws (which inflict capital punishment and confiscate the
goods of he who kills someone, such that ‘noble families disintegrate and are
not able ever to indulge their desires’), Campanella warns them recalling that
‘defacing a sacred temple such as man is a very grave sin and merits the great-
est penalty’ and that desiring to ‘indulge in evil’ is characteristic of the ‘arro-
gant, and not of people who are innocent.’


                       Christianity as Universal Religion

The great quadripartite treatise that takes its title from Psalm 21.28 (Remi-
niscentur et convertentur ad Dominum universi fines terrae) and was edited
for the first time by Romano Amerio between 1939 and 1960 was one of the
works closest to Campanella’s heart. Indeed, he claimed he had almost been
forced to write it by God. It is structured as a series of eloquent speeches
directed to princes, to republics, to all the diverse sects and faiths of those four
‘nations’ of the world – the Christian nation, the Gentiles, the Jews, and the
Muslims. Having laid down the weapons of war (which are proper to beasts)
and the weapons of grammar (which are proper to sophists), they are all called
to a universal ideal assembly to discuss the true faith and are called upon to
recognize ‘the true religion’ by means of spiritual arms alone, in accordance
with a divine and not merely human logic. As the author recalled in the dedi-
cation to Paul V written towards the end of 1617 from Castel Sant’Elmo (the
                                                         Christian Unity    153

work would later also be dedicated to two successive Popes, Gregory XV and
Urban VIII), the initial inspiration for the piece went back many years ear-
lier to an exhortation from the Pope that Campanella make a better use in
the future than he had in the past of the talents that had been given to him
by God. These were words that had elicited ‘pious desires’ in Campanella’s
heart and melted his soul at the thought that the Papal majesty had deigned
to warn ‘such a small buried worm’ (tantillum vermiculum sepultum).33 From
here derived the desire to contribute to a radical reform of the sciences, in
the light of nature, and to write in a way that would prepare the arrival of
Christ as the supreme reason. Campanella wrote the text of the Reminiscen-
tur with his hopes of liberty having vanished and having been sent back into
his former cruel prison (in prioribus angustiis). Directed towards the conver-
sion of all nations, it was presented as the ‘epitome, colophon, and end’ of his
studies.34
    The treatise began with the affirmation that nothing is more natural than
the return of everything to its own beginning. The innate love of self-preser-
vation and of living forever generates in everything the irresistible desire to
be reunited with its own totality: the parts of the earth go towards the earth,
from which they are detached; all waters run towards the sea, from which they
are separated when they are deposited on mountaintops by hidden and mys-
terious means, ‘from the subterranean veins of the earth almost as if through
alembics and sponges.’ Likewise, so as to reach the celestial fire the sparks
imprisoned in the deepest subterranean cavities erupt with a violence able
to demolish mountains and whatever else might stand in their way. Driven
by such instincts of preservation all creatures, conscious of their own insuf-
ficiency, tend to return to their Creator – the ocean and origin of being. But
souls do not know God and things divine in a distinct fashion, because their
secret aspiration for the heavens is impeded by the passions of the body in
which they live. If souls desire to nourish themselves on divine notions, bodies
instead feed on ‘the flesh of the plants and the animals of the earth.’ Many
waters, separated from the sea, seem to lose their flavor as well as the path
by which they might return; many fires hide themselves in stone, in wood, in
metal, from which they are reawakened only with repeated striking and rub-
bing – but the sparks fly at once towards the sky.35
    Recollection is the renovatio (renewal) of past sensation or understanding
reawakened by something similar to those things known previously: and ‘there




   33
      Reminiscentur, I, p. 3.
   34
      Ibid.
   35
      Ibid., pp. 7–8.
154      Chapter 8

are as many memories as there are similitudes.’ It is asked whether the soul,
divine in origin, retains the mark of God. Some maintain that it is a tabula rasa.
But from the moment that it is not produced by the elements, but rather by
God, from him derive ‘the seeds of the sciences and the seeds of virtue, on the
basis of which the soul can become extremely wise, powerful, and loving.’ This
is true even if at the beginning, while completely enmeshed in the fabric of the
body, it seems not to love anything except the body itself. The waters of the sea
remember the direction of the sea, even when they are separated from it. The
heat of the sun, when it is introduced to the earth, continues to tend by instinct
towards the heavens. That is why it wants to render the earth subtle, to burn
it and drag it up with itself towards the sun. In this way, the soul knows God
through an ‘innate seminal tendency,’ and not on account of an extrinsic (illata)
knowledge that distances it not only from God but also from itself (to the point
of not knowing itself and coming to recognize itself only with effort after a long
journey).
    The history of the relationship between God and the human race is modeled
on this schema. From an initial love and reverence for God (who is understood
as a benevolent and beneficent father), men are lost into an oblivion of the
Creator as they transfer to men and to things the worship due only to him. But
after successive visitations, God recalled humanity to its common origins and
to the necessary return to unity. Thus, ‘the people of the earth, reawakened by
the preaching of the truth as the sparks of fire closed up in a stone and almost
buried in dormancy will remember their own nature thanks to the striking of
the stone and of the iron; with the stone of the hardened heart and of idola-
try abandoned, they will turn to God and begin again to raise themselves up
towards heavenly things.’36 Numerous signs indicated that the time of such a
universal remembering and return was near: celestial novelties (which do not
happen by chance and are instead a universal divine language), discovery of the
New World, indications of the arrival of the Antichrist, and the aspiration in all
humanity that ‘the will of God’ be done ‘on earth as it is in heaven.’
    After the announcement of the book’s theme and scheme, important
autobiographical sections follow in which Campanella turns to God so as to
confess his own youthful disorientation and reconstruct the most significant
steps of his own spiritual journey. It is above all to these pages that scholarly
discussion of the question of ‘conversion’ refer. With chiaroscuro touches and
in an allusive fashion, Campanella confessed having neglected precisely this
reversio to God in the years of his youth. With the abandonment of the shield
of his protection and the sword of his word, he was consigned to an unknown



   36
        Ibid., p. 10.
                                                           Christian Unity    155

enemy of his own accord, believing him a friend. Without even knowing how,
he was convinced that there is nothing better than serving the most impure
desires and pleasures. From here derived the justice of divine punishment,
which was enacted with a precise overturning of every aspect of his life:

   While I wandered in the perversity of my sense, you mired me in an abyss of
   unhappiness. Not only did you denude me of temptations and pleasures of
   the body, you also filled me with torments. You added prisons to my prison,
   so that I might learn not to love such a prison. You tortured me cruelly and
   repeatedly – nineteen years in the deepest pit with spiders, salamanders,
   scorpions, a cell of shades and in the shadow of death, enchained in poverty
   and in irons. I had not obeyed my fathers and superiors, because it seemed
   to me almost appropriate to raise myself above them. Thus did I become a
   slave to the hangman and executioner. Disdaining the cells of the saints, I
   lived in the cell of devils.… I held your temple in contempt, and I desired
   almost to cast it down and destroy it.… Until now, it was not permitted for
   me to see it and I could not even look upon the sun and the moon and all
   the temples of the sky. On this account, I envy mosquitoes, flies, animals
   (even the smallest among them) their ability to do this.37

The play of contrasts, wittingly laced with references to Psalms, proceeded
with a reference to his own wisdom and his own doctrine. He who had read
everything and written about everything presumed to reform the sciences
without first having reformed his own heart. For this reason, God had seen fit
to humiliate his pride and his presumption, depriving him of every opportu-
nity to exercise his mind. He had made him show his learning before ‘dragons
and ostriches, to whom discussions of the most elevated matters were of no
interest, and who thought that whoever is not interested in dice and cards and
vanities and other stupidities is a madman.’ Deprived of books and every-
thing, he had learned to grasp – almost ‘to touch with the hands of the intel-
lect’ – the plausibility of the most holy Trinity, the signs of which shone forth
from all things: ‘from this point on my soul recognized itself, and the body and
its chains, and with which wings one flies up to you; remembering the fullness
of your beauty, reawakened from the splendors that shine from the matter of
things, my soul yearned for union with divine things, so far away, and so close
to us.’ Campanella, the derider who had devastated with scandal and vanity
the vineyard of the church of Christ, wanted to offer himself as a parable and
example, so that others might not despair of divine mercy.38
    Within the context of this psychological and intellectual condition, Cam-
panella included eloquent appeals directed at political and religious leaders,


   37
        Ibid., pp. 23–24.
   38
        Ibid., pp. 24–25.
156   Chapter 8

so that, after overcoming conflicts and self-interests, they might once again
locate bonds of fraternity in the acknowledgement of a single God. The
appeals of the first book are directed to several recipients: the Pope and to the
Cardinals; to God, praying for pity for the human race which like a baby that
knows neither father nor mother and lives abandoned in the woods among
the beasts; to angels and also to demons, so that they might abandon their vain
arrogance; to all Christians, so that they might be true; to monks, so that they
might emerge from their cloisters under the standard of the cross so as to join
battle armed with the logic of Christ; and above all to his Dominican brothers,
the ‘dogs of the Lord,’ exhorting them not to keep quiet when they ought to
raise their voices. Appeals to the emperor and to the sovereigns of Europe,
both Catholic and non-Catholic, follow and after that an appeal to the Ger-
man nation, to which is appended an address on the beliefs of the Lutherans
and the reformers from testimony of the debate with Adami.39
    The second book (perhaps the first to be written) is given over to the sects
of the Gentiles. In using information acquired from his reading of books and
the reports of travelers and missionaries, Campanella showed a great curios-
ity for the rites, customs, and beliefs of a great diversity of peoples. Those
narratives seemed to confirm the fundamental and original unity of humanity,
which was expressed in the affinities between their ceremonies and rites, on
the one hand, and Christian ones, on the other – even if those ceremonies and
rites are subsequently condemned as forgeries and diabolical suggestions. The
appeals are directed to sovereigns and priests in distant kingdoms: in Japan,
China, India, Narsinga, Pegu, Burma, Siam, to the great Khan of Cathay and
to Monopotapa, the sovereign of a vast African realm who is also mentioned
in the Cittá del Sole.40 All the interlocutors are invited to abandon the cults of
lesser beings, of animals and men, and to give up cruel and unbecoming ritu-
als, so as to come together in universal rationality and Christian naturalness
and so as to recognize a single, infinite God who shines forth in all things and
who cares for every being. This God is the greatest being and the supreme
cause, the God from whom comes all virtue, who is every nature, and who
‘makes everything in everything.’
    The third and fourth books (which were published by Amerio as Per la
conversione degli Ebrei and Legazioni ai Momettani) are directed to the
other two great monotheistic religions, whose accusations against Christian-
ity are reported so that they might be confuted and so that the grave limits


   39
       The Epistola antilutherana, the Responsiones, and the Responsiones secundae ad
obiectiones, added at the conclusion of the first book of the Reminiscentur, pp.
107–194.
   40
      Città del Sole, p. 56.
                                                         Christian Unity    157

of their beliefs might be made clear along with the arguments that ought to
persuade them to join Christianity, which is taken to be more universal in that
it conforms to a greater degree to reason and to nature.41 Common to the two
religions is a derisiveness towards the mysteries and dogmas of Christianity,
which they hold to be impossible and unreasonable, among which the divine
Trinity, the incarnation of Christ (whose divinity was denied, so as to make him
a heretic and an impostor, and who supposedly completed his miracles thanks
to magical discoveries), the Eucharist, and the virginity of Mary. Replying to
those accusations, Campanella invited the Jews to give up the obstinacy that
rendered them certain of being the only repositories of the truth, not recog-
nizing in Christ the Messiah and the instauration of the temporal kingdom.
Above all, he beseeched them to abandon the delusions of the Talmud, on
the basis of which they looked for God ‘where there is no God, except for an
imaginary one,’ for a truth where there are only lies, for virtue where there is
only vice.42 The rabbis are accused of presumptuousness, in that they believe
themselves to be wiser than God, and in that they pretend to substitute the
Talmud for Scripture, each one opining in his own head without sense of God
or Pope, without miracles and prophecies. Even more serious is the fact that
they present an image of God that does not correspond to the God of Moses
or David: it is a God who is not capable of all things, who is ignorant of many
things, a God who prays, as if he were admitting that there was someone supe-
rior to him, a corporeal God in that he wears garments of cloth, a God who
is lazy and inept, who learns to act in the world in the course of many succes-
sive attempts and who in order to exercise himself destroys those who do not
satisfy him.
    The fourth part is made up of five addresses directed to the diverse sects
of the Muslims – to the great Turk, the Shi’a of Persia, the Arabs, the Sheriff
of Fez and Morocco, the Tartars and the Great Mongol. Amerio considered
it the weakest part of the Reminiscentur, due to the scarcity and questionable
reliability of the information and sources used by Campanella, and because he
lacked knowledge of Arabic, and also for the controversial method adopted,
which often resorted to a tone that was ‘derisive and disdainful.’ The polemic
is in fact rather sharp at many points, but the text does not lack arguments
that are of interest. As in the preceding book, the author commits himself to
replying to the most frequent accusations against Christians, which have to do
above all with the Trinity and the Eucharist. To assert that Christians worship
three gods and devour their own god is evidence of possessing a crude intel-


   41
      Per la conversione degli Ebrei (Florence, 1955); Legazioni ai Maomettani
(Florence, 1960).
   42
      Per la conversione degli Ebrei, p. 91.
158      Chapter 8

lect, one that is capable of understanding neither the unity and distinction of
the persons of the Trinity nor the powerfully uniting function of the Eucharist,
which does not consist in assimilating in ourselves the body of Christ as a food,
but rather in decanting ourselves into him, as the beloved into the beloved.
Conducting a detailed and minute analysis of the various assertions made in
the Qur’an, Campanella insisted on pointing out that if taken literally some
assertions are fabulous and impossible. In contrast, only the Sh’ia of Persia
wisely agree with an allegorical and metaphoric interpretation. Turning his
attention to the Turks in particular, he deplored their carnal understanding of
everything. The cosmological doctrines of the Qur’an are completely fantasti-
cal, while new geographical and celestial discoveries – made possible thanks
to the wondrous discovery of the telescope and thanks to the work of ‘our
friend’ (amicus noster) Galileo – shattered the Qur’an’s fictitious heavens and
seas of hyacinth, gold, and emerald. Accentuating aspects of sensuality shared
with animals (who not by chance are held to be worthy of beatitude), they
propose a morality that is not human but rather extremely vile and bestial.
It is the same morality that dominates the Islamic conception of paradise,
which is tinged with carnality. In more than one passage, Campanella noted
and strongly deplored the practices, tainted with an unbridled sexual license,
of the priests of North Africa who are called Marabouts.43 The prohibition
against science, together with the defense of the faith with arms (rather than
with reason), accentuate the tyrannical and violent aspects of the Muslim sov-
ereigns. That Muslim rulers should be tyrannical and violent ceases to sur-
prise from the moment that – and this is the most insistent and fundamental
accusation – they become imitators of a God who (just like the God imagined
by the Reformers) is quite similar to the god Maozim – that is to say, the god
of force and not goodness or wisdom. The Christian God, who has bestowed
liberty on men (and thus the possibility of meriting salvation), is not a weak
god, but rather a prudent one, good and extremely powerful, in that he adapts
himself to exigency and human limitations. Muslim princes, imitators of a god
of power, are tyrants and wolves, not pastors of the people.44 The cessation of
wars that tear to pieces the human race, the union of peoples, the inaugura-
tion of a golden age in which everything is common and men come together
‘in a single faith, a single hope, a single truth’ (just as God himself is but one)
– all these things can be realized concretely only if one presupposes univer-
sal belief in a God who is not partial or flawed, a God who genuinely draws
within him those prerequisites of universality, rationality, and conformity to
nature that are apt to herald the reunification of peoples.


   43
        Legazioni ai Maomettani, pp. 143, 157 (on the Marabouts, see also ch. 10, p. 182).
   44
        Ibid., p. 166.
