9. New Heavens


                   Science and Faith: The Apologia pro Galileo

On 13 January 1611, immediately after having read the Sidereus nuncius,
Campanella wrote an elaborate Latin letter to Galileo, the first of nine letters
to his famous contemporary that have survived. The letter expressed both
astonishment and admiration for his celestial discoveries, but added a number
of doubts, perplexities, and suggestions as well.1 In these pages – which years
later the author would have the pleasure of seeing published following
Galileo’s Dialogo,2 – are reflected emotions elicited by the extraordinary
celestial messenger and by the novelty revealed by Galileo in the heavens
thanks to the ‘wondrous instrument’ discovered by him. The emotion is a
mixture of enthusiasm and perplexity, praise and reservation. Right from
his first encounter with Galileo in his youth at Padua (which is evoked once
again here), Campanella would express constant sentiments of friendship and
esteem for him. In later years too, he would be in epistolary contact with him,
participating in discussions on his doctrines.3 In 1614 he wrote four articles,
now lost, lamenting the scientist’s adhesion to atomism:

   The manner in which you wrote last summer pains me greatly, you who have
   applied yourself to the study of floating bodies and have discovered everything
   there to be atoms, nothing other than relations between such things, etc. You
   have affirmed many propositions that you cannot prove and hold to be true
   as well as many others that you cannot uphold so easily, such that you have
   spurred your enemies in order to deny all those wondrous things that Your
   Lordship has gifted to us. I wrote four articles in response to that Discorso …




   1
      Lettere, pp. 163–169.
   2
      In a postscript to the letter to Galileo of 1 May 1632 (Lettere, p. 236), one reads: ‘I
would have liked it had you published the first letter I sent you on this matter.’
    3
      See Michel-Pierre Lerner, ‘La science Galiléenne selon Campanella,’ B&C, 1 (1995),
pp. 121–156.



G. Ernst, Tommaso Campanella, International Archives of the History                     159
of Ideas /Archives internationales d’histoire des idées 200,
DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3126-6_9, © Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2010
160    Chapter 9

   so that Your Lordship might arm his pen with a perfect mathematics and leave
   this talk of atoms for later etc.4

The spirited dialogue, which was not without disagreements, would find its
high-point in the drafting of the Apologia pro Galileo.5 The treatise (which
enjoyed a considerable circulation in the seventeenth century and helped
to connect the names of Galileo and Campanella, his ‘defender’) had been
composed in the first months of 1616, in an extremely delicate moment in
the debate on the doctrines of Copernicus, which had been openly supported
by Galileo after the Sidereus nuncius. The inquiry, opened the previous year,
into the relationships between the new astronomy and Scripture concluded
with the opinion of the inquisitorial commission of 24 February 1616, which
declared the principles of the immobility of the sun and the motion of the
earth ‘stupid and absurd, philosophically speaking.’ From the point of view of
faith, the first opinion was deemed formally heretical; the second, erroneous
or worse. In this way, the decree of the Index on 5 March was reached, in vir-
tue of which the De revolutionibus of Copernicus would be suspended from
the donec corrigatur clause, and those texts that explicitly maintained the
compatibility between the heliocentric position and Scripture were prohib-
ited. This prohibition extended to the beautiful letter of the Carmelite Paolo
Antonio Foscarini written in 1615.6 The Apologia is situated in that context,
and it took shape as an attempt to intervene in the debate in order to avoid a
condemnation that is portrayed as both wrong and ruinous. Years later, Cam-
panella would affirm having known that his text could not be taken into con-
sideration, given that it arrived in Rome too late after the verdict had already
been delivered.7 Sent to Adami, the Apologia was published in Frankfurt in


   4
      Lettere, pp. 176–177. The question of floating objects and of conceptions of
“heavy” and “light” generally, addressed in the light of the doctrines of the ancients
(Empedocles, Democritus, Plato) and in the light of the modern philosophy of mag-
netism, is discussed in Quaest. phys., XXXII, pp. 304–324; Metaphysica, part I, pp.
221–228; on that issue, see Francesco Paolo de Ceglia, ‘Campanella versus Galileo.
Una risposta metafisica alla Quaestio de Natantibus,’ Annali della Facoltà di Lettere e
Filosofia dell’Università di Bari, 40 (1997), pp. 241–267.
    5
      Apologia pro Galileo/Apologie pour Galilée, text, translation, and notes by Michel-
Pierre Lerner (Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 2001), from which I cite; there is an Italian
translation (Pisa, 2004) and an English translation – A Defence of Galileo, translated
with an introduction and notes by Richard J. Blackwell (Notre Dame, 1994).
    6
      The letter has been republished in an appendix to the edition of the Apologia
pro Galileo edited by P. Ponzio (Milan, 1997; Milan, 20022). Regarding the placing of
Copernicus on the Index in 1616, see Michel-Pierre Lerner, ‘Copernic suspendu et
corrigé sur deux decrets de la Congrégation Romaine de l’Index (1616–1620),’ Gali-
laeana. Journal of Galilean Studies, 1 (2004), pp. 21–89.
    7
      Quaest. phys., X, 4, p. 106.
                                                              New Heavens       161

1622. In that edition, there was a foreword by the editor (who, after a meeting
with Galileo, had declared himself very much in favor of the new astronomy)
and a dedicatory letter from the author addressed to the Cardinal Bonifacio
Caetani, who had been charged with carrying out the emendation of Coper-
nicus’s text.
    The Apologia was an act of great courage and intellectual honesty not
just because Campanella took up the delicate question even as he was still in
prison but also because he was not defending his own doctrines. As he would
later remind Galileo, his had been the only voice to speak out in his defence:
‘and recall that my text alone was published in your defence, and not the texts
of others.’8 His image of a living book of nature is in fact fairly different from
Galileo’s notion of a book written in the language of mathematics. Further,
he had reservations with regard to the doctrine of Copernicus (which was not
easily reconciled with the physics of Telesio), and above all with regard to the
motion of the earth, seat of the principle of cold, a principle that renders beings
heavy and immobile. Campanella wrote in defense of Galileo’s libertas philos-
ophandi and more generally in defense of the freedom of opinion of the Chris-
tian scientist, whose first right and duty is to read the book of nature. He brought
into focus with great lucidity the core of the problem, which is identified as the
marriage of Aristotelianism and theology and the undue dogmatic value con-
ferred upon Aristotle’s philosophy. Like every human doctrine, Aristotelianism
ought instead to be corrected on the basis of comparison with the book of nature
and, when it no longer corresponds to experience, it is to be abandoned, without
fearing that such a shift would have negative repercussions on theology.
    The text, which adopted the structure of a quaestio, was divided into five
chapters. The central chapter, fairly complex, furnished contents and coordi-
nates for replying in a satisfactory way in the final chapters to the anti-Galil-
ean objections listed in the first chapter and for vindicating those arguments in
Galileo’s favor as set out in the second chapter. The initial arguments against
Galileo denounced in the first place the subversive character of his thinking.
Destroying traditional doctrines that were in agreement with the principles
of theology, it was feared that such new ideas risked putting theology itself in
jeopardy. On this account, some feared that there was a discord between the
letter of some scriptural passages and the presumed heretical implication of
some of his assertions. Finally, generally speaking, his presumption of investi-
gating things that extend beyond the limits of human reason was deemed trou-
blesome. The arguments in favor of Galileo stressed that in the past renowned
theologians had welcomed the Copernican position with favor. It was amazing
that those authorities might be blind like moles, while contemporary theolo-
gians (who, what is more, are not even as famous) have more eyes than Argus.

   8
       Lettere, p. 236.
162      Chapter 9

Copernicus’s doctrine had attracted interest and agreement also from well-
regarded men of science and philosophy, and Campanella did not fail to make
an extremely audacious reference to ‘the Nolan [that is, Bruno] and others,’
who had been condemned as heretics for other doctrines, but not insofar as
they were supporters of a Copernican and Cusanian cosmology. Copernicus
and Galileo, furthermore, renewed the ancient doctrines of Pythagoras, who
was a disciple of Moses, and his followers. In that way, a buried and forgotten
truth returned resplendent: ‘sepulta veritas elucescit.’9
    The central part of the work presented the three pillars on which one ought
to found responses to such arguments. The first asserted the necessity that a
judge in such matters be in possession of the zeal of God, to the end of investi-
gating the truth with a mind free of every passion. At the same time, however,
he had to be scientifically competent, so as to avoid errors that even holy and
learned Church Fathers such as Lactanctius and Augustine had run into, when
they denied the existence of the antipodes, something that was aggravated by
having upheld false theses on the basis of appeals to Scripture.
    The second pillar – articulated in turn in several points – specified from one
side how Scripture was the bearer of a moral message, expressed in an everyday
language (beyond being the bearer of supernatural and revealed truths) that
mirrored common experience and was accessible to all as a result. On the other
side, Campanella specified how man possessed adequate instruments with
which to develop his interpretation of the book of nature ever further, and how
it was precisely on account of his cognitive capacity that man might realize his
own progressive deification. Thus, we ought to show gratitude, and not hostility,
to Galileo, in that he allows us to improve and perfect our understanding of the
work of God. It is in this part of the work that we encounter the more radical
positions with regard to the inescapable bonds between Christianity and sci-
ence, that are in a way intrinsic to Christianity itself and represent for it a con-
stitutive characteristic, insofar as they are deployments of rationality and truth.
Because it is not a partial sect but instead embraces the totality of the truth,
Christianity has nothing to fear from its progressive unfolding. Indeed, he who
forbids someone to be involved in the sciences prevents him from being truly
Christian. Persecution of he who searches for the truth is a sign of weakness and
fear on the part of someone living in error and in ignorance and someone who
fears being found out. This is something that is characteristic of the Muslims,
who ban the sciences in order to maintain puerile or fabulous beliefs and so as
to defend their lies with the sword. When they do this, they act like the tyrant,
who has an interest in rendering the people ignorant and base. Thus, those who
attack Galileo seem to be moved more by jealousy and ignorance than by love
for the truth. They do it out of the embarrassment of having to go back to their

   9
       Apologia, p. 25.
                                                              New Heavens       163

school desks like children, they who consider themselves teachers. If Christians
are called wise and rational by Christ, the Word and First Reason, he is truly
Christian who makes himself a spokesman for and disseminator of rational-
ity. Praying that he not be forced out, Campanella did not hesitate to profess
that the favor accorded to the sciences (‘approbatio scientiarum’) had been the
strongest bond keeping him within Christianity.10
    The concluding assertion of the central part insisted on the theologian’s duty
to know the entire exegetical tradition, so as not to bind the interpretation of
sacred texts to any particular philosophy in an exclusive way and instead render
himself sensitive to a multiplicity of possible meanings and interpretations.
Campanella himself would do just that when responding to arguments against
Galileo. Beyond reaffirming the full compatibility between research and faith,
he showed how on some specific points the doctrines of Pythagoras that had
been relaunched by Galileo permitted a literal interpretation of some scriptural
passages that was simpler and closer to the text than that proposed by other
doctrines, and certainly much simpler and closer to the text than interpretations
proposed by the philosophy of Aristotle. Far from being blameworthy, the fact
that Galileo was anti-Aristotelian was a sign of merit. Pronouncing prohibi-
tions and setting up obstacles to the reading of the book of nature was truly an
absurd and impious project, especially when dealing with someone who ‘speaks
soberly, following the observation of evidence, and by conjectures,’ instead of
‘out of his own mind’ (de cerebro suo) as Aristotle does.11
    Of particular interest was the response to the eighth argument on the mul-
tiplicity of worlds that seemed to renew a Pythagorean vision of the cosmos
and to bring to life again the doctrines of Philolaus on the elemental constitu-
tion of every star. As has already been recalled, in his youth Campanella had
discussed this hypothesis with Colantonio Stigliola, according to whom it was
irrational to support the notion that stars are only ‘idle fire’ (ignis ociosus) and
not worlds similar to our own instead. Campanella had responded to Stigliola’s
arguments by maintaining that to him on the contrary it seemed irrational to
multiply on other worlds the ignorance, unhappiness, deceit, and blasphemies
of our own world and that he preferred to consider the stars devoid of such
corruption and sorrow and to consider them home to angelic spirits instead.12
But the discoveries of Galileo on the irregularity of the surfaces of the moon,
the phases of Venus, and the ‘small clouds’ around the sun reopened the argu-
ment and made him doubt his former certainty – to the point that he did not
even discount the possibility that the stars, instead of being the abode of


   10
      Ibid., pp. 69–71.
   11
      Ibid., p. 91.
   12
      See ch. 2, note 9.
164     Chapter 9

hallowed spirits, were populated with inhabitants, even if they might be different
from us on account of the diversity of the environments in which they found
themselves.13 That did not, however, entail an adherence to the position of
Democritus regarding the multiplicity of worlds strewn about randomly in an
infinite space. Instead, it made him hold onto the possibility of a plurality of
systems coordinated in a unitary whole. In a subsequent letter to Galileo, he
would exhort him to discover ‘the theaters and scenes in which the eternal
intelligence represents such great games of wheels upon wheels.’14
    In the Apologia, Campanella uses incisive and tightly-knit arguments while
displaying an exceptionally remarkable hermeneutical skill – at times making
it hard for the reader to follow without getting lost in the myriad of citations
and references. He seeks to demonstrate how the union between theology and
Aristotelian philosophy (which theologians held to be necessary and indispen-
sable) is actually shaky, outdated and open to revision, while showing that this
in itself did not put theology at risk. He intended to show, on the contrary, that
precisely the opposite is true – namely, that theology would be damaged by a
stubborn and blind adhesion to a physical system that did not agree with new
data and was contradicted by new discoveries. The abandonment of Aristote-
lianism would not only not carry with it the collapse of theology, it would also
permit the recovery of a correct conceptualization of science, something that
could not but consist, precisely as it did in Galileo, in open-ended research and
in a continual reading of the infinite book of nature, which is the expression of
infinite truth and Christian rationality. From here came the invitation to Chris-
tianity to accept its calling to rationality with faith and courage.
    In September of 1616, Pietro Giacomo Failla, a disciple of the prisoner,
advised Galileo that Campanella had sent to Cardinal Caetani at Rome an
‘apology, in defense of Your Lordship’s manner of philosophizing, demon-
strating that it is not ‘against the unanimous agreement of the Church Fathers
and the Sacred Scriptures and that he who prohibits this manner of philoso-
phizing prohibits the Christian intellect from being Christian.’15 On 3 Novem-
ber, Campanella himself confirmed to Galileo that he had sent to Rome ‘a
Quaestio in which it is proved theologically that the manner of philosophizing
practiced by you is more compatible with divine Scripture than its opposite,
or at least rather more than the Aristotelian manner of philosophizing.’16


   13
      Quaest. phys., p. 99.
   14
      Letter dated 14 March 1614, in Lettere, p. 177.
   15
      Galilei, Opere, XII, p. 277.
   16
      Lettere, pp. 179–180. In the same letter, Campanella went on to lament that he
had not had a reply from Galileo; in truth, some months later, there would be a reply,
but Galileo’s letter, send to Failla, had trouble reaching its addressee: see the letter of
Fabio Colonna from Naples, dated 3 February 1617, in Galilei, Opere, XII, p. 305.
                                                                   New Heavens       165

    Many years later, in 1630, Campanella would meet Galileo in Rome. In
a letter to Peiresc (June 1636) that has recently be rediscovered, the author
hints at the contents of their discussions in Rome in order to confirm Gali-
leo’s adherence to atomism.17 Between April of 1631 and October of 1632,
Campanella would send another six letters to Galileo. The first two had a
rather formal tone, in that Campanella felt himself unjustly neglected by his
friend, who had shown and sent the manuscript (and later the printed edition
of his Dialogo) to others and not to him: ‘Your Lordship did me wrong show-
ing it to so many others and not to me, I who am more your devotee than
anyone else.…’ One year later, Campanella wrote again to the effect that
‘Signor Galileo, truly illustrious, who illuminates our century in an uncommon
fashion, it pains me that I receive your favors only rarely.… I am the one who
most esteems your works and who judges them with a judgment more puri-
fied of every passion ….’18 But in August of 1632, having received a copy of
the work, Campanella communicated to Galileo his own admiration for the
brilliant success of this ‘philosophical comedy’:

   I received Your Lordship’s Dialoghi. Everyone plays his role perfectly –
   Simplicio, for instance, as the amusement of this philosophical comedy, who
   demonstrates simultaneously the stupidity of his sect and the inconsistency
   and stubbornness of his manner of speaking.… Assuredly, there is no need
   to envy Plato. Salviati is a great Socrates who helps in giving birth even more
   than giving birth himself and Sagredo is a free spirit who, without being pol-
   luted by the schools, judges everything with a great deal of wisdom.19

Yet only about two weeks later Campanella shared with his friend the first
alarming news on the intensification of threats and dangers with regard to
his work: ‘to my great disgust, I have heard that irate theologians are uniting
and moving to prohibit the Dialoghi of Your Lordship, and among them there
is no one who knows mathematics and recondite things.’ Campanella added
that he was ‘afraid of the violence of people with hardly any knowledge’ and
suggested to him that the Grand Duke ask Rome to nominate as his defend-
ers the Abbot Benedetto Castelli and himself. The extraordinary thing is that
Galileo accepted the proposal. Even if he did not share some of the scien-
tific doctrines of Campanella, he without doubt ought to have appreciated
Campanella’s theological competence and sincere attachment. But the pro-
posal was quickly rejected by Rome, as the Ambassador Francesco Niccolini
informs us in a letter to Secretary Andrea Cioli. He writes that the request

   17
      Lettere 2, p. 116: ‘e dal discorrer c’ha fatto meco in Roma’ (‘from discussions that
he had with me in Rome’); see ch. 1, note 14.
   18
      Letters dated 26 April 1631 and 1 May 1632, in Lettere, pp. 232, 235–236.
   19
      Ibid., p. 240.
166   Chapter 9

advanced was impossible to grant because Campanella ‘had written a pretty
similar work that had been prohibited and because it was not permissible that
a guilty man such as Campanella should defend him.’20
   The situation worsened quickly, eliciting in Campanella the deepest bit-
terness together with a recognition of the necessity of a difficult resignation:
‘I did what I could to be of use to you … but it was not acknowledged.…
Let us agree with divine will, and let us believe that if natural things are all
made with art and infinite wisdom then the same is true of moral and political
things, even if to us it seems like a reverse: and let us be children of obedience.
When the blood cools, I will tell you more.’ In the final letter, a sense of impo-
tence and defeat emerged as a result of not being able to do anything more
for his friend: ‘may Your Lordship forgive the weakness born of long worries
and slanders; know that men aim not at truth, but at delighting and excusing
themselves by denouncing us.’21


                             Philosophy and Theology

Some years before the Apologia, Campanella had redacted another important
quaestio that was in many respects similar and complementary to the Apologia
– namely, the De gentilismo non retinendo. On account of its complex and radi-
cal confrontation with Aristotelian philosophy, combined with its treatment of
the relationship between philosophy and theology, it would be reprinted in
1637 as the opening to the Paris edition of the Philosophia realis (after first
being published the year before), with the title Disputatio in prologum instau-
ratarum scientiarum. The text constituted an introduction to and foundation for
Campanella’s general project of an overall reform of the sciences.22
     The work is not very large, but it is very dense, and we shall highlight
 some of its essential points. So as to respond to the question of whether
 it is permissible (and in some respects necessary) to found a new philosophy

    20
       Galilei, Opere, XIV, p. 389. On Benedetto Castelli, see the entry by Augusto De
Ferrari, in DBI, 21 (Rome, 1978), pp. 686–690.
    21
       Lettere, pp. 242–245.
    22
       The 1637 edition, used here, was preceded by that of 1636; that edition had a
different title, by which the work is better known, De gentilismo non retinendo, in the
volume which included the Atheismus triumphatus and other texts. The later edition
constitutes a revised and amplified text in comparison with the earlier one, after the
publication of which Campanella became aware of condemnation of the texts of Aris-
totle at Paris. See John M. Headley, ‘Tommaso Campanella and Jean de Launoy: The
Controversy over Aristotle and his Reception in the West,’ Renaissance Quarterly, 43
(1990), pp. 529–550. A recent adjustment of the relationship between theological and
scientific truth in Michel-Pierre Lerner, ‘Vérité des philosophes et vérité des théol-
ogiens selon Tommaso Campanella o. p.,’ Freiburger Zeitschrift für Philosophie und
Theologie, 48 (2001), pp. 281–300.
                                                          New Heavens      167

and in order to repel the arguments that such a refounding of philosophy
was unnecessary (in that we can already make use of the philosophy of the
ancients and in particular the philosophy of Aristotle), Campanella appealed
to the disposition of the eighth session of the Second Lateran Council as a
point of reference. Accentuating the fact that no truth can be contradictory
to truth, the Council rejected any possibility of a schism between true theo-
logians and true philosophers and exhorted a healing of the ‘infected roots’
of pagan doctrines and the founding of a new accord between philosophy
and theology. Campanella agreed fully with the rejection of any notion of a
double truth. Convinced that grace perfects and does not destroy nature, he
maintained that illuminated by grace Christians could achieve results greater
than those of the ancients – not only in theology but also on moral and natural
questions. From here there derived the necessity of undertaking and carrying
forward a general project of refounding the sciences, so as to emend them,
improve them, and make them progress in the light of the two books of God –
the one embedded in Nature, the other written in Scripture. As he reaffirmed
on numerous occasions, this had been and would remain the project of his
entire life.
    The remarkable inventions of the moderns (from the art of printing to
the discovery of new terrestrial and celestial worlds), together with the ren-
ovation of the sciences in all fields (from astronomy to the philosophy of
nature), proved that it is necessary to correct the errors of the ancients and
to go beyond the results achieved by them. Likewise, these things proved that
the Christians (who took Christ, the wisdom of God, as their master) can
and ought to work without begging from the sciences of antiquity. But in the
schools it happened instead that the masters taught the doctrines of Aristotle
and his commentators, which it turned out were profoundly different from
the doctrines of Christianity. Students thus learned a mass of false doctrines:
that the individual soul was mortal and only that soul which was universal
and the same for all men was immortal; that the world is eternal and not
created by God; that heaven and hell do not exist, nor as a consequence did
the rewards and punishments of another life; and that God did not know and
did not care for the inferior world of men. The doubts that are planted in the
minds of those who learn in this way are reinforced by the cold confutations
of those doctrines provided by their masters, which induces the suspicion that
they are declared false only on account of fear of the Inquisition. He who
then behaves in an immoral way or commits crimes hopes and desires in his
heart that the doctrines of the ancients are true, so as not to have to settle
accounts with God. The distorted will ‘makes arguments appear true that are
more in accordance with their passions.’23 The most noxious upshot of this

   23
        Disputatio, f. B iiv.
168      Chapter 9

way of thinking is Machiavellism, which is ‘the root of all evil’ and holds reli-
gion to be a mere political expedient utilized by princes on account of reason
of state. Machiavellism is a doctrine that spreads like the plague, occupying
the thrones of sovereigns and the leaders of the people. From here comes the
so much more urgent necessity of ousting false doctrines and refounding true
ones, in that ‘it is impious to extinguish the light of our minds and to continue
to utilize the smoking torch of the pagans.’ Campanella exhorts Christians to
light the lamp of the sciences ‘in the light of the sun of divine wisdom.’
    The strong call to correct the fallacious books of men in the light of the
original book of nature is made as an exhortation to emancipate oneself from
human authorities, so as to open oneself up to new doctrines and discover-
ies that derive from a correct reading of nature and are not to be rejected
but rather evaluated with attention and welcomed. St. Jerome suffered at the
hands of many bishops, who accused him of arrogance and criticized him heav-
ily for having dared to make a new translation of the sacred texts. Columbus
was held to be a heretic, because he proposed to find the antipodes that had
been denied by St. Augustine and Lactantius. Likewise, the Bishop of Salz-
burg was condemned as a heretic by a national synod for having upheld this
opinion, which today has been proved true. Experience had proved Columbus
and the Bishop right and so many truths that had previously been hidden
had now been made manifest: ‘thus it is a heresy to assert that Aristotle has
exhausted truth, and that we cannot philosophize beyond his limits; it is a
heresy to prefer a heart immersed in the shadows to those illuminated by the
Gospel.’24
    On the basis of such presuppositions, Campanella affirmed forcefully that
on some points it is necessary to reject the authority of Aristotle, while on
other points he remains useful. Those doctrines that are evidently in conflict
with Christian principles are rejected without reservation. These included posi-
tions on the eternity of the world or the denials of the immortality of the soul,
providence, and the rewards and punishments of the afterlife. Also to be con-
demned is the denial of angels and demons, the possibility of prophetic dreams,
and in general the radically naturalistic interpretation of prophecy explained
in the light of medical doctrines (such as the notion that the Sibyls and the
prophets were affected by melancholic humors and made their divinations in a
kind of madness). As he would reaffirm in the Apologia pro Galileo, Campanella
emphasized how there is no uniform adherence to Aristotelianism in the Chris-
tian tradition; he was happy to recall multiple discordant voices and the vari-
ous adoptions of Plato, Socrates, and Pythagoras. Holy men such as Vincent
Ferrer and Serafino of Fermo came to define the Peripatetic philosophy as the


   24
        Ibid., f. B ivv.
                                                               New Heavens       169

phial of the anger of God turned upon the waters of Christian wisdom, ‘which
became bitter like absinthe.’ It is from such doctrines that the greater part of
the theological and philosophical heresies took their origin, from the Mono-
physitists to the Arians, from the partisans of Gilbert de la Porrée to Amalric
of Bène, to the rationalism of Abelard, who passed even the Scriptures and the
Church Fathers through the sieve of Aristotle. As has already been noted, it is
from here that the political doctrines considering religion as an ars regnandi
and the laws as an imposture instituted by the cunning have their origin. As
the Spanish theologian Melchior Cano had also noted, one of the most dan-
gerous fruits of Aristotelianism is precisely Machiavellism, which is the ‘root
of sin and of the insolence of princes, of the sedition of the people, and of the
audacity to give birth to heresies in order to gain power.’25 In order to combat
what seemed to him an undue involvement and authority of Aristotelian phi-
losophy in the schools of Christianity, Campanella did not hesitate to recourse
to the most disparate sources, including the eccentric Ortensio Lando’s Para-
dossi. In the twenty-ninth chapter of that work (titled “That Aristotle was not
only an ignorant man, but also the worst man of his time”), he undertook an
unscrupulous desecration, both philosophical and ethical, of the philosopher.26
Denouncing the philosophical errors and the immoral conduct of Aristotle,
he deplored the fact that ‘we madmen worship him like an idol,’ putting faith
in him ‘like an oracle,’ and he invited Christians to wake themselves from this
dangerous dream, emphasizing the extremely grave risks of abandoning the
sacred texts ‘in order to attend to the dreams of this oaf’:

   then Martin Luther turns up without this taste for Aristotle, without recourse
   to the formality of Scotus; armed only with the Holy Scriptures and his own
   understanding of them, he put to flight all those reverend Aristotelian theolo-
   gians from Leipzig, Louvain, and Cologne – making them recognize how great
   an error it had been to leave the grain in order to eat the acorn.27

The delicate problem of the reasons for the acceptance of such doctrines in
the schools, and for the marriage between Aristotelianism, Thomism, and
Scholastic theology took shape in the context of this ample and radical riposte
to Aristotelian doctrines, which is already delineated in the early works. In
that regard, Campanella completed a drastic redimensioning of the primacy


   25
       Ibid., f. C iir.
   26
       Campanella did not cite the author of the anonymous Paradossi, most probably
for reasons of prudence with regard to an author who had been placed on the Index
and who was highly suspect in the eyes of the ecclesiastical authorities.
    27
       Ortensio Lando, Paradossi, anastatic reprint from the Lyon edition, 1543, ed.
by E. Canone and G. Ernst (Pisa-Rome, 1999), p. 206; modern edition by A. Corsaro
(Rome, 2000), p. 253f.
170   Chapter 9

of Aristotle and intended to show how the decision to favor Aristotle resulted
from a particular historical juncture. Thanks to the Arabs, the Aristotelian
texts were the only ones to have survived in an age that had known the loss of
the books of the ancients and the destruction of its libraries. Beginning in the
age of Charlemagne, the schools reopened after the long silence that followed
the invasions of the barbarians. With the texts of Plato lost, the only surviving
texts were those of Aristotle, whose fortune was thus connected with a chance
historical circumstance and was not a function of their intrinsic excellence.
Moreover, the insertion of Aristotle into the curricula of the universities was
not so peaceful and consensual as had been supposed. Campanella specified
and was happy to list every condemnation of Aristotelian works on the part of
the Sorbonne or on the part of the Pontiffs. Regarding Aquinas, Campanella
appreciated the efforts that went into his commentary of Aristotle and the
amendments and criticisms he made to his philosophy. But the attempt to
find an accord between that philosophy and Christian theology was in certain
respects so difficult that it brought upon him accusations of having misunder-
stood or deformed the genuine significance of the texts of the Greek philoso-
pher. Aristotelian philosophy was thus introduced into the Christian world
casu diro (‘due to an unfortunate circumstance’) as, in the age of Antiochus in
the schools of Jerusalem, Greek philosophy had taken the place of the doctrine
of Moses, redeemed later by the Maccabee brothers. Later still, it had become
difficult to oust it on account of the convergence of many factors – among
which habit, ignorance, and a Machiavellian impiety that had a vested interest
in maintaining it. In any case, it was heretical and impious to assert that theol-
ogy had its foundation and confirmation in that philosophy. One ought not to
recourse to Aristotle either as an arbiter or as a judge. In general, one ought
not to chain the interpretation of the sacred texts exclusively to any specific
philosophy. Instead, one ought now and again to make use of those doctrines
that were more in agreement with the divine books.
   With regard to Aquinas, he was not a Peripatetic but instead a Christian
philosopher who was in fundamental accord with the Church Fathers, who
were themselves often hostile to the philosophy of Aristotle. On various occa-
sions, Thomas did not hesitate to dissent from the texts upon which he was
commenting, sharing fully the position that it is necessary and useful to take
those aspects from every philosophy that are positive and that are in accord
with Christian wisdom. In his attempt to draw a clear distinction between
Aquinas and Aristotle, Campanella intended above all to maintain that the
adoption of anti-Aristotelian positions did not necessarily imply pitting
oneself against Thomas. So as to defend his own positions (which were at
once informed by a decided anti-Aristotelianism that had been very clear
from the years of his youth and by an acceptance of Thomism if it were
                                                                     New Heavens        171

correctly understood), Campanella spoke of the grave trial of his youth prior
to that related to the conspiracy in an important autobiographical passage. In
that trial, he had been called upon by the Holy Office to defend himself with
respect to the anti-Aristotelian doctrines espoused in the books that had been
withdrawn deviously at Bologna in the autumn of 1592. In particular, he was
called upon to speak on the doctrine of the Senso delle cose. When he had spo-
ken, the commissioners, having listened and evaluated his arguments and his
explanations, not only did not reprove him in any way, but even praised him:

   The most learned fathers have not punished me, nor have their reproached
   me orally, nor have they ordered me to desist from confuting Aristotle, nor
   have they done so with arguments. On the contrary, the fathers, particularly,
   the Cardinals Santori, Bernerio, Sarnano, have praised me for having redeemed
   the fathers from the offenses of the pagans. I cannot understand why now others
   see things differently: let them go and see for themselves the records of the trial.28

Telesio, for his part, had not been condemned on account of being an anti-Aris-
totelian, but rather because some points of his thought turned out to be liable
to deeper investigation. In any case, he had not been subject to a total ban of
his work; only some treatises were forbidden donec expurgentur. With regard
to the accusations against the novatores, Campanella believed it was neces-
sary to make some opportune distinctions. Rejecting the coloring of that term
with exclusively negative connotations, Campanella asserted forcefully that not
every novelty in the state and in the church ought to be liable to condemnation:
‘rather, all the new doctrines please and render admirable both the state and
religion, and they make it so that subjects turn more willingly to their duties;
from foreigners they elicit admiration and obedience.’29 When he discovered
the new world that had been denied by saints, Columbus not only did not abase
them, but rather ‘embellished and exalted governments and the Christian sci-
ences,’ just as Galileo had done in discovering new stars that previously had


   28
        For this episode, the 1636 edition gives 1595, while the later edition gives 1698
(clearly erroneously). Here, as in the passage from the Defensio (see ch. 2, note 50),
Campanella is referring to the conclusion of third trial. It is important to remember that
Cardinal Sarnano died at the end of 1595. I quote here the Latin passage from the 1637
edition, putting in square brackets the passages omitted in the 1636 edition: ‘Et quidem
anno 1698 [sic] interrogatus ego a Patribus in S. Officio de opinionibus quas contra
Aristotelem scripseram [in libris furto mihi sublatis datisque S. Officio ab impiis sciolis,]
et praecipue de sensu rerum, [pro quo Apologiam feci postmodum] nec reprehensione
vocali nec praecepto recedendi ab impugnando Aristotelem, nec rationibus Patres doc-
tissimi me obiurgarunt, sed laudarunt, [praecipue cardinalis Sanctorius, et Bernerius, et
Sarnanus], quod PP. SS. ab iniuria Gentilium vendicarem. Nescio cur nunc alii murmu-
rant scioli? Videant processus in S. Officio et meas opiniones ibi examinatas.’
     29
        Disputatio, f. E ir.
172      Chapter 9

been unknown. In the same way, one could not call the person who ‘introduces
truths that are not damaging to the old truths’ (as founders of religions orders
do) a novator in a negative sense. Innovators that are worthy of condemnation
are those who ‘come up with new things in order to destroy old well-established
ones.’ Heretics and the founders of sects constitute the most renowned exam-
ples of such bad innovation. But he who reforms the sciences in the light of the
two divine books puts himself forward as a restorer (instaurator) of the sciences.
He is to be praised in that, revealing the errors of the sectarians, he presents
himself as a liberator of Christian minds from the tyranny of the pagans. On the
contrary, they are lazy and vile who content themselves with putting into circu-
lation a well-worn money in place of a genuine currency minted with gold. One
is dealing here with inert men, lovers only of their own comfort and traitors
to the state. These are men endowed with servile minds, who are ignoble and
convinced that we must overtly and secretly make use of monetary currency
(even to the point of falsifying it and coining it with new brass) to the detriment
of the state. They reject the reformers who use ancient gold and they reject the
best of the fathers. Their abuse is similar to that of the gentile philosophers who
thought they had to uphold false gods against their own consciences.30
    In response to the final question of the treatise (whether it be permissible
to swear allegiance to the words of a philosopher), Campanella reaffirmed
that the sole master is Christ, who is the wisdom of God. He reaffirmed that
God alone is truthful, while every man has a limited and partial understand-
ing, and argued that he who prefers a single thinker and disdains all the rest
deprives the church of its defenders. Swearing allegiance to a single philoso-
pher is a heresy, a perjury, an impiety in that one is closing the door to con-
tinual improvement. Thus, chaining minds to a single book is not useful for
the republic, because it weakens it and deprives it of new discoveries. Every
day the experience of new things enlarges and renews the sciences, on account
of which it is necessary to favor a ‘studium multiplex,’ without which there
would never have been such wondrous inventions.


                                    Astrology

In the extremely bounteous corpus of Campanella’s works, we also encounter
a treatise containing six books called the Astrologia. This was an area that
was the object of constant reflection on Campanella’s part, after a period of
youthful skepticism that he described in the Senso delle cose: ‘I was very much
against astrologers and wrote against them in my youth, but my studies made
me conscious that astrologers say many true things.’ In a famous letter to


   30
        Ibid., f. E iv.
                                                                    New Heavens   173

Monsignor Querenghi, Campanella drew a comparison between himself and
Pico, recalling that the Count of Mirandola ‘found fault with the astrologers
for not having aimed at experience, just as I found fault with them when I was
nineteen years old; but afterwards I saw much wisdom lodged in the midst of
their many idiocies.’31 When he made reference to the skepticism of his youth,
Campanella was alluding to the digression on astrology in the third dispute
of the Philosophia sensibus demonstrata and to the criticism of those astrolo-
gers who ‘thought that they could easily escape reason and to take refuge in
occult powers, with which they can cover their errors and confound the minds
of men.’32 Later on, and perhaps due to the friendship with Giovan Vincenzo
della Porta and other Neapolitan ‘mathematicians,’ Campanella acquired spe-
cific competences in astrology, demonstrating a great interest in individual
horoscopes as well as in those celestial doctrines that connect astral events
with terrestrial developments.
    Prophetic and political themes were connected, and, as has been seen in
the first declarations immediately after his arrest in the attempted conspiracy,
he emphasized his own interest in ‘those things that yield signs of the future,’
and recalled the conversations that he had had at Naples with Nicolantonio
Stigliola, Giulio Cortese, and Giovan Paolo Vernaleone.33 Both the aspects of
astrology – the individual and the general – are then recalled in connection
with the final lines of The City of the Sun, where the author had emphasized
that the astral beliefs of the Solarians did not conflict with the freedom
of the will. As a confirmation of the continued existence of liberty even in
the context of celestial influence, he evoked two things. On the one hand, he
evoked the terrible torture he had recently suffered: if an extreme physical
ordeal is not enough to dent the freedom of the will, so much the less could
a much weaker and more distant conditioning that was operated by the stars
do it, given that only he who follows more the senses than reason is really
subject to the stars. On the other hand, he showed how in the recent past,
persons such as Ignatius of Loyola, Martin Luther, and Hernàn Cortéz had
been born under the influences of analogous astral arrangements. These were
individuals who were in some way linked by the impulse for renewal, even if
in terms of the diversity of their situations and contexts they were very distant
one from another:




   31
      Senso delle cose, p. 226; letter dated 8 July 1607 in Lettere, p. 134.
   32
      See ch. 1.1.
   33
      Dichiarazione, p. 102; see ch. 5.1.
174     Chapter 9

   One knows this – that they [the Solarians] subscribe to the liberty of the
   will. And they say that, if in forty hours of torment a man does not let slip
   that which he has resolved to keep to himself, much less can the stars, which
   exercise their influence from afar, force him to do it. Because in sense
   changes are made very subtly, he who follows sense more than reason is
   subject to the influence of the stars. Whence it is that the constellation that
   drew infectious vapors from the cadaver of Luther, also drew odorous
   fumes of virtue from our Jesuits who existed in his time, as well as from
   Hernàn Cortéz who spread Christianity into Mexico in the same age.34

An eloquent confirmation of his interest in worldly astrology, which was based
on the new information provided in the system of Copernicus (who is referred
to as ‘sagacissimus,’ ‘vir admirabilis’), is prominent in the Prognosticum, which
had been drafted on the occasion of the great conjunction of 24 Decem
ber 1603. Starting from that date, and for the next 200 years, the conjunctions
of the greater planets, Jupiter and Saturn, would be found in the signs of fire,
beginning with Sagittarius. In the preceding 200 years they had been situated
in the trine of the signs of water, dominated by Venus and by the moon. This
was to have brought with it, among other things, the triumph of the Muslims
and the dominion of female figures, facts that are recalled in The City of the
Sun. The return of the conjunctions in the trine of fire (which was the same
situation that had presided over the birth of Christ and the empire of Charle-
magne) announced a profound political and religious upheaval. Campanella
looked with great emotion upon the astral event, which was expected precisely
on the day of the birth of Christ. He composed a number of prophetic sonnets
as well as the Prognosticum, which would be added as a final chapter to the
Articuli prophetales.35 Among the changes he expected, Campanella foresaw
great advances in the sciences, new discoveries and inventions, as a result of
the particular positioning of Mercury. He would bring this to Galileo’s atten-
tion in the closing of his great Latin letter written immediately after having
read the Sidereus nuncius. In a subsequent letter of March 1614, announcing
to Galileo the completion of the astrological treatise, Campanella rebuked his
friend for the contradiction between his declared ‘skepticism’ (on the basis of
which he rejected an astrological consultation for his own health problems,
declaring that he did not believe in it) and the precise astrological allusions
present in the dedicatory letter to Cosimo II contained in the Sidereus nun-
cius, where the excellent qualities of the Grand Duke were put in relation to
the felicitous positioning of the ‘very benign star of Jupiter’ in his horoscope.36


   34
      Città del Sole, pp. 58–59.
   35
      The Prognosticum thus would not be numbered among the lost writings: see Art.
proph., pp. xxxvii–xl, 260–300.
   36
      Art. proph., p. 278; Lettere, p. 169.
                                                                     New Heavens        175

Campanella emphasized that, if such references to the influence of planets
were only affected and were the function of an encomiastic and courtly praise,
devoid of any internal conviction, then they ought to be avoided, since ‘it
is not permissible for Your Lordship to use false opinions that are believed
only by the vulgar.’ He therefore went on to admonish him, bidding him not
to disdain a doctrine that was without doubt ‘full of fallacies’ but that also
contained ‘extremely divine things’ if the proper distinctions with regard to
various levels of certainty regarding contents were taken into account.37
    The six books of the Astrologia dealt with the foundational assumptions
of astrological doctrine: from the enunciation of basic doctrinal principles
to previsions of general events; from indications on climates and seasons to
true and proper horoscopes, to which the fourth book was dedicated; from
the calculation of the times of celestial events to the problem of ‘elections’
– that is to say, the evaluation of opportune moments for executing the most
advantageous decisions.38 Campanella’s long acquaintance with the compila-
tion and interpretation of nativities is evident in the text. In these pages we
come across many references to famous personalities and to their horoscopes:
Emperor Rudolf II, whose decline and whose end are related to the appear-
ance in 1607 of a comet in the sign of Leo, his ascendant sign; Pope Paul V,
whose extremely difficult birth is recalled and whose clash and reconcilia-
tion with Venice are reread in the light of celestial positionings; the Duke of
Nocera, irascible, arrogant, martial on account of the positioning of Aldebaran,
whose fleshy reddishness was so changeable on account of the moon that ‘no
painter was able to complete a faithful portrait of him’; Francesco Caracciolo,
favored during his rise in society by an unusual concentration of planets that
would also ironically bring about his sudden demise. In these pages, one also
encounters Campanella’s companions and friends: Dionisio Ponzio, who died
a violent death far from his homeland; the faithful Tobias Adami, noted for his
long voyages; or Giovanni Alfonso Borelli, who was loved like a son and who
Campanella sought to protect from a dangerous positioning of Mars.39
    In a magisterial reconstruction of the context in which the letter to Ottavio
Sammarco of 1614 was situated, Giorgio Fulco demonstrated the tight web of
contacts that connected Naples (the ‘Siren jailer’) to the illustrious prisoner,

    37
       Lettere, p. 177. For the relationship to Galileo with regard to astrological issues,
see Germana Ernst, ‘Aspetti dell’astrologia e della profezia in Galileo e Campanella,’
in Novità celesti e crisi del sapere, ed. P. Galluzzi (Florence, 1983), pp. 255–266 (then in
Religione, pp. 237–254; an English transl. in Culture and Cosmos, 7 (2004), pp. 21–36).
    38
       For the De fato siderali vitando, added at press as a seventh book, see ch. 11.2.
    39
       Astrologia, pp. 1180, 1177, 1207, 1223, 1263–1264, 1270, 1277, 1336. I addressed these
issues in ‘Vocazione profetica e astrologia in Tommaso Campanella,’ in La città dei
segreti. Magia, astrologia e cultura esoterica a Roma (XV–XVIII), ed. F. Troncarelli
(Milan, 1985), pp. 136–155 (and subsequently in Religione, pp. 19–34).
176    Chapter 9

who was the object of curiosity and admiration during visits from foreigners
and famous persons. Sammarco, a young writer on political subjects, had writ-
ten to Campanella requesting an astrological consultation for a friend. The
prisoner replied, but in his response he did not hold back from chastising the
interlocutor for supposedly grave offensiveness with respect to his person and
above all with respect to his books.40 The most complete example of Campan-
ella’s expertise in the interpretation of births is set before us in the horoscope
compiled for the young Flemish Philibert Vernat, imprisoned at Naples by
the extremely suspicious Viceroy, the Duke of Ossuna, who believed him to
be a hired killer sent by Venice. Luigi Firpo described this horoscope as ‘the
complete … practical demonstration of the theoretical teachings indicated in
the Astrologicorum.’41
   Campanella set himself the task of liberating astrology from the supersti-
tions of the Arabs, so as to refound it as a natural and conjectural doctrine
that would be compatible with Christian positions, a project that we see set
out in the introductory pages of the text. In the first place, this was a mat-
ter of separating astrology from that mass of useless (nugaces) doctrines,
towards which the human mind is also irresistibly attracted. If the human
desire to know the future is in itself positive, in that it is one of the ways of
indicating his own participation in divinity, it can also become an illusory
and ruinous passion if it is not corrected and ruled by a superior reason
and if man, forgetful of the Prime Cause, begins to prostrate himself before
secondary and instrumental causes. Neither idolatrous nor demonic, astrol-
ogy must always be attentive to correspondences between stars and nature,
cautious in its methods of investigation (for only a few cases are genuinely
‘demonstrative,’ whereas most must be reasoned probabiliter or conjectur-
ally), and aware that events depend on a multiplex concourse of causes.
Astrology practiced in this mode is not unworthy of the name of ‘science,’
and only he who does not respect its natural limits falls into superstition and
risks falling into diabolical deceit.
   With regard to the most prickly problem (namely, the influence of the stars
on the free choices of man), Campanella kept his distance from deterministic
positions, reasserting the liberty of the human will in a passage that alludes
to the tortures he had suffered: ‘Man is so free that, if he does not so will it,

    40
       See Giorgio Fulco, ‘Il fascino del recluso e la Sirena carceriera: Campanella,
Ottavio Sammarco e Napoli in una scheggia di carteggio (dic. 1614),’ B&C, 2 (1996),
pp. 33–56; the text of the letter can also be found in Lettere 2, pp. 65–68.
    41
       Firpo, Ricerche, p. 151. For the text of the horoscope, see Luigi Firpo, ‘Un inedito
autografo campanelliano (Calculus nativitatis Domini Philiberti Vernati),’ Atti della R.
Accademia delle Scienze di Torino, vol. LXXIV, tomo II (1938–1939), pp. 286–305 (in
truth, as Firpo himself would later indicate, the text is not autograph except in parts).
                                                              New Heavens       177

he cannot be beaten by any torment or death. How much less of a threat,
then, are the stars that do not exert an influence that is so atrocious? Even if
they burn the body they do not succeed in dominating the will.’42 In truth,
the question was complex and required an entire series of distinctions and
specifications. Going back to Albert the Great and St. Thomas, Campanella
affirmed that the will of man is subject to the stars – but not directe and only
per accidens. The sky and the stars influence the body and the spiritus, which
carries the affections thus received to the incorporeal soul infused by God
and which can choose to consent or instead oppose itself to the solicitations
of the passions. If, as in to a famous astrological aphorism, ‘the wise man will
dominate the stars,’ it can also be said that the astrologer often hits the mark
when making his predictions, because men, in most cases, indulge sensuous
inclinations rather than making rational choices.


                                  Celestial Signs

In the final months of 1618, unusual celestial phenomena appeared: the ‘beam’
of November (a celestial body with an elongated form, like a spear, a sword, or
a pen) and above all a spectacular comet (with a tail that extended for more
than 40°) that would remain visible for several weeks. The appearances would
not fail to elicit the most lively emotions both among the learned and among
ordinary people. As Virginio Cesarini wrote on 1 December from Rome, ‘the
celestial novelties to be seen in recent days in the heavens have awoken men,
even those who are not curious; even the sleepiest and laziest people in the city
of Rome have forced themselves to rise up from bed.’ Cesarini himself, not-
withstanding the precarious condition of his health, had not gone to bed dur-
ing the previous night, despite the bitter cold, so as to observe the ‘extremely
clear heavens cleansed by a powerful northerly wind.’43
   Since this concerned the appearance of major celestial phenomena after
the invention of the telescope, there was a lively expectation that Galileo
would make a pronouncement on the event, and he was asked by many
to do so, both in Italy and from abroad. Francesco Stelluti wrote to Gali-
leo on Christmas day from Acquasparta (where he was as a guest of Prince
Federico Cesi) and informed him of the observations of the comet through
the telescope and the discussions about it. As he related, ‘the new celestial
appearances of the beam and the comet have provided for the discussion and
speculation of many, and particularly for he who is able to observe it minutely.…’


   42
       Regarding the torture, see ch. 5, pp. 80–81. Giordano Bruno had been burnt on
the stake in 1600.
    43
       Galilei, Opere, XII, p. 422.
178     Chapter 9

He solicited the opinion of his interlocutor: ‘but we expect with greater reason
to hear something about it from Your Lordship, which would be extremely
welcome to all.’44 But Galileo, kept in bed by an attack of arthritis, could not
complete any observations. Only the next year, after the publication of the
De tribus cometis (a work published anonymously, but written by the Jesuit
Orazio Grassi), would he be induced to take part in the dispute that would
culminate in 1623 with the publication of the Saggiatore.45
    Rather surprisingly, Campanella was among those who observed the comet.
As he himself informs us, the conditions of his detention during this period
were somewhat more lenient than they had been previously. He opened a
letter from that time with the assertion that ‘for three months I have found
myself outside the lake of Jeremiah half free in the Castel Nuovo.’ He was
able to observe both the beam and the comet between 25 November and 2
December, and hurried to set down a discourse and send it to the Viceroy. The
Duke of Ossuna,46 who served as viceroy at the time, had taken an ambivalent
attitude towards the prisoner but showed a certain propensity towards the
possibility of giving him his much-desired freedom. At the same time, Cam-
panella already and yet again foresaw set-backs and difficulties. As he wrote
to the Duke of Mantua, ‘[the Viceroy] promises freedom and other graces, but
these things are continually deferred.’ Likewise, he wrote to Giovanni Fabri in
Rome that ‘this promise does not seem likely to be fulfilled.’47 On 22 December,
the piece was sent to the Pontiff in the form of an epistolary tract.
    The first reflections are of a prophetic nature. The work displays conspicu-
ous similarities to the Articuli prophetales, particularly in those chapters (the
fifth, the sixth, and the seventh) that set out a prophetic interpretation of
astronomical facts, examining the various doctrines concerning the age of the
world and comparing the observations of the astronomical tradition of the
past with those of most recent astronomers, so as to identify signs announc-
ing the approach of the end of times. In the years that followed, Campanella
would deepen his own more properly scientific opinion on the comet in the
twenty-fourth Quaestio of the Physiologia. There, he would take up the theo-
ries of authors such as Tycho Brahe, Telesio, Santucci, and Galileo, for the


   44
       Ibid., pp. 430–431.
   45
       The treatise De tribus cometis anni MDCVIII disputatio astronomica (Latin text
and Italian translation) was published by O. Besomi and M. O. Helbing in Galileo
Galilei and Mario Guiducci, Discorso sulle comete (Rome-Padua, 2002); the same scholars
are responsible for the recent edition of Galileo’s Saggiatore (Rome-Padua, 2005).
    46
       Pedro Tellez Giron y Guzmàn, third Duke of Ossuna (1574–1624), was Viceroy of
Naples from 1616 to 1620; see Firpo, Ricerche, p. 48ff, and also ‘Cinque sonetti inediti di
Tommaso Campanella,’ ed. G. Ernst, B&C, 1 (1995), pp. 13–14, 19–21.
    47
       Lettere 2, pp. 70, 72.
                                                                   New Heavens        179

purpose of evaluating the most discussed aspects of the question – namely, the
nature of comets, their proper place, and their motion.48 But even before such
astronomical considerations, he reflected upon the prophecies of the Sibyls,
which Tycho Brahe had also recalled, and came up with interpretations of the
extraordinary appearance of the new star in 1572 and of the comet in 1577.49
    Comets, ‘great signs written in the book of the heavens with the fingers of
God,’ are the characters of a universal language that reveals itself to all men –
for ‘in every land and language they speak shining forth’ – and the meaning of
which ought to be deciphered. Campanella intended to assume himself the role
of ‘final sentry in this age of divine judgments.’ Such extraordinary phenomena
cannot derive from chance, and their explanation cannot be exhausted with an
appeal to the fortuitous concourse, devoid of all finality and meaning, of mate-
rial components such as vapors. To argue thus would be like saying (taking up
again in a polemical manner an image from Lucretius) that the letters of the
text that the author was composing ‘are written by themselves the result of
randomly spilt ink.’ Many years later, in two letters to Gassendi, Campanella
would not fail to reaffirm the insufficiency of an explanation of celestial phe-
nomena that did not take divine wisdom into account.50
    The appearance of comets is an opportunity to reflect on the approach
of those signs ‘in the sun, the moon, and the stars’ of which the gospels and
the fathers of the church such as Ambrose, John Chrysostom, and Gregory
speak. If Aristotle had deduced the eternity of the world from the immov-
ability of the celestial figures and from the regularity of astral motions, then
new phenomena contradict in the most evident way such notions of the
inalterability and the perpetuity of that order and of the world itself. The
hinges of the machina mundi, held to be immobile, in fact moved: constella-
tions were not fixed as had been held and the apogees of the planets were
not fixed either. The obliqueness of the sun was tightening and the sun was
inexorably getting closer to the earth, which would end up being burnt, ren-
dering vain all the expedient mathematical calculations to which astrono-
mers recoursed – Copernicus too – so as to render regular the anomalies of
the motions and the displacements of the stars in space.



    48
       Quaest. phys., XXIV, pp. 219–240. In the summer of 1624, Campanella asked the
physician Marco Aurelio Severino to procure for him the books that were necessary
to bring to conclusion ‘quella questione De cometis’ (Lettere, p. 204; the de secretis that
one reads in the Spampanato edition should be corrected in the de cometis; see Firpo,
Ricerche, pp. 280–281); see Paolo Ponzio, ‘La disputa sulle comete nelle Quaestiones
physiologicae di Tommaso Campanella,’ B&C, 2 (1996), pp. 197–213.
    49
       See Art. proph., pp. 75–79.
    50
       Discorso sulla cometa, pp. 57–88; Lettere, pp. 236–39; see ch. 11, pp. 236–237.
180     Chapter 9

    Campanella did not intend to replace scientific explanations of celestial
phenomena with prophetic explanations. Instead, he claimed forcefully that the
natural explanation did not preclude or exclude prophetic interpretation and
prophetic insight. He who denied such a dimension was preventing men from
paying attention to celestial signs so that they might prepare for the coming of
the Lord and not be surprised by him as ‘by a thief in the night.’ Putting himself
forward as a spy on divine judgments, Campanella intended to denounce and
unmask the silent conspiracy of all those – Aristotelians, astronomers, politi-
cians – who agreed, even if from different points of view, in their desire to deny
or deride the prophetic meaning of celestial signs. They persecute those who
reveal such meaning, with the intention to deceive people, dissuade them from
being vigilant and keep them in a deceptively restful sleep.
    The appearance of the comet could not but give rise to astrological discus-
sions. If Cesarini accentuated the immediate diffusion of ‘stupid and popular
explanations,’51 Campanella concluded his own work with sober predictions,
imbued with a caution that bordered on reticence. Reserving the right to
return to the argument at a time when he had more complete and secure
data, he limited himself to connecting the first comet to ‘great journeys of
preachers … not without upheavals among the people’ subject to the signs
in which it had appeared; at the same time, in the sea could be verified ‘the
great smashing and wrecks of warships and war.’ With regard to the second,
it indicated ‘great undertakings’ in the islands of the south ‘with arms and
preaching.’ He invited the Pope to put himself in charge of the process of the
reunification of nations, a duty that pertained to him rather more than that
of ‘intervening in celestial matters or deciding against Copernicus.’ The Edict
of 1616 was recalled twice, in tones that seem to reveal a certain annoyance
at an unwarranted intrusion even as on the outside they feign the required
obsequiousness. At last, Campanella sought to calm down the Pope, who was
evidently worried (‘Your Holiness, do not be anxious …’) and whose horo-
scope Campanella knew well: in the Astrologia he had spent some time con-
sidering the moment of his extremely difficult birth.52 In fact, the Pope would
die two years later. His death would be followed, another two years after that
(in the summer of 1623), by the death of his successor, Gregory XV – deaths
that Campanella would not refrain from relating to the appearance of the two
comets, which are always heralds of upheavals and disorders, wars and discord
– such as the invasion of Bohemia, announcements of the crisis of the Spanish
monarchy, deaths of Popes and sovereigns, ‘and changes in all things.’53


   51
      Galilei, Opere, XII, p. 422.
   52
      Discorso sulla cometa, pp. 80–81; see Astrologia, p. 1177, 1207.
   53
      Quaest. phys., p. 237.
