10. The New Encyclopedia of Knowledge


                                 Philosophia Realis

Having overcome the most difficult period of imprisonment (a period that sur-
prisingly gave rise to remarkable texts such as the Senso delle cose, the Poesie,
and the Ateismo trionfato), Campanella dedicated himself to the systematic
refoundation of the sciences in the years that followed. As he would emphasize
in a beautiful passage in the dedicatory letter addressed to Chancellor Pierre
Séguier that precedes the Philosophia realis, even the long years in jail could
be reread as elements in a providential design:

   Spending my life in the prisons of ungrateful masters, God, through whose
   wisdom all things are made and ordered, wanted that I be shut up for the
   time required to refound all of the sciences, a refounding that (always fol-
   lowing his divine inspiration) I have conceived in my mind. This was a feat
   that I would not have been able to complete in a condition of ordinary
   happiness or without solitude. Deprived of the world of the body, I trav-
   elled through the world of the mind which is a great deal more vast and is
   therefore the infinitude of that Archetype that rules over every thing with
   the word of its virtue.1

After the frustrated expectations caused by Schoppe’s reluctance to publish
his works, Campanella’s experience with Tobias Adami was much happier and
more profitable. Adami had returned home after a long journey and would
dedicate himself to publishing the works of his friend with alacrity. In view of
such expectations, Campanella reworked his texts and translated them into
Latin. The first of the four parts of the Philosophia realis is the Physiologia,
which is a reworking of the Epilogo magno and to which the Ethica is added,
after being rendered autonomous from natural philosophy. After that follows
the Politica, developed and reorganized from the earlier Aforismi, to which he
added as an appendix the Civitas Solis.



   1
       Lettere, p. 379.


G. Ernst, Tommaso Campanella, International Archives of the History               181
of Ideas /Archives internationales d’histoire des idées 200,
DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3126-6_10, © Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2010
182      Chapter 10

    The volume closed with a section dedicated to Oeconomica, concerning
running of the household and the family, which he considered a constitu-
tive part of society. Society could, in turn, be organised like a family with
the same ends of preserving the individual and the species (as elaborated in
The City of the Sun). The text opens with interesting questions on whether
other communities can be considered families, communities such as, for
example, religious orders or the communities of the Brahmans, the Bhikkhus,
and the modern African Amazons, or those of the priests of Muhammad, the
Marabouts, who live in North Africa, ‘in monasteries closed on every side by
walls, in each of which a lord commands who has four wives and more than
forty concubines, each of whom is closed in her own cell and has a multi-
tude of children.’2 Even as they had an important role to play in society, in
Campanella’s opinion religious communities could not be considered fami-
lies. He had words of lively reproach for the Marabouts. Life dedicated to
pleasure distanced them from contemplation and knowledge, such that they
were extremely ignorant and superstitious. Their relationship to society was
similar to that of ‘a worm born in the limbs or in the stomach, which devours
the body and is not useful but rather harmful to the whole because it invades
it and extracts nourishment from it.’
    Many suggestions made in this text echo principles articulated in The City
of the Sun – rules on the suitability of location, of climate and air, on dis-
tance from noise (which, even if it sometimes serves to purify the air, distracts
from contemplation). Emphasizing the nobility of agriculture, Campanella
encouraged an attitude of respect towards ‘mother’ earth, which offers nour-
ishment. He argued that it is necessary to avoid the violation and excavation
of the earth that comes from greedy searching for metals, lest we make our-
selves similar to the matricide Nero. All the arts and crafts are praised for
their utility, while lazy and harmful gaming such as playing cards and dice was
condemned. The author offered sensible advice on every aspect of the organi-
zation of the household and domestic economy – on the roles, the activities,
and the functions of the persons who lived together in the family, from fathers
to wives, children, and servants, as well as on the prudent administration of
wealth owing to profitable investments (something that was to be achieved
without involving oneself in usury). Campanella also recommended avoiding
superfluous expenses, such as those for sumptuous weddings, banquets, and
the purchase of livery; in general, he discouraged indulgence in all wasteful
things that aim at pointless display.
    With regard to marriage, monogamy was held to be more respectful for
a woman. Moreover, monogamy led to stronger and tighter affective ties


   2
       Oeconomica, p. 1039.
                                    The New Encyclopedia of Knowledge           183

both between the marriage partners themselves and between the parents and
children. Campanella came to this conclusion about monogamy even though
he did not consider polygamy against nature. The wife, a companion to be
loved and respected, ought to be an object of great respect within the family,
given that she was a participant in and co-principle of generation. She was not
merely a ‘container in which the seed is deposited, which produces fruit by
itself, without the participation of the container (something that works only
for onions).’ In turn, the wife has to love her husband; she must not give him
any reason to be jealous, and she must stand by him even in adversity. That
said, it is a deplorable excess to be buried alive alongside a dead spouse (as
was customary among the Scythians) or to burn oneself on a pyre (as in the
kingdom of Narsinga). The wife had to lead a wise and active life, without
indulging in laziness, which notoriously produces the worst evils. The wife
was to be irreproachable in her conduct and also in her person. From here
came the condemnation of inappropriate clothes and shoes, and above all, as
mentioned also in The City of Sun, the artifices of make-up. Applying oint-
ments and colorations to the face was not so much diabolical (as the Fathers
say, given that it was equivalent to ‘corrupting the divine image’), as it was
unhealthy. In fact, such beauty treatments lead to bad breath and headaches,
while also inducing darkening, weakness, and painfulness in the teeth. They
make women pallid and horrible like corpses, and so they are forced to apply
make-up upon make-up, time and again. They make it so that the woman is
no longer the same woman, something that is equivalent to the annihilation
of self. Moreover, when they kiss their husbands they transfer the poison of
the pigment, dirty their lips, and induce nausea. Beyond that, the thickness,
weight, and height of their shoes make it such that the woman is no longer
able to take physical exercise. If she wants to move, she requires the assistance
of a servant on whom to lean, as if she were a paralytic. This image elicits dis-
dain and disgust in whoever sees her as well as a kind of stupefaction – just as
when we look upon something that is dead or ugly or sick.3
    This style of life had very negative consequences for women themselves,
for their children and for society as a whole. In contrast, ‘Calabrian women,
who are not afflicted by such raised shoes or beauty treatments or laziness,
are tall of stature, agile, robust, vivacious in their movements, in their coloring,
and in their voices.’
    In the years that followed, these sections would be provided with a dense
apparatus of quaestiones. Already announced by Tobias Adami in the 1623
Frankfurt edition of the Philosophia realis, these quaestiones would only appear
in the monumental tome published at Paris. There were three questions in the


   3
       Ibid., p. 1062.
184    Chapter 10

Oeconomica: regarding the relationship between society and family, marriage,
and the acquisition and preservation of riches. Highly impenetrable (and largely
unexplored) are the quaestiones that were added to the first part. Surveying and
discussing classical and contemporary authors, the sixty-one Quaestiones physi-
ologicae took up a good 570 pages of the massive folio volume. It is in these
pages that one finds references to, among others, Galileo, whose doctrines on
sunspots, comets, the buoyancy of bodies, and the tides are discussed.4
    The three quaestiones added to the Ethica are rich in suggestions, con-
sidering the chief good, free will, and the virtues. Likewise, the four quaes-
tiones attached to the Politica are also very rich. In the question on free will,
Campanella confronted the heart of the problem of human freedom, which is
decisive for every moral doctrine: virtuous action (and the merit that follows
from it) depends in fact on the possibility of a choice, which is independent
of both the co-existence of a decree that has already been established and
the presence of an external force. Human liberty constitutes one of the pecu-
liar qualities that distinguish man from other living beings. Campanella holds
this opinion against those who tend to exclude or curtail human freedom
in significant ways – whether because they only want to accept the role of
chance (like the atomists) or because they want to insist on the exclusive-
ness of divine initiative. For Campanella, he is free ‘who moves himself at will
and with intent, and who can desist from such acting by himself, not pressed
into it by others: this person is called master of his actions, and this person is
responsible regardless of whether he acts well or ill.’5 Animals and servants
act spontaneously, but not freely, in that they are moved by passionate solici-
tations from external objects, or from masters. They are not able to choose
to stop something when they want to, but only when someone or something
outside of them decides it. Man, on the other hand, initiates an action and
desists from it through his own choice. He is free both before and after
deliberation. He can resist the passions and even the most atrocious suffer-
ings cannot change his will. As Campanella had argued elsewhere, if a man is
able to set himself against the violent passions that assault him from outside,
so much more will he be able to control those rather less intense passions
that are impressed upon him by the stars and the heavens. He is overcome by
the passions only when reason is destroyed by serious diseases, such as epi-
lepsy or as in other kinds of madness. But in this case there is neither sin nor
merit. Man is not responsible for the first carnal passions that he suffers. He


   4
     See ch. 9, notes 3, 4, 48.
   5
    Cf. Quaest. mor., quaest. secunda De libero arbitrio, p. 27. On Campanella’s con-
ception of liberty, see Germana Ernst, ‘Libertà dell’uomo e vis Fati in Campanella,’ in
Humanistica. Per Cesare Vasoli, ed. F. Meroi and E. Scapparone (Florence, 2004), pp.
207–229.
                                       The New Encyclopedia of Knowledge              185

is responsible instead for his responses. Even as he experiences desire, he can
resist amorous flattery and the songs of Sirens, as Ulysses did when he bound
himself to the mast of reason. In contrast, an animal is disturbed from its food
or from another passionate activity only by a stronger passion.
    But the more interesting question is the first, entitled De summo bono, in
which the author surveys the doctrines of the Aristotelians, Epicureans, and
Stoics so as to confute their positions with his own, according to which the
chief good is to be identified with the preservation of being.6 The position
most compatible with that doctrine was the Stoic one, which identified the
good with virtue, the bad with vice, and held all other things to be indiffer-
ent. If virtue is the true good, then the virtuous man alone is happy, in that he
is able to convert every evil into good while no external evil can cause him
harm or alter his interior condition. Without doubt Socrates is happier ‘dying
for virtue than were his killers who were living in vice.’ The Stoics were right
when they asserted that the virtuous man is a king by right, because his spirit
is regal and because he masters his own passions and rules in a rational and
appropriate way.7 By way of confirmation of the fact that no one, as Seneca
and Chrysostom had asserted, can injure the virtuous man whose interior vir-
tue cannot be tarnished by any external evil, Campanella evoked his own
tragic experience of torture and asserted that even the most atrocious suffer-
ings inflicted on the body are not able to nullify virtue or to force the virtuous
man into an internal assent to evil, which he is always capable of rejecting.
    Along with the great ethical traditions of the past, Campanella also pre-
sented and discussed the doctrines of the modern ‘political writers’ and the
‘Machiavellians,’ who identified the chief good with dominion and power.
They affirm that all the actions of man are directed at ruling and there is noth-
ing that he is not willing to do in order to obtain power. Thus, every prince
violates religion and morals in the name of reason of state, in the hope that
power will make up for all the evils and losses incurred, even those impugning
virtue and reputation. When finally he comes to power (even if by means of
fraud or violence), he becomes at once famous and glorious. He comes to be
praised and not referred to as a violator of the common good or virtue. He is
instead praised as courageous and magnanimous for have risked so much.8
    Campanella did not tire of admitting that the practices of dominion of
which Machiavelli spoke had not been invented by him and that such prac-
tices could be detected in times both ancient and modern. It is indeed true that



   6
      Quaest. mor., quaest. prima De summo bono, pp. 1–23.
   7
      Ibid., pp. 6f, 20–21.
    8
      The exposition of the doctrines of political leaders is there, pp. 2–3; the response,
at pp. 8, 11–13.
186     Chapter 10

many men are ready to do anything in order to exercise power and, above all,
that they embrace with enthusiasm those doctrines that present themselves
as justifications of their passions. But for Campanella it was certainly not
enough to concede that happiness and the chief good can be indentified with
the crimes or preoccupations of power. With regard to the positions of the
‘politicians,’ Campanella could not but repeat his own point of view: the value
of power – just like that of glory, riches, or any other kind of external good –
depends always on the use that is made of it, and virtue resides always within
us. That happiness does not coincide with power is also demonstrated amply
by the unhappiness of tyrants and Machiavelli’s heroes, who most often ‘meet
a base and sudden end, with the loss of their kingdom.’9 Tyrants and princes
can appear happy only after a superficial and vulgar examination, one that
limits itself to seeing only the external ornaments and ephemeral pleasures of
power. The gaze of the philosopher, who penetrates into the interior of things,
reveals that they are akin to ‘whitened sepulchers’ or ‘an apple that looks
very nice on the outside, but is all eaten up by worms on the inside.’ In the
first political question, going back to traditional elements that are somewhat
moralistic yet not without efficacy, Campanella added further touches to the
gloomy portrait of the tyrant dominated by the horrible monsters of vice and
ambition that disfigure life and render man servile. The tyrant is represented
as the protagonist in a tragic farce generated by the unbearable gap between
appearance and reality, pulled apart by the conflict between the parts recited
on the stage of the world, dressed in the royal mantle, and the consciousness
of his own unworthiness, which is the harshest of punishments – a conscious-
ness of being ‘a dog dressed up in imperial purple.’10
    Of the four questions added to the Politica, the first investigates the
nature of power, the second and third confront various aspects of the politi-
cal opinions of Aristotle (denouncing their contradictions and insufficien-
cies), while the fourth – De optima republica – lingers on the problems and
objections attendant to proposing an ideal city.11 The first, the most com-
plex, is titled De dominio et regno and it is divided into two articles. The
first concerns the issue of whether dominating and ruling are to be identified
with one another. The second deals with the subject of whether ‘a man can


   9
     Ibid., p. 11.
   10
       Quaest. pol., quaest. prima De dominio et regno, pp. 80, 83–84. On the relationship
with the doctrines of Machiavelli, see ch. 4.3.
    11
       A modern edition, with Italian translation, of the third political question in Città
del Sole (1997), together with subsequent reprintings, pp. 112–137 (Italian trans. by
L. Firpo); there is likewise a modern edition of the fourth question in Città del Sole
(1996) and subsequent reprintings, pp. 96–173 (Italian trans. by G. Ernst). Regarding
the fourth question, see ch. 6, pp. 102–103.
                                   The New Encyclopedia of Knowledge          187

be the lord of other men on account of some right that is natural or divine, or
whether every dominion is derived from violence or art.’ It is in this context
that once again the Machiavellians play a leading role. Against those who hold
that every dominion of men over men is violent, the new politicians maintain
that dominion is to be pursued as the chief good and that this is completely
in line with nature. According to the politicians, war and violence are natu-
ral and all kingdoms in the world have been acquired and maintained with
arms. It is for this reason that every legislator is careful to make the repub-
lic strong and dominant and careful to bestow the greatest honors on those
who fight, erecting for them, posthumously, the most splendid memorials, as
if all virtue consists in military valor. Nature seems to confirm the supremacy
of the strongest. Indeed, clashes and conflicts among elements and animals
are themselves natural. Heat battles against cold; the wolf sheep; the falcon
preys on doves; the eagle dominates all birds and the lion is universally con-
sidered the king of beasts.12 But Campanella emphatically rejected the argu-
ments of the political writers, Aristotle, and all those who sought to justify the
legitimacy of the dominion of the strongest or to sanction the inequality of
men with an appeal to nature.13 Campanella denied firmly that there was any
distinction between the free and the enslaved and above all he rejected the
pretext of justifying it on a natural basis. He affirmed that no one is a slave by
nature, because all men are participants in reason and in Christ, who is first
reason. He reaffirmed that the only true slavery is that of sin, on account of
which only tyrants are true slaves, while the wise man and the virtuous man
are free.
    In light of such positions, Campanella vindicated once again the full and
equal dignity as citizens of peasants or artisans. They are political animals in
precisely the same sense as any nobleman. They contribute as does any other
part of society, and constitute the ‘body of the republic.’ Aristotle’s exclusion
of these categories of men from virtue and blessedness is completely absurd:
Jewish society was made up of shepherds and peasants; the Roman republic
(whose most illustrious men even took their names from vegetables) held agri-
culture in the highest esteem. This also suggested that the moral virtues are to
be found more often and more copiously in illiterate people or in people with
simple spirits. So, it is necessary to distrust those who with excessive subtlety
and sophistry seek to obfuscate the transparency of truth. Cato the Censor
was right to be alarmed by the avidity with which the young people of Rome
listened to the discourses of Carneades for and against justice. Among those
young people were Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus – and Campanella could not

   12
        Quaest. pol., p. 72.
   13
        Ibid., pp. 78–79.
188     Chapter 10

help commenting that it would have been better for the republic if they had
remained in the countryside and occupied themselves with vegetables.14 To
Aristotle’s notion that from the natural excellence of some men and from the
natural inferiority of others derived the natural right of some to command
others, Campanella opposed the organic model set out in a famous passage
from St. Paul’s Letter to the Corinthians, according to which every member of
the body plays a part of equal dignity, and all together contribute to the unity
and to the good functioning of the entire organism.15 On this account, it is not
people who carry out duties that are commonly considered vile and distaste-
ful who are unworthy of qualifying as citizens, but rather the parasites and all
those who do not contribute to the common good. The latter deserve to be
excluded from citizenship, since they live in laziness and dedicate themselves
to pointless and harmful pleasures.


                               The Books on Medicine

Campanella’s interest in medicine was both constant and important. This
interest was already present in his first readings and works. It manifested
itself in a number of treatises (which are unfortunately lost, for the most part)
and which were later gathered and organized into the seven books of the
Medicinalium edited by Jacques Gaffarel and published in Lyon in 1635.16 In
dedicating the volume to Prince Odoardo Farnese, Gaffarel called this a new
and incomparable medicine. In a letter to the readers, he asked them not to be
amazed if the author turned out to be a ‘monk and theologian,’ recalling the
illustrious predecessors in that tradition and recalling that Ficino, physician
and theologian, had tried to connect the study of the remedies and ailments
of both mind and body.17 And it is precisely Ficino who is one of the authors
upon whom Campanella called most often in his work, a work in which, as in
many others, the role of spiritus is central.


   14
       Ibid., p. 97: ‘si autem in rure de oleribus tractassent, melius reipublicae fuisset.’
   15
       Ibid., p. 92 (see 1 Cor 12, 14–26).
    16
       On l’Apologia pro Telesio, see ch. 2, pp. 27–28; there is a tract of the plague in
Lettere, pp. 112–117; there is also another on ways of avoiding summer heat (ibid., pp.
124–130); lost, however, are short works on hernias, on how to extract mercury from
internal organs, and on how to avoid excessive cold.
    17
       Regarding medicine, see Michael Mönnich, Tommaso Campanella: Sein Beitrag
zur Medizin und Pharmacie in der Renaissance (Stuttgart, 1990); Marie-Dominique
Couzinet, ‘Notes sur les Medicinalia de Tommaso Campanella,’ Nuncius, 13 (1998),
pp. 39–67; Guido Giglioni, ‘La medicina di Tommaso Campanella tra metafisica e cul-
tura popolare,’ in Laboratorio Campanella, pp. 177–195; Id., ‘Healing and Belief in Tom-
maso Campanella’s Philosophy,’ Intellectual History Review, 17 (2007), pp. 225–238.
                                       The New Encyclopedia of Knowledge       189

    In the exordium to the book, medicine is defined as ‘a species of practical
magic’ (quaedam magica praxis), which works on man in so far as he is sus-
ceptible to disease in order to restore him to health. In order to achieve such
an end, the good physician has to know man well in his totality and his particu-
lar parts, as well as in terms of the environment in which he lives. That human
‘totality’ is made up of four parts: the incorporeal mens; spiritus, luminous, hot,
and mobile, made up of the most subtle matter; the humors and the solid parts.
Regarding the humors, Campanella distanced himself from traditional medi-
cine, increasing the number of them and ruling out supposed correspondences
with the four elements. Furthermore, he emphasized the centrality and the
preeminence of blood, of which the other elements are but waste (excrementa).
They execute the function of aides (comites auxiliarii) and concern only the
part in which they are contained, not the whole of the organism. Campanella
paid particular attention to the atra bilis or melancholy. Here, as in other texts,
he wanted to specify the correct relationship between this humor and proph-
ecy. Constituted by a sediment of dark and heavy blood that is the residue of
heat and cooking, black bile was collected in the spleen, just like in a vase that
collects impurities. It functioned as a stimulus for hunger and, when necessary,
for fear. In modest quantities, black bile could also be of use to contemplation,
but certainly not on account of the fact that it was ‘wise and prophetic and
meditative’ or because it was a direct cause of contemplative activity (as Aris-
totle and Galen had mistakenly maintained). That physiological explanation
had no foundation: how could an insensate thing, Campanella asked himself,
be the origin for wisdom?18 It is, instead, true that the presence of this humor
is a sign of an intense heat in the spirit, which renders it extremely subtle and
thus particularly ready to receive the impressions of the passions. It is therefore
the subtlety of the spirit (and not its sootiness) that renders it well adapted to
prophecy. For when it is plentiful such sootiness tends to obscure and terrorize
the spirit, interrupting its discourse and disturbing its notions.
    Campanella insisted upon the importance of prevention and the necessity
of adopting every possible remedy for conserving the innate heat of which
life consists. Old age occurs precisely when the relationship of solidarity and
exchange between spirit and body is altered, when the spirit produced by the
organism is not able any more to be retained and utilized properly and tends
to exhale away. Natural death, which happens without pain, takes place when
the entire spirit expires, just as the fire from the candle flies away when the
wax and oil have been consumed. The spirit abandons the organs that, having
become dry and hard, are no longer able to elaborate and assimilate the new
heat produced by food, just as the old walls of a house are no longer able to


   18
        Medicina, p. 16: ‘quomodo enim res stupida sapientiam pariat?’
190   Chapter 10

assimilate fresh plaster. And the house, having become creaky and full of fis-
sures, opens the way to the aggressions of its enemy – namely, the cold – and
permits the escape of vital heat.
    The remedies suggested emphasize the importance of the adequacy of
food and drink, location and climate, the limpidness of water and the purity
of air, which should be rarefied, luminous, temperate, and far from infected
places. Campanella reaffirmed the importance of music, which excited the
spirit to motion, its natural operation, which can induce various actions and
states of mind, and can pacify madness and restore serenity to the turbulent
motions of the spirit. Regarding sexual activity, the author, just like Ficino,
affirmed that in very old people it is harmful, even if frequenting young men
and young women and ‘chastely lying down with them’ (casta cubatio) is help-
ful in postponing old age: ‘the joy of Venus (but pure, without sin) is much
more useful than many medicines.’19 Insisting on the importance of healthy
physical exercise, Campanella deplored the excessive use of carriages on the
part of Neapolitans, with the resulting risk of a weakening of sexual activity.
Above all he denounced the grave effects of laziness on women. 20
    One question that fascinated Campanella was that of whether medicine
might offer remedies that could delay old-age and restore youth.21 Even if it is as
extremely rare as the alchemical transformation of iron into gold, the possibility
did not seem to him to be excluded in principle. Even if the best medicine
against old age consisted in ‘interior serenity with a victory over the passions’
and in occupying oneself with happy things and philosophy and avoiding
sadness (which is worse than poison), one of the secrets of youthfulness is that
of keeping the liver soft. Campanella provided recipes for pharmaceuticals and
ointments that were apt to favor a general renewal of the organ. Other profound
alterations are possible in animals and men – some for the worse (as happens in
the person who is bitten by a tarantula), others for the better (as happens
in the person who, in order to be cured of syphilis, is subjected to a cure that
works a complete transformation of his temperies). Therefore, the possibility of
restoring one’s youth ought not to be excluded.
    In the central books of the work, Campanella set out remedies for cura-
tive medicine that are always displayed in the light of his own philosophical
principles. He insisted on the importance, on the part of the good physician,
of an attentive and all-encompassing diagnosis that is dedicated to identifying
the seats and causes of disease and to interpreting their signs and symptoms


  19
     Medicina, p. 56: ‘Veneris laetitia, sed pura absque peccato, multis praevalet
medicinis.’
  20
     Ibid., pp. 63–64; see note 3 above.
  21
     ‘De retardando insigniter senio et de reiuvenescentia,’ ibid., pp. 66–70.
                                     The New Encyclopedia of Knowledge             191

correctly. Many pages are dedicated to the pulsus, the pulsations connected to
the continual actions of compression and dilation to which the lungs, the heart,
the arteries, and the brain are subjected. This is an action that constitutes the
very rhythm of life and that is the vital action of the spirit, whose nature is
continual motion. This is not an action of the organs, but rather their ‘pre-
servative being acted upon,’ through which life is preserved and restored.22
    The question of the hidden powers of herbs, animals, and stones is treated
in the fifth book. Campanella explained those powers in the light not only of
celestial influences, but also of the bonds of antipathy and sympathy present
in the entirety of nature. In one passage, Campanella observed that he who
fights does so not only because he has a body and armor, but because he
recognizes an enemy and wants to kill him.23 He reiterated the doctrines of
Ficino and of the Platonists on the properties derived from the stars and he
intended to gloss them in the light of his own principles. He insisted that eve-
rything acts on account of the properties that is has, and that the marvelous
power of certain stones or herbs is not dependent on the stars or on demons
only, but depends also on the enduring in things themselves of passions and
sensibilities that have been communicated to them by a common sense. He
appreciated the doctrine of signaturae, in virtue of which every herb, metal,
and animal that presents some analogy with regard to figure or color or con-
sistency with some part of the human body is without doubt of use to that
part.24 On this subject, Campanella recalled with appreciation the Phytog-
nomonica of Giovan Battista della Porta. Holding the connections between
terrestrial and astral beings (which are universal causes that act in the inferior
world) to be undeniable, Campanella spent some time discussing the seven
kinds of beings – animals, plants, stones, odors, tastes, ages, seasons, diseases
– that are connected with the planets and their properties. He began with
the two considered to be malicious (Saturn and Mars), and then passed on
to the two considered beneficial (Jupiter and Venus). From there, he dealt
with the Sun and the Moon and finally with Mercury. Regarding Saturn – to
which is connected black bile, animals that are solitary, slow, or cold (such as
badgers, dormice, mice, toads, and lice), sterile and dry plants, heavy metals
and dark stones – he emphasized the ambivalence of its influences. Saturnine
people can be both extremely wise, aware of secret and prophetic things, and
‘stupid, rough, and impious.’ Likewise, the solar man (precisely like the star
to which he is orientated) is the expression of dignity and of true regality:


   22
      Ibid., p. 142.
   23
      Ibid., p. 244.
   24
      On signatures, see Massimo L. Bianchi, Signatura rerum. Segni, magia e conoscenza
da Paracelso a Leibniz (Rome, 1987).
192     Chapter 10

he loves the whole more than the part, he is beneficent, generous, ambitious,
and delights in all the sciences, loving to dedicate himself to great undertak-
ings. But it is the moon that administers and executes all the celestial virtues.
Inferior things depend on the moon to such a degree that it is not possible to
operate correctly ‘with regard to movement, sense, birth, growth’ in anything
without observing of the moon’s aspects. This is so much more true in medi-
cine, moreover, where proceeding without having first observed the position
of the moon is like being blind and acting entirely by chance, in that it is the
moon that governs the ‘critical days,’ the stages of a disease and the passions
of the humors.25
    The sixth book deals with the diseases of the spiritus, neglected or inter-
preted in an erroneous manner by traditional medicine. The seventh and last
book is dedicated to an analytical treatment of fevers, interpreted in an origi-
nal fashion not as diseases but as positive symptoms of the reaction of the body
and the war that the organism is waging against the aggressions of disease.
    Psychological suffering can be explained as a blundering or mistaken reac-
tion to passions elicited by external objects. The avaricious man kills himself
when he loses money; likewise, the person who is in love takes his own life if his
desire is frustrated. The violence of certain passions can be fatal, just as a light
that is too dazzling can cause blindness. One can die from the joy of seeing a son
believed to be dead, and a strong fear can turn one white with shock. Remedies
consist in detaching oneself from obsession, even if in a deceitful way. Even the
illusory satisfaction of desires can assuage fears and lessen interior tensions.
Above all, the important thing is to purify and purge the spirit affected by dam-
aging passions, comforting it with appropriate foods and remedies, reconstitut-
ing it little by little. To this end, Ficinian remedies will be highly useful – such as
looking upon or frequenting amenable places such as gardens filled with plants
and flowers. It is extremely important to breathe fresh and pure air, which con-
tributes to a reconstituting of the good qualities of the spirit. If it is not possible
to live in contact with nature, it is advisable to recreate a domestic garden inside
the house itself, with flowers, plants, and fountains.26
    Campanella expressed a very negative opinion on black bile and patho-
logical melancholy.27 If some are melancholic by nature, others can become
melancholic in the wake of particular circumstances, such as prolonged fasting,



   25
       Medicina, p. 275.
   26
       Ibid., p. 317.
    27
       On the relationship between melancholy and prophecy in Campanella, see also
Germana Ernst, ‘“Contra l’ombra di morte accesa lampa.” Echi ficiniani in Campan-
ella,’ in Forme del Neoplatonismo. Dall’eredità ficiniana ai Platonici di Cambridge, ed.
L. Simonutti (Florence, 2007), pp. 147–175.
                                    The New Encyclopedia of Knowledge           193

insufficient sleep, excessive application to studying, living with anxiety, or
deep pain at the loss of things or people they loved a great deal. In any case,
the personality affected by melancholy lives in a condition of great suffering.28
The interior light of the spirit – which by virtue of its nature enjoys the light of
the sun, reinforcing and amplifying it – comes to be dimmed by murky, sooty
vapors that stain the spirit in the same way that ink colors paper. From here
comes a melancholic delirium that is characterized by constant sadness, fear,
aversion to relations with human beings, a disturbed imagination, and a desire
for death. In serious cases, when obscurity completely invades the spirit, rem-
edies can be extremely difficult. If it is not possible to separate water from
ink, how will it be possible to distill the spirit? In the event that the shadows
invade the interior only in part, there is some hope, thanks to the possibility
of consuming suitable food and drink and in general thanks to the possibility
of turning to jovial, venereal, and solar remedies while avoiding everything
saturnine. One can also make use of the therapeutic powers of music, which
can settle the disordered motions of the spirit and purify blood that has been
harmed and poisoned by bile.29
    On the basis of this conception of black bile, Campanella criticized harshly
what Aristotle affirmed in the Problemata. There, he had attributed poetic
inspiration and the prophecies of the Sibyls to precisely this humor, instituting an
analogy with the effects induced by wine that Campanella held to be superficial
and false. For him, prophecy can be of several kinds. There are forms that are
natural and shared with animals, who sense the coming of rains and storms
or notice in the air the premonitions of events before they come to pass. Man
can be endowed with particular dispositions that are apt to perceive in the air
the causes of events that are in the process of forming. But natural divination
does not exclude prophecy communicated by God to human minds, and indeed
this form of prophecy is one of the signs that distinguish the human level from
the animal one. Campanella rejected with disdain the affirmation that the
presumed divine inspiration of the prophets and the Sibyls is to be ascribed to
humoral imbalance and is reducible to causes and explanations that are entirely
physiological. Again, Campanella held in greater esteem the positions of Ficino,
who did not limit himself to connecting black bile and prophecy, but explained
the modest proportions of melancholic humor that need to be present in the
blood in order not to damage it. Ficino correctly took account of the spirit and
its characteristics, something that had been ignored by Aristotle who attributed
to wine and to black bile something that in fact ought to be attributed to the
subtlety of spirit. He who has such subtle spirit can foresee the future in that he


   28
        Medicina, p. 319.
   29
        Ibid., p. 338.
194     Chapter 10

perceives in the air the causes of future events that are already present, just as
birds foresee the rain. Certainly, those who are affected by a melancholic humor
cannot do this, for in the most serious cases such victims are sordid, stupid, and
love graves, cry, and desire death; because, when it becomes gloomy, the spirit
desires things similar to itself. Black bile is not useful to science except if the
spirit, frightened by the darkness, pulls back into the interior to contemplate.
Indeed, in the worst cases, there is the possibility of demonic possession. The
melancholic person is the victim of the intervention of demons, who make use
of this humor to torment he who has fallen into the shadows – and that person
believes himself a wolf and becomes a game for the devil (ludus daemonum).30
For poetic inspiration and distinguished works is required, on the contrary, a
pure, lucid, tenuous spirit, in which sootiness is scarce or absent. This is a spirit
that permits impartial judgment and a healthy memory that is thus capable
of forgetting or letting rest those memories that are too painful due to their
association with unberable emotions.
    Like Ficino, Campanella knew well that Saturn could kill his own children,
on account of an excessive dedication to studying. Too concentrated a spirit
heats up and becomes embittered, giving rise to hardness, infesting vapors, and
all the negative consequences of the passions, when they become exclusive
and obsessive. Remedies against the harms done by saturninity would be
those that we know: suspension of studies, mollification of anxieties and fears,
inducing serenity and faith, satisfaction (even if illusory) of frustrated desires,
abandoning occasions of excessive effort, the defusing of obsessions and
fixations.31 But the best things to do, above all, are breathing in the serene and
open air, walking in green gardens full of flowers, listening to music, dedicating
oneself to light and playful things, returning to all that which is venereal and
jovial in nature, nourishing oneself with white, sweet, and soft foods – the
opposites of black, bitter, and dry bile.
    There are frequent autobiographical insertions in the Medicina that offer to
the scholar interesting and curious information regarding Campanella’s life.32
He recalled a host of things: the remarkable eyewash with which della Porta
treated him for inflamed eyes, causing great astonishment in those who were
looking on because of the immediate beneficial effect; sciatic pains he suffered
as a result of a long horse-ride combined with the luxurious kitchen at the
Del Tufo palazzo; the terrible consequences of torture and the years spent in
subterranean prisons; the pains due to a hernia from which he suffered when

   30
      Ibid., p. 345.
   31
      Ibid., p. 348.
   32
      See the original contribution from Romano Amerio, ‘Autobiografia medica di fra
Tommaso Campanella,’ Archivio di Filosofia, special issue Campanella e Vico (Rome,
1969), pp. 11–19.
                                     The New Encyclopedia of Knowledge            195

he was almost fifty years old and from which he was cured after drinking iron
filings in an egg every morning for a month and wearing an iron belt with a
poultice for three months (although the hernia returned after the interruption
of the cure); the curious observation, recalled in several passages, that lice did
not take root in his person ‘due to the nobility of his temperament’ and the
non-greasy quality of his sweat;33 the buzzing and hissing in his ears, apparently
caused by the dampness of his cell (even though in general he was naturally
blessed with an extremely acute power of hearing). Those noises persisted for
years; he heard them always as a hissing and blowing of the wind, as ‘when it
passes through narrow passages’; or they were like the sounds of reels on which
is wound thread taken from the cocoons of silkworms that is being transferred
onto larger reels. Attacks of ‘canine hunger’ are then recalled, attributed to the
consumptiveness of his body after the fasting of Lent or when, in extreme pov-
erty, he had been nourished by bread and adulterated wine only. He treated
such hunger by eating vegetables cooked in milk and by sleeping on a straw
mattress, so as to combat the wave of heat by which he felt himself consumed
and almost dismembered – something ‘not so very different from leaves as
they are being burnt.’ 34


                         Arts and Sciences of Language

The collection of the five parts that constituted the Philosophia rationalis –
that included the Grammatica, the Dialectica, the Rhetorica, the Latin Poëtica
(fully reworked from the Italian version), and the Historiographia – would
be published at Paris in the projected Opera omnia.35 The Dialectica (not
reprinted after the seventeenth-century edition) still remains to be studied,
but we should at least comment on the exordium, where dialectic is defined
as an ‘art or rational instrument of the wise man with which to regulate the
discourse of every science,’ so that we can account for why dialectic is termed
an ars and not a scientia:

   Science is of God and of the things made by God (such as the world, the
   animals, the elements that exist before the actions of the human intellect).
   Art, however, because it is made in the wake of human reason, is both
   external to soul (like clothing, an abode, or an astrolabe) and internal to it
   (such as a word, a syllogism, a fable). Therefore the object of every art is the
   being of reason, and its end is utility. The object of science on the other hand


   33
     Medicina, pp. 125, 218, 223, 395, 422, 433, 517–518.
   34
     Ibid., pp. 398–399, 433.
  35
     On that work, see the contribution of Lina Bolzoni, ‘La Poetica latina di Tommaso
Campanella,’ Giornale storico della letteratura italiana, 149 (1972), pp. 481–521.
196     Chapter 10

   is the being of the thing and its end is understanding. The being of reason is
   constructed from art in a useful manner, both for teaching and for acting, as
   the fable, the letter, the sword. That, however, which is useless or harmful,
   … one ought to refer to as the being of irrationality and deceit – whether
   it is active (as in the case of liars, nonsense, sophistry, and stories that do
   not teach anything) or passive (as in the false proposition of a heretic that
   God be body or that the sun does not shine with its own light). In fact, the
   useful parable to teach is the being of reason, not that of deceit. Therefore
   in a unwise manner the majority of the logicians hold that the Capricorn,
   the chimera, and the false proposition that “man is an ass” are all beings
   of reason. These are in fact beings of irrationality – active, passive, or both
   combined …. Therefore logic is the art that deals with the beings of reason
   and the beings of deceit, just as the physician deals with the healthy and the
   sick.36

Grammar is defined as an ‘instrumental art used for expression that is coher-
ent, rational, and simple; as a consequence, it is used for writing and reading
all that which our spirit has perceived through all its means of knowing.’37
Campanella addressed the distinction between ‘civil’ and ‘philosophical’
grammar in a beautiful passage, written against the pedants and rule-fetishists
and in defense of the permissibility of coining new words and inventing new
languages that are well-suited to the expression of new concepts:

   Civil grammar is an ability, not a science, because it is founded on authority
   and on the usage of famous writers …. Philosophical grammar, by contrast,
   is founded on reason and achieves the status of a science. In fact, it is the
   method of the intellect that investigates and it notes how much it has inves-
   tigated; among the things that are found in nature it establishes relation-
   ships and distinctions.… Grammarians condemn it … and they harass us
   when we derive words from things instead of from authors.… What terrible
   thing do they not say when we have discovered something new that we can-
   not express in terms that were used by Cicero (which is a situation in which
   we mould new words)? … Instead, the conceited want to impose laws on us,
   and thereby imprison science too.38

If, with respect to the Poetica, we can refer to what was said with regards to
the early Italian text,39 we ought not to fail to comment here on the important
Rhetorica, listed as the fourth of the ‘arts of talking.’40 By way of definition,


   36
     Dialectica, I, 1, in Philosophia rationalis (Paris: I. Dubray, 1638).
   37
     Grammatica, in Scritti letterari, p. 435.
  38
     Ibid., p. 439.
  39
     See ch. 3, 2, bearing in mind that the Latin text, as usual, develops the material
more amply and organizes it more systematically.
  40
     The initial core of the work dates to the period spent in Padua.
                                    The New Encyclopedia of Knowledge            197

the author emphasized the differences between rhetoric and dialectic with
reference to object, method, and purpose. If dialectic is concerned with the
true and the false and makes use of rational demonstration, rhetoric has to do
with good and evil and recourses to verbal persuasion, and does not work by
means of logic. If the first ‘has its seat in the schools and is orientated to phi-
losophers,’ with brief and incisive discourse, rhetoric is at home ‘in the piazzas
and temples and is orientated to the people,’ making use of longer and more
easily understood arguments, often using examples and proverbs. In a certain
way, legislators, priests, prophets, and generals can all be considered orators.
No society – whether made up of soldiers, bandits, or saints – can do without
two doctrines, namely grammar, which is ‘the tongue of the community,’ and
rhetoric, which speaks on behalf of that which is good for the community.
When Campanella then defined rhetoric as the instrument ‘by means of which
to advocate that which is good for us and to dissuade us from that which is
bad,’ he was sure to make a number of specifications that distanced him from
the doctrines of the ‘pagans.’ Not only and not so much a simple art of speak-
ing well, rhetoric ought to be understood as an ‘instrumental art dedicated
to inducing us orally to the good and distancing us from evil.’ Upholding this
thesis, Campanella had to defend it both from philosophers such as Socrates
and Plato (who condemned it as an embellished whore, set apart from the vir-
ginal beauty of science) and also from those who, on the contrary, permitted
recourse to every kind of lie and deceit, admitting the possibility that rhetoric
might be used to defend and justify scoundrels, tyrants, and those who had
committed the worst crimes. For Campanella every true art is, as such, always
the daughter of wisdom, on account of which the purpose of true rhetoric
could not be anything other than persuasion towards the good, irrespective of
whether it achieves its aims of not. If it happens that rhetoric leads us into evil,
then it is no art, just as the physician who kills out of ignorance or malice is not
employing the art of healing. Lying is never permissible. It is, however, true
that in order to defend oneself from violence and from injustice, or to save
one’s own life, one may recourse to reticence or equivocation, making use of
dissimulation – not so as to deceive or do evil, but as a stratagem, following
thereby the example of numerous episodes from the Bible.
    In order to persuade, therefore, rhetoric has truck with the passions and
the affects. It is for this reason that it has certain similarities to magic, as Cam-
panella had already maintained in the Senso delle cose (where he emphasized
the magic power that words exert over the imagination of he who listens). It
was thanks to the spoken word that Menenius Agrippa was able to pacify the
Roman plebeians who were rebelling against the senate and it was thanks to
speech that preachers had been able to convert innumerable peoples. Rheto-
ric acts on the passions in order to elicit ‘love and hate, anger and fear, docility
198     Chapter 10

and amazement’ in the most efficacious way. Yet orators do not persuade like
physicians who achieve their results with medications, nor do they ‘call upon
devils to raise up those passions that move the fantasy with incantations;
instead, rhetoric makes use of argumentations, movements, potent incite-
ment, and a fascination with words that is almost magical.’41
    All persuasive speech pertains to rhetoric, even that speech which is
spontaneous and uncultivated. Even the apostles taught thanks to rhetoric,
although it was a rhetoric very different from that of the schools, in that it was
alive and divine – and a word from Solomon, Isaiah, or Paul was more con-
vincing than the prolix discourses of the sophists, as the author said he had
experienced for himself. Yet, it is true that the orator makes use, in a proper
sense, of a ‘refined technique rich in artifice.’ The central and final chapters of
the work dealt with every possible aspect of the art with vividness and argu-
mentative richness. With regard to the prerequisites of the good orator, he has
to be endowed with natural predispositions that are to be perfected with exer-
cise, among which are ingeniousness, style, and voice (but ‘if he stammers a
little, sometimes this adds grace, as I have often been able to confirm’), vivid-
ness of expression, a strong memory, apt gesture (which is a ‘second language
of the body’).42 Above all, a kind of identification with the sentiments that
are to be induced is important: ‘he does not persuade who is not first himself
persuaded. As the heated object heats and as the cold object cools on contact,
just so he who is sad communicates to his auditors his own sadness, while he
who hopes communicates his hope, and the angry man communicates anger;
in this way the efficacy of this magic is great.’43 If it is true that the soul is free
and can always follow the orders of reason, it is also true that ‘usually men
are governed rather by the passions than by reason.’ It is for this reason that
the orator has success, ‘communicating to his auditors his own sentiment with
the impetus of discourse, since by nature men cry with he who is crying, laugh
with he who is laughing, become irate with he who is irate, yawn with he who
is yawning.’44
    In reading these pages, it appears almost as if one is seeing from behind the
scenes some ‘secrets’ of Campanella’s oratorical talent, which impressed both
Campanella’s interlocutors and the public for its passion and vivacity. Or per-
haps it is almost like catching sight of technical aspects of argumentation to
which he himself would turn, as when he suggested listing arguments for and
against in cases of doubtful questions. In making an example of the question


   41
      Rhetorica, pp. 742–745.
   42
      Ibid., p. 749.
   43
      Ibid., p. 751.
   44
      Ibid., p. 763.
                                    The New Encyclopedia of Knowledge          199

of whether the conquest of the New World had been a good thing, arguments
that raised doubts and perplexities about the enterprise followed those that
justified it; thus, they give voice to a kind of inner debate. One has a similar
feeling when Campanella advised that, in order to attract the good-will of the
listeners, one ought to praise them as ‘prudent, just, lovers of truth, saying that
one is turning to them with confidence, hopeful of success. Then it will seem
to them that they are unworthy of such praise if they do not act in that way.’
This is not simply an acute observation, but a kind of insight that enables us
to understand better why, for example, in the letters Campanella turned to
illustrious persons and praised them for their merits, even when they were
anything but benevolent towards him and certainly not worthy of the trib-
utes he paid them. This is not a courtly adulation. Rather it is a philosophical
praise given so as to transform a personality into what it should be.
    In the brief text of the Historiographia, one also finds plenty of sharp judg-
ments. Defined as ‘the art of writing history well so as to establish the founda-
tions of the sciences,’ the author specified that history consists in a narrative
discourse that is clear, truthful, and ‘well adapted to providing the bases of
the sciences.’ On account of this function of ‘first light,’ it ought not to be
hazy, because that would offend the eyes without being of any use to the view.
Among the prerequisites required in the good historian, three are fundamen-
tal: that he be well informed on the basis of direct testimony or at least reli-
able testimony regarding the subject he narrates; that he possess a virile spirit,
such that he is not induced to lie or alter the truth out of the impulse of the
passions; that he be honest and motivated to tell the truth. As for the second
prerequisite, recalling a judgment from Jacopo Sannazzaro (who described
Poggio Bracciolini, who excessively praised the Florentines, as ‘neither a bad
citizen nor a good historian’), Campanella made a brief and bitter allusion
to the unjust judgment of Tommaso Costo. As he put it, Costo was ‘neither a
good citizen nor a good historian’ when he related the events of Calabria in
an extremely hostile tone..45 The need for veracity (in contrast to the ‘lies’ of
the Greeks) was fundamental and Campanella railed against the judgment
(which in truth he held to be unfounded) attributed to Paolo Giovio, accord-
ing to whom the historian did not need to worry himself about lying, since ‘a
hundred years hence, lies will not be recognizable.’ Those ‘adulators of God’
are wrong, however, who invent miracles that never took place. They are
addressed in harsh tones: ‘Thus, it is not enough for you to play games with
men, so you dare to adulate God in a derisory fashion, as if he were a fraud-
ster like you?’ History can be divided into sacred, natural, and human. Natu-
ral history can be of a universal kind (as in Pliny) or of a particular kind (as in


   45
        Historiographia, p. 1232.
200     Chapter 10

Aristotle’s history of animals or in modern authors such as Guillaume Ron-
delet and Georg Agricola, who had written of fish and metals). With regard to
the moderns, Galileo’s Sidereus nuncius is recalled, of which it is said that ‘it is
a historical work; indeed, it does not explain why around Jupiter four planets
orbit and two around Saturn, but it concerns itself with whether the matter
has been so confirmed. The mode of investigation was scientific; narrative was
the mode of rendering it. Yet on these facts, as on a new foundation, will be
built a wondrous astronomical doctrine of the heavenly systems.’46
    Civil, or human, history is fundamental ‘for politicians, moralists, orators,
and poets.’ From histories of the past, we can in fact learn what is useful and
what is damaging, derive rules from so many experiences, and reform the
sciences and the law – ‘so that he who knows well the history of all nations
from the origin of the world to our times can boast of having lived from the
primordial beginnings of the world right up until today and of having lived all
over the face of the earth.’47 According to its extension in space and time, such
history can be universal or particular – of a single city, of an epoch, of individual
events, or a biography of a single life. Campanella underlined the importance
of an intelligent organization and selection of materials; it is important to
omit trivia, avoid digressions, the speeches of persons, and false celestial
prodigies. On the other hand, it is useful to refer, with clarity and brevity,
to some particulars: ‘do not omit foods, medicines, arms, money, buildings,
or technical inventions.’48 A biography ought to set out all the qualities of
its subject. It ought to ‘describe the lineage, the day and hour of the birth,
under which dominant planet, and then physical appearance; thereafter the
subject’s actions, one by one, the events, the most signal undertakings, both
good and bad.’49 Excellent examples of brevity and clarity are Suetonius,
Diogenes Laertius, and Plutarch. Rather more suspect, however, is the life
of St. Francis of Paola narrated by Paolo Regio, which instead of offering
precise information to its readers, is limited to connecting ‘a great number
of miracles almost with a single thread.’50


                              The New Metaphysics

At Paris, in the summer of 1638, less than a year before the death of its author,
the imposing folio of the Metaphysics would be published as the fourth tome

   46
      Ibid., p. 1244.
   47
      Ibid., p. 1246.
   48
      Ibid., p. 1248.
   49
      Ibid., p. 1250.
   50
      Ibid. The work in question, by Paolo Regio (1541–1607), Bishop of Vico Equense,
was titled La meravigliosa vita di San Francesco di Paola (Naples, 1581).
                                       The New Encyclopedia of Knowledge               201

in the series of projected Opera omnia. In the dedication to Claude Bullion
de Bonolles, Superintendent of the Finances of France, Campanella displayed
justified pride in his own principal work, presenting it as both a foundation
and a crown for every kind of knowledge:

   Most honored Sir, … one might call this book a Bible for the philosophers,
   wisdom of the sciences, treasure-chest of things human and divine, solution
   to every problem regarding all matters both actual and possible that can
   stimulate the minds of men, in such a way that each man is able to explore
   for himself the truth and errors of human sciences and laws from the ground
   up. … I, who have never praised my own works, feel compelled to praise
   this work alone on account of its utility for all, for it will be discovered that
   in comparison to this work all other human books are nothing but puerile
   musings paling in comparison to a mature understanding, and that all those
   who put themselves to the test of metaphysics gave rise, more than to a
   metaphysics, merely to an insipid logic or grammar without order.51

Campanella showed the greatest satisfaction in finally seeing completed a
work the redaction of which had occupied almost the entirety of his life.52
In the work, in which almost all the themes that he had addressed in all his
other works came together, he confronted all the doctrines of the entire
philosophical and theological tradition, adopting an attitude of full liberal-
ity with respect to the diverse schools. Extremely rich, the Metaphysica has
remained in large part unexplored and here it is possible to give only an
extremely general idea of the structure of the work and to take note of some
essential themes.
    The proem begins by underlining that the fullness of veracitas is completed
in God alone, while all men are mendacious in some measure and in some
particular respects, either out of fear or ignorance. Or they may be menda-
cious on purpose, so that they lie in an ‘officious’ manner (for ends that are
held to be useful) or because they are driven by passions such as ambition,
avidity, jealousy, or hate. On the one hand, God is exempt from any passion
whatsoever that can occlude or deform the truth that he communicates. On
the other hand, as the creator, he is not ignorant of even the smallest thing.
God alone is the true master, and it is to his school, and not to those of human

   51
      Lettere, p. 395.
   52
     According to the Syntagma (pp. 48f), the initial core of the work – which would
eventually be divided into eighteen books in three parts (where the chapter list alone
takes up around thirty pages) – goes back to the years of his youth. After that first
draft was lost, Campanella, in the first years of his incarceration, prepared an Italian
version. But that version, given to an unfaithful disciple was also lost and then Campanella
began the Latin redaction, which, sequestered in 1610, was rewritten and continually
enlarged and revised.
202   Chapter 10

beings, that Campanella intends to recall men, with whom God communicates
through two means – by creating things and through the medium of revela-
tion. With reference to the first means, ‘when God makes things, he makes or
augments a living book, from the observation of which we learn,’ on account
of which the Church Fathers and saints called the world both “wisdom” and
“the book of God.” And they did so with reason, ‘because God has written all
his concepts in it and he explains them with his Word, so that there is nothing
in the world that does not express something present in an ideal way in the
divine mind. But the saying and the writing of God is his manner of making
things real.’ Men read this book with their senses, from which the successive
moments of the cognitive processes take their beginning: memory, accumula-
tion of multiple sensations, and gradually the experimentum to the point of
reaching general principles and definitions. It is important never to forget the
sensible origin of all understanding, and in case of doubt it is to sense that one
must return in order to check and verify.
    Regarding things that do not enter into our field of experience, because
they are distant in time or space, we recourse to the senses of others, which are
similar to ours. We put faith in those who base their doctrines on testimony,
which is a product of the direct reading of the book of God, and not on opin-
ions, which derive from a form of conjecture that can be mistaken. We believe
in the experience of the sailor Columbus who with his voyages falsified the
arguments of Augustine and Lactantius on the non-existence of the antipo-
des, even though Augustine and Lactantius were saints and learned men; as
a general rule ‘we measure certainty by how close or how distant something
is from sense. The truth is indeed the extent of the thing, as it is and not as
we imagine it for ourselves: sense testifies to things as they are; imagination,
as we hold them to be.’ From here comes the injunction to reject books that
contradict the book of nature and to confront and correct human books in the
light of the autograph script of God. One of the most problematic attitudes,
from which neither theologians nor saints are exempt, consists in conferring
unduly the dignity of God’s autograph script upon fallible human ‘copies,’
an attitude that gives rise to divisions and controversies. This sets one school
against another, Platonists against Aristotelians, Scotists against Thomists –
for the Scotists consider St. Thomas ‘rough and stupid, while Scotus is subtle’
and the Thomists consider Scotus ‘an enthusiast and vacuous’ while only St.
Thomas is ‘solid and free from error.’ It is in this way that one substitutes a
common search for the truth with the partisanship of attachment to one’s
own masters. Similarly, the defects of the person loved appear to be beautiful
to the enamored person. Conversely, he who is animated by malevolent and
hostile feelings towards someone will always and only see defects in him. In
general, in a green mirror everything will seem green.
                                     The New Encyclopedia of Knowledge            203

    Having studied all the philosophical and theological schools, all the laws,
all the sciences, and all the arts – those that are true as well as those that
are false or demonic – Campanella decided to write discourses on the true
wisdom, in such a manner that anyone would be capable of examining the
sciences from the book of God and to gather the deep connections between
the sciences in the totality of the encyclopedia, and to distinguish truth and
falsehood. Thus, this doctrine would deal with both the first principles and
the ends of things as well as the foundations of the sciences, and we call it
“metaphysics” on account of the fact that it goes beyond physical doctrines
and common philosophy, on account of the fact that it embraces all the areas
of philosophy and raises itself up to the first causes and to that supreme first
cause in such a way as to permit us to see the causation and the cognition of
everything little by little.53
    The work begins with fourteen dubitationes (doubts) that, engaging with the
renewed fortunes of scepticism, set out all the possible doubts concerning the
value and the very possibility of human understanding in general (and that of
the senses in particular), an understanding that is described as partial, uncer-
tain, and contradictory.54 The ninth doubt reveals how knowledge, if it consists
in alienating oneself and becoming something other than oneself, is a form of
madness. In the tenth doubt, it is reaffirmed that knowing is an “un-knowing”
or self-forgetting, because the soul ignores itself and under such conditions how
could the soul come to know other things? Enclosed in the body, the soul com-
pletes operations it does not know how to account for, and, in order to know its
own nature and its own condition, it is constrained to search and to interrogate
beyond itself. The soul is like the smith who works immersed in darkness, without
seeing either himself or the work that he is completing, and then approaches the
window and asks for news of what he is doing, about whether he finds himself in
jail or not, about who he himself is and who it is that put him in that place. Or the
soul is like the drunkard who upon awaking from his slumber asks for informa-
tion about himself and what he has done while he was unconscious. The many
opinions on the nature of the soul cannot but confirm these doubts. On this issue,
the philosophers (each one believing he is right) fight furiously amongst them-
selves like madmen in the hospital of incurables at Naples – without taking into
account that just as such men seem mad to us, we seem mad to them.55


   53
      Metaphysica, part I, p. 4a.
   54
      On the relationship between Campanella and the Scepticism see Gianni Paganini,
Skepsis. Le débat des modernes sur le Scepticisme Montaigne-Le Vayer-Campanella-
Hobbes-Descartes-Bayle (Paris, 2008); Id., ‘Tommaso Campanella: The Reappraisal and
Refutation of Scepticism’, in Gianni Paganini and José R. Maia Neto (eds.), Renaissance
Scepticism (Dordrecht, 2009), pp. 275–303.
   55
      Metaphysica, part I, pp. 20–21.
204      Chapter 10

    Faced with such objections, Campanella adopted a Socratic attitude of learned
ignorance, for which the awareness of limits, of difficulties, and of the inexhaust-
ible infinity of true understanding represents the beginning of every genuine
inquiry that wants to abstain both from presumptuous dogmatic certainties and
from the sterile nay-saying of the skeptics. To the objections concerning the
errors and uncertainties of sensible understanding, Campanella responded by
affirming that the senses are able to correct themselves and that relativity lies
not in the things themselves but rather in the mode in which they come to be
learned – given that every piece of knowledge is tailored to every entity and only
animals and the unlearned hold that things are precisely as they appear. Every
being is affected by the same thing pro mensura sua (according to its own meas-
ure). Sounds, tastes, and smells are realities that come to be perceived in dif-
ferentiated ways. But it is not the things themselves that are relative, but rather
their mode of acting and being – that is always relative and proportionate to that
which is acted upon. The same broom will seem sweet to the goat and bitter to
a man; the same sound will be pleasing or displeasing according to the character
of the spirit and the sense that undergoes the sensation.
    But the responses of greater interest are those that concern understanding
as alienation and undergoing and the paradox of the soul that understands
all other things, but seems not to understand itself. Such apparent misunder-
standing of itself derives in the first place from the fact that the soul under-
stands itself in a way that is different from the way in which it knows all other
things. Since it loves itself, it is beyond doubt that it knows itself, but it knows
itself with an essential understanding that is not discursive (as Campanella
had already indicated in the Senso delle cose): ‘every soul knows itself, since
it uses so many arts for the purpose of living, and loves itself; and that love is
born from knowledge, but not knowledge of oneself with discourses, because
discourse is a thing that is doubtful; instead, the soul knows itself by nature and
by essence in that it senses itself in those transformations, whereas it knows all
other things through discourse.’56 Campanella distinguished thus between two
kinds of knowledge, one essential that is the knowledge of itself, and another
that is discursive and follows from the alterations induced by external objects.
Understanding of oneself, abdita (hidden) and innata (innate), is intrinsic and
coincides with the being of he who knows itself. It is what Augustine called
praesentia perennis and Aquinas (referring to Augustine) called notitia prae-
sentialitatis. Knowledge of oneself is the condition of that addita, which fol-
lows from the passions and all the modifications induced by objects:

   Wisdom is perception and judgment of passion and, consequently, of the
   object that induces the passion. Every being effuses its own proper entity,

   56
        Senso delle cose, p. 109.
                                      The New Encyclopedia of Knowledge             205

   and certainly every being knows itself in the first place; otherwise, if it
   were ignorant of itself, it would not love its own being. But it knows itself
   because it is that which it is: it then senses other things in so far as it senses
   itself changed in those other things.57

When the eye sees an external stone, it sees it in the sense that ‘first it senses
the stone-like color received intrinsically by the pupil, and then it displaces
that color at once onto the outside’; thus

   Passion is not the active cause of knowledge that is the cause of science,
   but the specifying occasion of science, which derives from an innate
   knowledge:… one does not acquire science, but rather knowable things.
   Knowledge is a primality like power and will and it does not have causes in
   objects, but rather specifications. Indeed, the ignorant stone does not teach
   me that it is a stone.… Knowledge is always a knowing of oneself and this is
   not understood by he who does not consider that every being loves itself, in
   that it senses itself through itself with a hidden sense; it knows other things
   with an explicit sense [sensus additus], in an accidental and reflex way.58

Understanding by way of alienation or modification is a consequence of the
knowledge of self that is primary and innate, which is connected with the
constitutive and essential principles of its being, ‘beyond time, beyond effort,
beyond passion and action.’ In virtue of that understanding, all beings know
themselves with an abdita notion, which is not acquired and coincides with
knowledge itself, a constitutive primality comparable to power and love: ‘if all
things love their own being, then they know that being also with a kind of natural
indication, just as they love it with a natural love. The soul, and likewise every
being, knows itself before everything, in an essential way; and after that it knows
all other things, in an accidental way, in that it knows itself to be changed and in
a certain fashion changed into the things that it knows.’
    This distinction between the two modes of knowing permits us to under-
stand how it is that the soul appears to be ignorant of itself:

   It knows itself because it is what it is, but it then senses other things when
   it senses itself transformed through other things, and it is accustomed to
   knowing other things with such continuous transformations that it forgets
   itself or it transforms its understanding of itself: and it is on this account
   that the soul appears not to know itself.59



   57
       Metaphysica, part I, p. 73a.
   58
       Ibid., p. 73b.
    59
       Ibid., p. 73a. On the relationship between Campanella and Descartes, see Gianni
Paganini, ‘Le Cogito et l’ame qui “se sent.” Descartes lecteur de Campanella,’ B&C,
14 (2008), pp. 11–29; see note 53.
206      Chapter 10

The superadditae (added) understandings of external things and the incessant
sequence of the passions and the modifications brought by external objects
fade and induce a kind of forgetfulness of the original innate and hidden
understanding: ‘we are generated between contrary beings, we suffer con-
tinually from heat and cold and from innumerable objects, and in this way
we transfer ourselves almost into the being of others: undergoing and being
changed is becoming other, because the soul falls almost into a forgetfulness
of itself and into ignorance, since it is always agitated by the forces of extrane-
ous things.’60
    Tobias Adami received a copy of the Metaphysica, but did not send it to
press because Campanella had told him that he wished to work on it further.
In a Praefatio addressed to German philosophers, however, Adami gave a
very precise synthesis of the work, which suggests the hypothesis, quite prob-
able, that these pages draw directly from Campanella’s notes. He noted that
in the first part of the work ‘it is shown how small and meager is the human
knowledge of things, how incomplete and partial; this is a knowledge not of
things as they are in themselves but only according to the degree to which
their being is understood by us.’ He then offered a summary of the central
part, which addresses difficult doctrines of the primalities and of the great
influences. The summary is highly accurate and precise and doubtless echoes
pages from Campanella:

   Created things are considered to be composed of Being and of Nothing.
   The author teaches that Being is constituted with the transcendental com-
   position of the three primalities – namely, power, wisdom, and love – as if
   by a divine stamp; while Nothing is constituted by impotence, ignorance,
   and hate. Since every thing exists since it can be, knows how to be, and
   loves to be what it is, and since – losing the power of being, the knowledge
   of how to be, or the will to be – it at once loses its own being too (and dies
   when it is connected to that nothing, for indeed it was not every thing or
   the totality of being), it passes into another essence on account of the trans-
   formation and generation of things. Thus, only from the first and highest
   being – which produces all things from nothing and in which, in an inef-
   fable manner, those primalities (with simplicity and infinitely higher and
   incomprehensible essential perfection, without participating in any way
   in nothingness) concur as in their own fount and they are the same thing,
   distinct only in reason – does the nature of creatures with such a composi-
   tion derive. Essence, truth, and goodness are the objects of such primali-
   ties, on which they are sown and on which Necessity, Fate, and Harmony
   exercise their influence. In this way, the first and unitary being transports



   60
        Ibid., p. 63a.
                                       The New Encyclopedia of Knowledge               207

   its inexhaustible ideas in various modes into the duration of things (which
   is time, image of the eternity that remains always equal to itself) thanks to
   its instruments and causal agents – heat and cold – in corporeal mass (mat-
   ter) suspended in space (place) which is the basis of this world, which has in
   God its firmness and stability.61

In accordance with the doctrine of the primalities, the first Being is
essentialized by the infinite principles of Power, Wisdom, and Love. Every
finite being, qua being, is constituted and structured by these same primalities,
which essentialize it according to different modes and proportions. Therefore,
given that each being is distinct and limited, it is composed of finite degrees
of existence and infinite degrees of non-existence. Nothingness does not exist
(neither in God nor outside of him), but such nothingness serves to constitute
the finitude and the distinctiveness of beings. After the exposition of the
doctrine of the primalities, Campanella explains the three great influences
(Necessity, Fate, and Harmony), to which is entrusted the role of bearing the
infinite inflections of the divine mind in the world and in matter. In the light
of such doctrines, he revisited much discussed and fundamental problems
such as the relationships between necessity and contingency, between human
freedom, fate, and providence, and problems related to evil and sin.
   Particularly beautiful are the pages on harmony (an effect of love), in
which Campanella depicted a universal coordination of ends. These pages
constitute a strong rejection of philosophical positions, among which those
of the Peripatetics and the Epicureans, that limit or deny divine providence,
or (not recognizing nature as an expression of the intrinsic divine skill) hold
that every thing happens by chance. For Campanella, however, divine wis-
dom radiates from even the most slender blade of grass or from a fly. Even
the slightest feature or smallest fissures in the earth have a role to play in
arranging matter so that it accepts the action of heat and light in a different
way. Every atom of the world is arranged in such a way that one cannot add
or subtract anything from it without altering the order of the whole. So as to
reaffirm how nature is a multiplicity of ends, of which not all (or rather the
minority) are known to us, Campanella recourses to a childhood memory,
which appeared several times in the pages of his writings. When, as a small
child, he would go into the workshops of smiths, or those of watchmakers
and armsmiths, he would look with amazement at the number of objects and
tools that to him seemed useless (because he was unaware of how they were
used), and even dangerous because if he touched them in the wrong way they
could hurt him. If a frog were to enter our house, the furnishings that it would


   61
        Ad philosophos Germaniae, in Opera Latina, I, pp. 17–18; see ch. 4, note 14.
208     Chapter 10

see would appear to it useless and without sense. When a mouse comes in, it
twists the uses of our objects because it does not understand them. It nibbles
at clothes, defaces books, and replaces food with excrement: ‘this is how we
are in the world, which is the house and the workshop of the prime craftsman
– only much more ignorant – and on account of this we do not understand the
function of things.’62
    To the Epicureans, who deny divine art, and to those saying that divine art
is incompatible with insects and pests or with evils such as wars and diseases,
Campanella replied with the accusation that they were adopting egotistical
and limited points of view. If one takes up the point of view of the total-
ity instead, then beings (which to man appear to be useless or harmful) are
revealed to have their own place and meaning with respect to the whole. Those
beings that seem evil to us can in fact have a positive dimension: it is true not
only that noxious things are integrated into the totality of the world, but also
that if they did not exist then wisdom, knowledge, and vigilance would suffer.
Each being, sunk deep in a continual laziness, would doze in the woods or in
the fields and there would be no political association. Campanella recalled
that flies and flees would often wake him and thereby call him back to study-
ing, even as he also recalled rejoicing, as he does elsewhere, that among all of
the evils that he had to endure he was not afflicted by the evil of lice.63 Oppo-
sitions between and distinctions among beings are necessary to the order of
the world, and reality would be an undifferentiated chaos if they did not exist.
Every thing, even the smallest (vel tantilla), radiates divine art. To Aristotle
(who denied that God is concerned with the negligible events of the human
world, a concern that for him would constitute a self-abasement on God’s
part), Campanella replied that God does not abase himself in caring for such
things, because there is nothing in the world that is vile or base:

   I do not know what vileness Aristotle sees in things, from which he intends
   to preserve God. If he is referring to lice, to dung, to urine, to snakes, then he
   reveals himself to be a trifling philosopher, because they are base and vile
   things for us, but not for nature… In the world, vileness, like evil, is relative
   and not essential and such baseness exists relative to the parts but not with
   respect to the whole. Thus, nothing is vile or evil for God and the world, except
   non-being and sin. Therefore our universal God does not render himself base,
   whereas the partial God of Aristotle does. But what is more stupid than con-
   sidering God as a part and not as the whole?64



   62
      Metaphysica, part II, p. 217.
   63
      Ibid.; see note 32.
   64
      Ibid., part II, p. 169b.
                                         The New Encyclopedia of Knowledge    209

Rejecting the image of a divinity completely enclosed in a ‘higher’ and more
perfect world and disdainful of the baseness of the human world, Campanella
offered up the image of a God whose wisdom radiates in every being, from
the smallest particle to the wonders of the heavenly bodies. This is a God that,
according to what Hermes Trismegistus had affirmed, is not hidden, but radi-
ates from every natural being, sign and testimony of divinity.65
    The third part of the Metaphysics lingers on themes concerning abstract
substances such as angels and demons; the government and the care of things,
with a close study of the doctrines of Ficino and of the Hermetic and Neo-
Platonic traditions; laws and legislators, offering an entire series of “signs”
aimed at distinguishing laws sent by God, those that derive from cunning, and
those sent by the devil; religion, distinguishing between the religion that is
indita and natural and that which is addita and historical; questions regarding
prophecy, every kind of divination and miracle, with relevant distinctions aim-
ing at differentiating natural miracles and divine ones, those that are fictitious
from those that are authentic; the purpose and renewal of laws, of ages, and of
worlds, so that one might achieve the holiness ‘to which one comes thanks to
religion and to purity, in such a way that spirits are sustained and united in it.
And outside of God one cannot search, for only He is the beginning and the
end of every thing that has or desires being – He who is eternal, glorious and
blessed forever.66
    The fourteenth book is dedicated to the human soul and to the problem of
its immortality. This is one of the most tortuous points that went back to that
distant night of his adolescence, in which Campanella burst into tears realiz-
ing the weakness of Aristotle’s arguments: ‘Poor us, if the immortality of the
soul were to depend on these arguments! One night in my youth, taking into
consideration the fragility of these arguments, I began to cry and I turned with
yearning to the philosophy of Plato and Telesio, and to the doctrines of the
saints, which brought me great comfort – at that point, I abandoned Aristo-
tle.’67 In a beautiful passage in which he asked why divine soul is united to the
opaque and terrestrial body, Campanella replied that God sent the soul down
to the earth for his amusement (and so that the soul might have the chance to
become worthy of merit). He said the soul is similar to celestial heat that, even
as it fulfils its function and unites itself with the earth so as to produce every
being, secretly hankers after the heavens, its origin: ‘thus, the heat of the sun
also hides itself on the earth and makes many beings forgetful of themselves
on account of the passions that turn up. Yet, as if by a secret force, the heat of


   65
      Ibid., part III, pp. 238, 239.
   66
      Ad philosophos Germaniae, p. 18.
   67
      Quaest. phys., in Phil. realis, p. 513.
210     Chapter 10

the sun senses and tends always towards that which is higher; just so, the soul
of man, although ignorant of itself on account of the passions it undergoes,
nevertheless senses God and tends towards him as if by a secret force.’68
    The first book of the third part deals with cosmological and astronomi-
cal themes. The author reexamined all of the questions concerning the con-
stitution of heavenly bodies and their motions, the duration of the machina
mundi and the realignment of its hinges, the continual tightening of the solar
obliquity, and the final transformation of the earth by fire. He who denies
such transformations is similar to the ephemeral insect that does not even
know the difference between day and night because it is born and dies in the
course of a single day. He discussed the doctrines of Copernicus and Tycho
Brahe and he addressed the new discoveries of Galileo. Several significant
appendices attached to the text testify on several occasions to doubts, waver-
ings, and reconsiderations with regard to Pythagorean doctrines, which he had
discussed in his youth with the Brunian Colantonio Stigliola. Then, he had
rejected them with the argument that it did not seem to him opportune to
suppose the existence of other worlds and systems, multiplying the evils and
sufferings of the earth. But now, those doubts seemed to reemerge and put in
crisis his conception of the igneous nature of the heavenly bodies, residence of
blessed spirits. In any case, whatever explanation or point of view one might
adopt, there was no doubt that – in any case and above all – the variety and
the harmony of celestial bodies manifested the wondrous wisdom of God.
Natural principles, instruments of the divine art, ‘execute the work of God, a
work that they do not understand, even as they act for their own preservation,’
and ‘God makes use of the stars as the smith makes use of many hammers,
raising them, lowering them, accelerating or slowing their motions, rendering
some straight and some oblique in the workshop, so as to realize his idea. And
God moves hammers of this kind not with a material hand, but with the pleas-
ure and love of their preservation and the fear of their destruction.’69


                               Theologicorum Libri

Once again, the merit of having begun and carried forward the work of edit-
ing the gigantic Theologia (which consisted of thirty books that took more
than a decade to complete) is due to Romano Amerio. In March 1614, Cam-
panella told Galileo that he had gotten as far as the fourth book; only in


   68
     Metaphysica, part III, p. 152b.
   69
     Ibid., part III, p. 32b; on this issue, see Michel-Pierre Lerner, ‘cosmologia,’ in
Enciclopedia, vol. 1, coll. 220–229.
                                      The New Encyclopedia of Knowledge             211

1624 would he be able to say with satisfaction to Cassiano dal Pozzo: ‘I have
just finished the last and thirtieth book of the Theologia which is de saeculis
saeculorum.’70 The work remained unpublished during Campanella’s lifetime.
He was unable to get it published at Rome and unable also to get it published
at Paris with a dedication to Cardinal Richelieu, as he would have liked. After
being first mentioned by Spampanato, the publication of the volumes was
undertaken in a systematic and sustained way by Amerio from the beginning
of the 1940s. He published twenty-four books, setting the Latin text alongside
an Italian version, and dedicated numerous essays to the theological thought
of Campanella, in addition to an important book.71
    The work, which had been presumed lost, was tracked down in two volumi-
nous exemplars: one conserved in the General Archive of the Order of Preachers
(AGOP) in Rome and the other in the Bibliothèque Mazarine at Paris.72 The
Roman codex is more complete, in that it encompasses almost the entirety of
the work; but the manuscript is peppered with mistakes and is not completely
reliable. The Parisian codex, on the other hand, is largely incomplete. The two vol-
umes that remain from the original six contain only thirteen books. Yet it has the
advantage of being a considerably more reliable exemplar, in that it bears numer-
ous traces of emendations and insertions in the author’s own hand. Some prob-
lems derive from the number and the enumeration of the books. In the Syntagma
Campanella spoke of twenty-nine books, but in other passages he referred in a
more reliable manner to thirty. The Roman codex (= R), indeed, lists thirty books,
but of the fifteenth book it only gives the title (De legibus speciatim), and Amerio
assumed that the book was never written, since the subject is treated elsewhere
in the Reminiscentur. The Parisian codex (= P), for its part, introduces another
variation with respect to the enumeration of books. In fact, from the massive first
volume is excerpted the part that began with the seventeenth chapter, De provi-
dentia, which is rendered autonomous as book six. As a result of that insertion, in
P the sequence of books from six to fifteen differs from that found in R.73
    Starting in the 1990s, Maria Muccillo has resumed the work of bringing
the Theologia to press. She has edited two of the five remaining unpublished


   70
         Letter of 20 July 1624, in Lettere, p. 203.
   71
         For a recent adjustment of the edition of the books on theology (and a detailed
profile of Romano Amerio and his publications), see Maria Muccillo, La pubblicazi-
one della ‘Theologia,’ in Laboratorio Campanella, pp. 213–234.
     72
        Roma, AGOP, ser. XIV, 288–293, 6 vols.; Paris, Bibl. Mazarine, mss 1077, cc. 1031
(ll. VI–XV); 1078, cc. 884 (ll. XXI–XXIII); see Firpo, Bibliografia, pp. 159–162.
     73
        In the other three books contained in the second Paris codex (ll. XXI, XXII, XXX-
III), the enumeration comes back into alignment, in that the XV P (XIV R) fills the gap
of the inexistent XV R. Such specification is necessary because the volumes edited by
Amerio sometimes follow the numbering from R and sometimes the numbering from P.
212     Chapter 10

books.74 Thus, three books still need to be edited before the publication of the
entire work can be brought to completion: De virtute et vitio quibus felicitas
et infelicitas conquiruntur (which is book eight in R and book nine in P), De
legibus generatim (book fourteen in R, fifteen in P), and De dictis Christi legis-
latoris regisque (book twenty-two in both R and P). It is obviously impos-
sible here to even barely mention to the multiplicity of themes confronted
in the Theologia. But we can at least take note of Campanella’s explanation
(included in the work’s general introduction) of why he had been induced
to confront the limitless field of theology. The first motive was identified in
the enormous recent diffusion of heresies and in the diffusion of knowledge
of religions that were not sufficiently confuted by the learned men of the
scholastic tradition, such as the Islamic religion. The second motive derived
from the discovery of new countries and new peoples, and above all new
heavens, new stars, and new celestial systems – fields in which theologians
do not have particular competence and in which they ‘often speak as igno-
rant men, proceeding amidst the derision of those who philosophize on the
basis of experience.’ The third motive was the need for a radical reform of
the sciences and the need to emancipate them from the yoke of Aristoteli-
anism. The fourth reason consisted in the fact that the author intended to
study not one science alone, but all sciences taking into account all authors,
‘always comparing what I write and read with the book of the world, writ-
ten by the wisdom of God in vivid and real letters.’ The fifth and last of the
motives was located in the desire to go beyond the ‘carnal zeal of the mod-
ern scholastics’ (on account of which each was attached to his own master
and to his own school), so as to reconstruct an authentic solidarity beyond
every particularism and conflict between science and sanctity, which ought
not to be separated. The aim was to do this without forgetting that full and
complete truth belongs to God alone, while men can achieve truths that are
merely partial and provisional.
    Campanella was able to demonstrate all of his own theological competence
in the course of the work. He had already established such competence on
other occasions (consider the Apologia pro Galileo), and this led to the much
sought after title of magister theologiae to be bestowed upon him in June 1629.
Campanella confronted theological problems of the greatest import in the var-
ious books contained in the work. And he did so in light of the entire tradition,
which from time to time he reinterpreted and reread in order to offer more


   74
     De ceremonialibus Iesu Christo observatis (Rome, 1993), l. XX (the book, trans.
by Amerio, was completed with the transcription of the text and with a set of notes
and an index by M. Muccillo); De conservatione et gubernatione rerum (l. VI R, VII P),
ed. M. Muccillo (Rome, 2000).
                                     The New Encyclopedia of Knowledge            213

satisfying solutions to the problems that were to him more heartfelt – from the
primalitative structure of God in the creation and organization of the world to
the economy of salvation. If some books are more conventional and display
some signs of tiredness, others are more personal and are closely connected
to the great arguments of his philosophical and metaphysical speculation –
as, for example, when he addressed the question of original sin. At one level,
the Christian doctrine of the fall of Adam offers an explanation and gives an
account of the ‘great confusion’ (scompiglio) of the history of humanity – that is
to say, of the shattering of the harmony between man and nature, between man
and reason, which stems from the arrogance of Adam who perverted the just
relation between reason and sensuality. But the deeper, more tormented and
unresolved issue remained the question of why and to what end God, who is
infinitely good, permitted such a massive corruption, from which would derive
the damnation of the overwhelming majority of his own children. As usual,
Campanella rejected the doctrine shared by Muhammad and the supporters
of the Reformation (according to which God is the cause also of evil for the
purpose of being able to punish us, and thereby manifest his own justice).
In Campanella’s opinion, God could in no way either wish or cause sin. On
the contrary, sin had its origin in the fact that man is limited, prone to error,
and free. But even the most subtle arguments of famous learned men such as
Augustine, Chrysostom, and Ambrose – arguments that were analyzed and
discussed in minute detail – were not able to resolve the basic problem: ‘in any
case, it is not yet made clear by these sacred doctors why God might have per-
mitted sin (on account of which the world has been so much worsened), if the
world would have been better without the reprobate and the damned, better
without the punishment of hell and the calamity of the present life.’ The ques-
tion is so crucial because the eternal ruin of so many men is without remedy
even following the Incarnation of God himself. Those who will be condemned
to eternal torture actually outnumber those who will enjoy beatitude. This
gives rise to a temptation to believe in the audacious solution of a progressive
and universal salvation proposed by Origen, ‘who teaches that the damned,
returning in this world again and again, during another cycle of centuries, will
obtain the merit necessary to ascend to glory and that even after so many
evils the damned will all in the end be saved – men and devils alike.’75 From
here too comes the temptation to adopt solutions that might result in the most
ample possibilities with regard to salvation.


   75
     Il peccato originale, Theologicorum l. XVI, ed. R. Amerio (Rome, 1960), p. 69; see
Germana Ernst, Tommaso Campanella (1568–1639), in Il peccato originale nel pensi-
ero moderno, ed. G. Riconda, M. Ravera, C. Ciancio, G. Cuozzo (Brescia, 2009), pp.
189–212.
214   Chapter 10

    Large parts of theology are dedicated to the birth, life, and works of Christ
and to the sacraments instituted by him, which are often the object of harsh
criticism from heretics or from other monotheistic religions. Some books echo
and take up themes from other works. Thus, there are books on the virtues
that expand upon the Ethica, while the final books on eschatological themes
take up prophetic topics and treat the end of times in the manner of the
Articuli prophetales. This theological work seems thus to reveal continuities
in Campanella’s thought, rather than points of rupture. One book, in particu-
lar, has attracted a lot of interest and bewilderment in this respect. Given the
title of Magia e grazia by Amerio, the fourteenth book deals with the prob-
lematic nature of grace gratis data (as distinct from merited grace, which is
treated in the preceding book, titled Della grazia gratificante). In contrast to
grace that places man in a state of moral sanctity, rendering him in that way
welcome in the eyes of God, grace gratis data consists in a gift bestowed by
God independently of moral status. Here, one is dealing with a gift thanks to
which man is able to undertake extraordinary deeds to the advantage of the
community. Campanella’s treatment is divided into nine parts, encompassing
faith, discretion of the spirits, the capacity to speak and understand different
languages. In truth, however, the aspects on which he focused most the longest
are those that are particularly dear to him, such as prophecy and magic.76 He
argued with such argumentative exuberance that Amerio went as far as calling
the text a second De sensu rerum.77 The purpose, rigorously orthodox, was to
avoid the radical naturalization of these operations and prerogatives, so as
to preserve the divine charisma of the Church and so as to reaffirm that not
every prophecy is natural and that miracles ought not to be considered in the
same way as natural prodigies. Yet, so as to distinguish the various kinds of
these arts and doctrines and so as to indicate the criteria according to which
one can give order to such an extremely dense mass of phenomena, Campan-
ella discussed with great attention all the kinds and forms of prophecy and
magic. He recalled facts that were true and others that were false, illusory and
truthful, strange and deceitful, scientific and diabolical; he offered an extraor-
dinary repertoire of sources and points of interest, and referred also to his
own personal experiences. He stressed that it is necessary to experience eve-
rything, because speculation is not valuable without practice, for the person
who actually paints is to be counted a painter and not the person who knows
all the abstract rules of the art.78


    76
       On these topics, see Germana Ernst, Magia, divinazione e segni in Tommaso
Campanella, in La magia nell’Europa moderna. Tra antica sapienza e filosofia naturale,
ed. F. Meroi and E. Scapparone (Florence, 2007), vol. II, pp. 589–611.
    77
       Magia e grazia, Theologicorum l. XIV, ed. R. Amerio (Rome, 1957), p. 7.
    78
       Ibid., p. 153.
