11. The Disappointment of Liberty


                   Politicians, Courtiers, and the Prophet’s Fate

After extensive negotiations, unfulfilled promises, and worrying delays, a
royal letter finally arrived in Naples from Madrid in March 1626 that asked
the Viceroy to take a final decision regarding Campanella’s case. The Col-
lateral Council found that he should be freed, under caution, and on 23 May
Campanella emerged from the Castel Nuovo after almost twenty-seven years
in prison and returned to the convent of San Domenico. From there, a month
later, the Holy Office ordered that he be delivered in secret to Rome, which
he reached by sea, disguised as a secular priest under a false name.
   The first period after the arrival in Rome constituted for Campanella the
height of bitterness, and he could do nothing to hide his delusion and discom-
fort. Freed from the jails of Naples only to be closed up in those of the Holy
Office, he not only found no sympathy for or solidarity with the sufferings that
he had endured, but also had to confront renewed hostility and diffidence. The
state of mind of despondency and irritation, unusual in him, appeared with
utmost clarity in a letter from the beginning of April 1627 to Ippolito Lanci di
Acquanegra, Commissioner of the Inquisition, who had requested an opinion
from him on the question of titles. For some time previously, the aptness of
bestowing the title of ‘most eminent’ on Cardinals had been discussed. Cam-
panella replied to the prelate, who had shown benevolence and esteem towards
him, with an explicitly and unusually annoyed tone:

   I write grudgingly. Until now I had avoided writing in this way restraining
   myself not only because I was unhappy at not having been able to obtain
   even the most minimal favor from these gentlemen (being given only trouble,
   and affliction from which after twenty-eight years I was hoping to get some
   relief), but also because I wrote a short work on this matter at the behest of
   Don Virginio Cesarini.… Thus, I now write in haste and out of necessity.

In the final lines, he affirmed that he no longer had any intention of putting
his own knowledge at the service of those who clearly did not appreciate him:
‘I am a worm, and I do not want to give advice in any matter where I am not
commanded to obey, nor do I want any more to show that I know more than

G. Ernst, Tommaso Campanella, International Archives of the History               215
of Ideas /Archives internationales d’histoire des idées 200,
DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3126-6_11, © Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2010
216   Chapter 11

the ordinary courtier, since having philosophized in an uncommon manner in
order to serve patrons has already cost me dearly.’1
    Little more than a month earlier, on 21 February, he had sent a long letter to
the Cardinal-Nephew Francesco Barberini, in which, once again, he had been
forced to defend and explain himself, so as to confront the false accusations
to which he had been subjected and so as to seek to overcome the deaf, tena-
cious hostility towards his person and his books. He attempted to specify the
true reasons behind the persecutions against him, beyond the vain ‘pretexts’
given officially. Right from the beginning of the letter, he did not hide his pain-
ful astonishment at his own present condition, emphasizing the sad contrast
between the last eight years at Castel Nuovo (when he had had the chance to
give lectures on every subject to numerous ‘Italian and Spanish gentlemen’)
and his present condition, ‘which was being consumed and oppressed in this
horrendous calamity in the hands of the Holy Father of the Christians.’ In the
light of this alarming paradox, he pointed out that although at Naples he had
been among his enemies the Spanish had learned to appreciate him in time,
and passed from reputing him ‘a devil’ to considering him ‘a saint worthy of
liberty and their favor.’ Yet now, in the heart of Christianity itself, the devil –
who sought continually to set ‘the virtuous’ against the Papacy ‘with suspicions,
jealousies, mistrust, and persecutions’ – ‘found a solution in some Judas so as
to crucify me before the eyes of the wisest Pope in the world.’2
    Campanella was particularly embittered by the hue and cry raised against
his books, which his adversaries wanted to subject to a minute revision (an
unjustified and absurd proposal), ‘so as to take the pen out of the hands of
all Christian minds, and so as to arm the tongues of heretics, and ban the sciences
from Italy, and to lead every virtuous spirit into despair.’ These same books
had been read publicly at Castel Nuovo, and they were, in part, already pub-
lished, while some of them were already known to the censors. They were books
that had been in circulation for some time and were often requested, books
that ‘copyists and booksellers.… sold at high prices in Rome and at Naples
and Padua,’ without anyone finding a shadow of heresy; indeed, those who
had craftily attempted to detect a heresy of some sort had remained disappointed.




     1
       Lettere, p. 216. Campanella had addressed the issue in the elegant pamphlet De’
titoli, sent on 4 April 1624 to Virginio Cesarini, who never got to see it, given that he
died, at only twenty-nine years of age, precisely at that point. Published for the first
time by Amabile, Castelli, II, doc. 201, pp. 138–147, there is a second edition in
Germana Ernst, ‘Segni, virtù e onore nell’opuscolo De’ titoli di Tommaso Campanella,’
Filologia e Critica, 15 (2000), pp. 281–301.
     2
       See Lettere 2, pp. 85–94.
                                              The Disappointment of Liberty          217

These books constituted the principal reason for pride in his life, his only
chance to communicate his own truth and his own thought: ‘I forthrightly sent
my books all over the world in order to seek help for myself, and I thought that
they would be helpful on account of the Christian truth that they contain and
not for the heresies that my persecutors pretend to recognize in them.’3
   To the persecution of his books were added the old accusations of rebel-
lion and heresy. A recently discovered tract dating back to 16274 proposed
once again the connection between his own biographical experience and the
dramatic, but inevitable clash between the prophet and the politician. This
clash took place within the context of the divine providential design and it
was understood against the background of the difficult question that ‘every-
one finds mindboggling’ – namely, the sufferings of the good and the triumphs
of the bad.5 Thus, a point of departure was as ever the difficult reflection on
his own experience. In order to repel the accusations and to dispel suspicion,
Campanella intended to show that the misfortunes of the philosopher should
not be understood as the punishment of misdeeds or as a sign of having erred.
The reasons for his suffering set down roots in a deeper terrain and were to
be understood within a broader perspective. Since reality is nothing but the
deployment of the infinite gradations and modulations of divine wisdom, the
problem of the existence of evil is to be understood without ever putting in
doubt the pervasive presence of divinity in every last corner of the human and
natural world. From here came the polemics against doctrines (Epicurean,
Aristotelian, or Manichean) which, so as to give reasons for evil, placed limits
on God and on his providence. From the perspective of the whole, even that
which appears to be the expression of negativity acquires a meaning and a
purpose. Even evil comes to acquire a positive function with regard to the
vicissitude of things and the totality of their relations, which is explicated in a
sequence of clashes and contrasts:




    3
      The censures were based on the still suspect doctrines of the Senso delle cose
(which he would defend in a learned Defensio), and on the Atheismus triumphatus,
which was accused of leaning towards Pelagianism.
    4
     Tracked down in ms Chigi, F VI 137, cc. 31r-77v at the Biblioteca Apostolica Vati-
cana, the treatise ought perhaps to be identified with the De technis aulicorum (men-
tioned in the Syntagma, p. 64). It has been published with the title Politici e cortigiani
contro filosofi e profeti, in Germana Ernst, ‘L’opacità del male e il disincanto del pro-
feta. Profezia, ragion di Stato e provvidenza divina in un testo inedito di Campan-
ella (1627),’ B&C, 2 (1996), pp. 89–155: 104–152 (and now as an appendix to Ead., Il
carcere, il politico, il profeta (Pisa-Rome, 2002), pp. 143–179).
    5
      Poesie, p. 354.
218       Chapter 11

   Every difficulty, both natural and artificial, is the school of God. If there
   were no hunger, war, thirst, evil beasts, hot and cold, then there would be no
   philosophy, no medicine, no mathematics, no mechanics, no art of peace and
   no art of war, no art of navigation, no science of the stars, of the elements,
   or of those things that are harmful or helpful. Nor would good be cherished,
   there would be neither forethought nor prudence, nor any virtue among
   those who disdain and defeat evil and attain good. Therefore, only as beasts
   do we lament that there are evil men, whereas first we ought to lament the
   existence of thorns, heat and cold, ferocious beasts and tiny fleas, as well as
   the sky, the earth, and the sea – and in this way we would lose everything.6

Campanella did not hesitate to find a positive meaning even in his own long
detention, which had offered him the opportunity to reform all the sciences, and
in his sufferings, which had forced him to meditate on the central problem of
the immortality of the soul and had allowed him to offer to posterity, citing
his own example, ’the security and the certainty of another life because of
which I endured every affliction and discomfort.’ There were evil men who
like demons had chosen the point of view of partiality and personal interest,
and the ‘good of oneself alone’ and ‘not the good of all or of the human race.’
Such men lived imprisoned in particularity in an illusory and blinded condition,
which made them ever more arrogant, and sure of themselves:

   And they laugh at religion and at those who fear to sin, and they rejoice
   at the thought of knowing more than anyone else, because they learn to
   deceive or deny citizenship, family, and friends and make use of the loy-
   alty of others with their own duplicity and false promises to achieve their
   ends. Finally all their prudence is nothing but the knowledge that they can
   sin without fear of punishment and that they can make use of everything
   according to their own liking – thereby making fun of scientists and rec-
   ondite doctrines as donkeys loaded with letters driven by them astutely
   towards burdensome work.7

To the politician, bearer of a vision of the world that adopted the point of
view of partiality and personal interest, are opposed once again the figures of
the philosopher and the prophet, who are conscious of the correct relation-
ship of the parts with the whole. With disconcerting temerity, Campanella did
not hesitate to affirm that just as among the twelve apostles there was Judas,
so there was no lack of emissaries from the forces of the devil even among
the bishops and within the College of Cardinals. Naturally, their triumphs too
are illusory, in that they too (unwittingly) are nothing but the docile instru-
ments of a higher divine will. The exemplary places of the political arts are the

    6
        ‘L’opacità del male,’ p. 120.
   7
        Ibid., p. 127.
                                            The Disappointment of Liberty         219

courts, which he describes as puerile microcosms dominated by the licentious
desire to achieve self-interest, where adulation triumphs. All of this involves a
constant work of keeping distant from the prince anyone who might be able
to reveal intrigues and deceits. The autobiographical allusions that pervade
this work culminate in a passage that lays bare the subtle web of slanders,
denigrations, hypocrisies, and mistrust towards every novelty, seen as a threat,
in which Campanella felt himself involved:
   When a great literary figure appears, all the little literary types fear him. So
   among themselves they make jokes about him, and at the beginning they
   pass small comments in the presence of the prince. Pretending to praise
   him they say that he lacks something, that he is foolish, that he does not
   know how to live, that he is not polished in matters of grammar or speak-
   ing; they assiduously pick on little defects in some work or sonnet, or they
   find in him some other faults of this kind. They do so to the extent that is
   required for them to be able to sow further lies, because they then make out
   of him a heretic on account of the dissimilitude of customs or on account
   of some serious proposition that has been badly understood. They say that
   it is dangerous to have anything to do with such people, and especially so
   for a prince, because large brains come up with new things and they feign
   that every novelty is contrary to the state and religion. This is a most bestial
   assertion, since novelty adorns the world and augments and enlarges the
   state. And these adulating scoundrels feign that all those things that do not
   come from them are harmful to the state and to religion or that they render
   the prince somehow suspect: they do not even speak to these philosophers
   by night – as Nicodemus did while facing the same fear.8

In this way, the prince is deprived of the reliable help of the virtuous and is
forced to make use of these base courtiers, who are depicted in an ever more
precise and unforgiving way: the courtier ‘sullies the court, the people, and
the kingdom with vices,’ seeing that his chief virtues consist in his own servil-
ity to the master, by ‘showing himself to be the first to fetch the chamber-pot
for the master, moan with shouts and cries when he says that his foot or his
tooth is giving him trouble, flattering him, greasing him, and duping him.’ In
the sinister light of the mechanisms of power and the court, the true reasons
for which prophets are persecuted by politicians and bad advisers become
easier to understand. These are politicians and bad advisers who ‘intoxicate
the princes with this love of oneself alone, and they blind them such that when
they hear that someone says or does something good that is not immediately
advantageous to his own condition (as it is to the common good), they become



   8
       Ibid., p. 131.
220   Chapter 11

consumed by an anger more implacable than that of a lover when he is told
that others love or desire the object of his love.’
   Campanella was exasperated because he felt himself to be the object of a
tenacious hostility even more at Rome – the heart of Christianity – than in
the prisons of Naples. At Rome, he felt immersed in an environment that
was saturated with ambitions and calculations, full of pettiness and hypocrisy.
In the Dialogo politico tra un Veneziano, Spagnuolo e Francese several years
later, with an all too transparent allusion to the persecution suffered by the
nephews of the Pope, Campanella would not fail to mention

   the hatred that the nephews of the great Prelates bear towards all those
   who are distinguished by virtue, for which they are usually loved by their
   uncles – and so they are always looking for opportunities to disgrace them
   [philosophers and prophets]. When they see the prelate speaking secretly
   with someone more than once, confiding in that individual, they at once
   suggest on their own accounts or on behalf of others that the Prelate has
   tarnished his reputation or risks the jealousy of other princes by acting in
   this manner. They suggest that the individual is not in fact so very learned,
   or that actually he is not held in very high esteem by others, so that in the
   world it is said to be shameful to deal with his sort; then they make it seem
   that he spreads lies, and deceives, and they change, as one says, the cards he
   holds in his hand. 9


               The Astrological Affair and the Pope’s Horoscope

There can be little doubt that the most sensational episode in this period
at Rome was one linked to Campanella’s astrological skill and the desire
of Urban VIII to make use of it in order to combat the rumors of his own
imminent death in view of unfavorable celestial signs. Rumors of this kind
had been in circulation from 1626, and they would become ever more insist-
ent in the years that followed. The gloomy predictions would reach the level
of a genuine international event, culminating in 1630 with preparations and
maneuvers by the Spanish, who were angling for a new conclave as if there
were already a ‘vacant seat.’ This was an episode that constituted an infamous
example of the ambiguous marriage of astrology, politics, and propaganda.
   Urban VIII was also rather alarmed because he did indeed have a secret
interest in astrology, and he intuited that there could be something true in such
insistent predictions. He turned therefore to Campanella, who reassured him
on the basis of an attentive investigation into his birth. Called to the Papal palace,

    9
      Dialogo politico tra un Veneziano, Spagnuolo e Francese, in Amabile, Castelli,
II, doc. 244, pp. 185–214; there is also a more correct version (from which I am citing)
in Tommaso Campanella, pp. 955–993: 963.
                                            The Disappointment of Liberty         221

Campanella, from the beginning of the summer of 1628, set about putting
into practice the theories of natural magic described in the short treatise
De siderali fato vitando.10 In the Avvisi from Rome came frequent reports of
secret meetings between the Pope who was intent more than ever on protect-
ing his own life in every way possible and a friar who was ‘extremely gifted
and unique in astrology.’ It was said that thanks to nocturnal rituals (illumi-
nated by the glow of torches and candles) and thanks also to ‘certain medi-
cines against bad humors and melancholy,’ this friar was able to placate the
illustrious man’s anxieties, persuading him that ‘he would live a long and quiet
life.’11 One of the best chapters of Walker’s Spiritual and Demonic Magic from
Ficino to Campanella is dedicated to the episode.12 Revealing the affinities and
debts of Campanella’s suggestions to those of Ficino’s De vita coelitus com-
paranda, Walker expertly focused on the most famous page of the work, which
suggests remedies against the dangers posed by eclipses and which reveals the
practices used by the Pope. When the heavens are corrupted and the air is con-
taminated by noxious seeds, it is necessary – so as to protect oneself from infec-
tion and just as one does for the plague – to halt the diffusion of infected seeds,
purifying the air and the environment. Campanella advised action that would
ensure ‘right from the beginning that scattered seeds cannot set down roots
in you; just like the seed that comes from fruit or from mustard (or any other
kind of seed), which if it does not find a suitable terrain cannot set down its
roots.’ Campanella recalled that during the terrible plague in Athens, Socrates
remained immune, thanks to the temperance with which he had neutralized
the aggression of the disease. So as to confront the threat of the danger, it is
thus necessary to mark out a separate space and to reconstruct a favorable
environment, combating the obscuring of the heavens with white clothes and
adornments and purifying the infected air with fires of aromatic wood, sprin-
klings of essences and distilled waters, together with the use of relaxing music.
But above all, thanks to the lighting of seven torches representing the sun and
the planets, it is necessary to prepare a representation of a symbolic sky, which
substituted in miniature form the obscured and threatening real sky:

   First, make an effort to live in a temperate manner, conforming to religion
   and the greatest possible vicinity to God, dedicating yourself to him with
   orations and ceremonies.



   10
       The De siderali fato vitando, in Opuscoli astrologici, pp. 64–133.
   11
       Amabile, Castelli, I, pp. 325 ff.; II, doc. 203, 210, 211, 216, pp. 148, 153ff.
    12
       Daniel P. Walker, Spiritual and Demonic Magic from Ficino to Campanella (Lon-
don, 1958), pp. 203–236, now with an introduction by B. Copenhaver (Pennsylvania
State U. P., 2000).
222     Chapter 11

      Second, you ought to sprinkle your house (once it had been well-sealed
   so that no air could enter from outside) with rose vinegar and aromatic
   perfumes; you ought to set a fire with laurel, myrtle, rosemary, cypress, and
   other aromatic woods. Nothing is more effective for dissipating toxic influ-
   ences from the sky, even those sent by a demon.
      Third, you ought to adorn the edifice with white silk clothes and leafy
   boughs.
    Fourth, you ought to set two lamps and five torches, which represent the
   planets of the sky, in such a way that, when they are obscured in the heavens,
   there is not lack of substitutes on the earth, just like at night, when the sun is at
   a distance, a lamp may substitute for it, so that the day that is far away is not
   actually missed. Let there be candles emitting an aromatic blend, and, were
   you to imitate the twelve signs, you ought to proceed in a philosophical man-
   ner and not superstitiously as ordinary people do.
    Fifth, among your friends frequent those whose aphetic areas in their
   respective nativities do not seem prone to being harmed by the eclipse…
      Sixth, you ought to listen to jovial and venereal music, so that the malig-
   nity of the air might be shattered and so that helpful symbols might be
   opposed to the evil influences of the stars.
      Seventh, since for every star there are adequate correspondences to
   stones, plants, colors, odors, forms of music and motions (as I argued in the
   fifth book of my Medicina), you ought to adopt those baits that attract posi-
   tive forces and repel negative ones.13

The Pope seemed to make use of such counsel, and the scandal would erupt
in the autumn of 1629. At that point, the tract De fato – which had been
imprudently given to a ‘treacherous confrere’ (insidiosus frater)14 and which
according to Campanella had been brought to press without his knowing –
was published as the seventh and final book of the Astrologicorum libri.15 The
circumstances surrounding the publishing of this work are not entirely clear,
but it is beyond doubt that the printing of the work was carried out with the




   13
      Opuscoli astrologici, pp. 92–94.
   14
      Syntagma, p. 60; the allusion is to Niccolò Riccardi O.P., an instigator of the plot
along with the General of the Dominican Order, Niccolò Ridolfi. On this second fig-
ure and on the ‘violent and rapacious way with which he rules,’ see the letter that
Campanella sent from Paris to Urban VIII on 9 April 1635, in Lettere, pp. 282–295.
    15
      In the first edition of the Astrologicorum (Lyon, 1629), the short treatise De fato
was added at the end of the book by the printer, who in an introductory note declared
that he had received it when the printing of the other six books had already been com-
pleted and that he had wanted to add it, even so late in the day, so as not to deprive the
reader of the chance to read it.
                                              The Disappointment of Liberty          223

aim of robbing its author of a growing benevolence from the Pope and of
stopping abruptly his ascent in Roman circles.16 At the beginning of 1629, he
had been definitively cleared of every charge and on 2 June the general chap-
ter of the Dominicans had bestowed upon him the coveted title of magister
theologiae. At the same time, there were rumors circulating of his nomination
as consultor to the Holy Office, and perhaps even higher honors. The despica-
ble maneuver of the printing of the De fato achieved its aims. The nomination
as consultor was suspended. The solicited presentation of the Astrologicorum
to the Pontiff was accompanied by insinuating accusations that the author was
lapsing into disobedience because he had printed his work without the required
authorizations. All of this (combined with other accusations of heresy and
superstition) unleashed an extremely violent anger in the Pope, who was wor-
ried by the risk of being publicly compromised and suspected of superstitious
practices. Understanding too well the dire straits into which he had fallen,
Campanella hurried to set down an Apologeticus in defense of the work. Hav-
ing easily cleared the field of the accusations of heresy, he tried to prove how
the suggested practices ought not to be understood as a ceremonial and super-
stitious ritual, but rather as a completely licit natural remedy, which did not
imply any pact with the devil, either implicit or explicit.17 But if Campanella’s
self-defence was easy with regard to the need to purify infected air and sur-
roundings (as physicians recommended and as Ficino too had recommended in
his work on the Consilio contro la pestilentia),18 he had to turn to the entirety
of his own doctrines in order to reply to the more insidious objections regard-
ing the influence of numbers, the symbolic value of representation, and the
power of astrological images.




     16
       Firpo, who was also a passionate bibliophile, provides a close reconstruction of
the four editions that followed between 1629 and 1630 (for which, see the chapter ‘La
stampa clandestina degli Astrologicorum libri,’ in Ricerche, pp. 155–169): two authen-
tic printings from Lyon and a third counterfeited for the purpose of confronting the
competition of the Frankfurt edition of 1630. Picking up on cues from Amabile and
on the basis of passages from letters, re-elaborated in an approximate and unconvinc-
ing fashion, Francesco Grillo, Questioni campanelliane. La stampa fraudolenta e clan-
destina degli Astrologicorum libri (Cosenza, 1961), maintains that the first edition
was published not at Lyon, but at Rome, at the printing press of Andrea Brugiotti.
     17
       See Germana Ernst, ‘Il cielo in una stanza. L’Apologeticus di Campanella in
difesa dell’opuscolo De siderali fato vitando,’ B&C, 3 (1997), pp. 303–334; the work
is now in Opuscoli astrologici, pp. 136–173; there is an English translation by Noga
Arikha in Culture and Cosmos, 6 (2002), pp. 45–71.
     18
       On this work, see Teodoro Katinis, Medicina e filosofia in Marsilio Ficino. Il Con-
silio contro la pestilentia (Rome, 2007).
224   Chapter 11

    Remembering that there were no bans and condemnations on
Pythagorean doctrines regarding the influence of numbers, Campanella
recalled the oft-cited verse from the Book of Wisdom, according to which
God made everything ‘in number, weight, and measure’ as well as passages
from Scripture in which recourse to numerological symbolism is relatively
frequent. Indeed, Scripture pays particular attention to the number seven;
it is enough to think of the vortex-like whirlwind of the seven angels, phials,
thunder claps, trumpets, and seals of the Apocalypse. Extremely apt, then, were
the references to the Church Fathers, from Origen to Jerome to Augustine to
Richard of Saint Victor, and to texts from modern authors such as the Flemish
physician Cornelius Gemma, author of the De arte ciclognomica and Fabio
Paolini from Udine, whose Hebdomades consisted in a highly learned,
vertiginous variation on Orphic theology and the value of the number seven
and took its cue from a verse in the Aeneid.19 As for the value of symbols,
the Bible often recommended the reproduction of exemplary models and
Campanella, recalling the learned Jewish convert Sixtus of Siena, noted the
representative power of the Aaron’s priestly robes, which depicted the entire
world in miniature. Beyond having a peculiar efficacy, according to Sixtus
such images called for a certain kind of explanation (‘sciographic’), in which
the reproduction of an image is essential. Relating the illustration of Aaron’s
solemn garments, Sixtus followed it up with a highly interesting discussion
on which, without doubt, Campanella must have meditated at length. In this
kind of ‘shadowy and pictorial exposition,’ an image puts under one’s eyes
things that cannot be expressed adequately by words alone. In the absence
of a figure, objects such as Noah’s ark, the Mosaic Tabernacle, and the temple
of Solomon are graspable only badly and with effort. Yet with the help of
representations they are understood easily and can be remembered for a
long time.20 Beyond a symbolic or mystical meaning, the seven torches that
represent the heavenly bodies also take on a vis physica from the stars. In order
to sustain this claim, Campanella did not hesitate to grapple with the delicate
question of astrological images. He again took up the authorities to which he
had previously appealed: Ficino in the most discussed and problematic pages
of the books De vita; 21 Albert the Great in the Speculum astronomiae that




   19
      Regarding Gemma, see Cornelius Gemma. Cosmology, Medicine, and Natural
Philosophy in Renaissance Louvain, ed. H. Hirai (Pisa-Rome, 2008); on Paolini, see
Walker, Spiritual and Demonic Magic, pp. 126–144.
   20
      Sixtus Senensis, Bibliotheca sancta, l. III (Lyon, 1575), pp. 184f.
   21
      See Marsilio Ficino, Three Books on Life, III, 18, crit. ed. and Latin text with
English transl. by C. V. Kaske and J. R. Clark (New York, 1989).
                                            The Disappointment of Liberty        225

was attributed to him;22 and St. Thomas in texts that were more toned-
down and cautious. Campanella added an extremely adept reference from
Cajetan’s commentary on Aquinas’ Summa, in which the Cardinal succeeded,
with a subtle piece of hermeneutical skill, in showing how some of Aquinas’s
affirmations, which appeared to be contradictory, were in truth reconcilable.
He therefore concluded that astronomical images were not to be condemned,
provided that they were stripped of letters, which were the only manifestly
superstitious elements.23
    Beyond risking the loss of the Pope’s favor, Campanella understood the
gathering of the storm over astrology that would be unleashed shortly there-
after. The growing, exasperated, anti-astrological intransigence of Urban VIII
– a Pope who in private boasted of knowing the birth charts of all the cardi-
nals and who consulted the horoscope of the old Duke of Urbino in order to
identify when he would finally quit the scene so that he could take posses-
sion of his state – would culminate in the trial of astrologers in the summer
of 1630. Along with this came the incarceration and death (in a case of sus-
pected poisoning) of Don Orazio Morandi, the Abbot of the convent of Santa
Prassede, which was one of the most active centers for prognostication and
private meetings and where astrological practices were closely bound up with
political intrigue.24 In the spring of 1631, there would follow the promulgation
of the extremely severe Bull Inscrutabilis, which banned every kind of divina-
tion and threatened harsh punishments (from the confiscation of property to
capital punishment) for the authors of predictions pertaining to the life of the
Pope and his relatives.
    Embittered and worried by these events, Campanella wrote an ingenious
and convoluted Disputatio on the Bull. Under the pretense of replying to the
criticisms of hypothesized adversaries, he did everything he could to provide
a mitigating interpretation. He denounced the possibility that it might be said
that the Pope was showing greater rigor against astrologers than against heretics




   22
      See P. Zambelli, The ‘Speculum astronomiae’ and its Enigma (Dordrect-Boston-
London, 1991); A. Paravicini Bagliani, Le ‘Speculum astronomiae’: un énigme?
Enquête sur les manuscrits (Florence, 2001).
   23
      Summa th., II IIae, q. 96, art. 2 in S. Thomae Aquinatis Opera omnia, with com-
mentary by Cardinal Gaetanus, vol. IX (Rome, 1897), pp. 331–333. On images, see
Nicolas Weill-Parot, Les ‘Images astrologiques’ au Moyen Age et à la Renaissance.
Spéculations intellectuelles et pratiques magiques (XIIIe–XVe siècle) (Paris, 2001).
   24
      On the event, see Germana Ernst, ‘Scienza, astrologia e politica nella Roma
barocca. La biblioteca di don Orazio Morandi,’ in Bibliothecae selectae. Da Cusano
a Leopardi, ed. E. Canone (Florence, 1993), pp. 217–252; B. Dooley, Morandi’s Last
Prophecy and the End of Renaissance Politics (Princeton, 2002).
226     Chapter 11

and schismatics or that the Pope might be thinking more of his own personal
interest (and that of his family) than the common good.25 Aware that the ban-
ning of astrology was a political condemnation, Campanella asserted that the
wisdom of the father of all can condemn not only false doctrines but also the
dangerous ones that are capable of causing unrest. Such dangerous doctrines
had appeared in the previous year, when vain predictions and superstitions
pertaining to the Pope and the Church, unscrupulously diffused and utilized
by politicians and princes, had sparked serious disorder.26
    In the final 1637 revision of his most famous text (the Civitas Solis in which
correspondences between the terrestrial world and aspects of the celestial
world play a central role), he introduced a long digression, precisely so as to
respond to the perplexities of the Hospitaller, to whom it seemed that the
Solarians ‘use astrology too much’ (nimis astrologizant). Having reaffirmed
the full philosophical licitness of astrology, given the undeniable role of medi-
ation played by the heavens, and having recalled the diverse levels of causality
and the limits on the effects of the stars, the Genoese sailor did not hesitate
to accentuate proudly the Solarian invention of a remarkable remedy against
astral threats. When threatening celestial events are pending, they suggested
recreating a closed, separated, and protected space, a room with white walls,
in which aromas, jovial music, and happy conversations might combat the
infected seeds that were being diffused from the outside. They also suggested
the lighting of seven torches so as to create a private sky, a domestic theater of
the world. Even this rapid description was so convincing that the interlocutor
could not but recognize the utility and admire the wisdom of the remedy: ‘Oh,
all these are medical remedies and applied with such wisdom!’27


                           Living and Writing in Rome

The events connected to the publication of the De siderali fato meant the
end, at least officially, of the short period of Papal favor that Campan-
ella enjoyed. It confirmed once again the fierce hostility towards his books,
a fact that had left him profoundly embittered since his arrival in Rome.
In the months straddling 1627 and 1628, a real trial was initiated against
one of the works that was most dear to him, the Atheismus triumphatus.


   25
       The Disputatio an Bullae Sixti V et Urbani VIII contra iudiciarios calumniam in
aliquo patiantur, which was published in the volume that also included the Atheismus
triumphatus (Paris, 1636), pp. 255–273, in Opuscoli astrologici, pp. 178–241.
    26
       Ibid., pp. 218–220.
    27
       See Civitas Solis, in Tommaso Campanella, Città del Sole, ed. N. Bobbio
(Turin, 1941), pp. 160ff.: 162.
                                                The Disappointment of Liberty            227

The never quite neutralized criticisms against the doctrines of the De sensu
rerum were renewed. Campanella replied with an able and learned Defen-
sio, which would appear with the Parisian republication of the original text.
The laborious, but certainly not cold or merely encomiastic, Commentaria
to the Latin poetry of Urban VIII, completed around 1632, were never pub-
lished. As Lina Bolzoni (who is in the process of preparing a complete edi-
tion) has demonstrated in a persuasive way, they are of interest for several
reasons, particularly because they reveal the limitations of judgments that
consider the commentaries a work dictated solely by the desire to please
the vanity of the Pope. Conducted on several levels, the commentary on
the poetry of Urban VIII (which he hoped would be used as a textbook in
schools) effects a “deconstruction,” of the text that permits the author to
enter into ample digressions and insert his own naturalistic, philosophic and
theological doctrines – even those that were most doubtful from the point
of view of orthodoxy.28 Within a few years, the Atheismus ended up being
confiscated. Having arrived at the press between 1630 and 1631 (after over-
coming a whole series of obstacles) and even after it had been corrected and
reviewed according to the indications of the censors, the text was withdrawn
hardly six months after it first appeared. Also very quickly sequestered was
the Monarchia Messiae, which had been published at Iesi in 1633.
    One of the most singular results to derive from Campanella’s exasperation
at the uproar against his books was a very particular, little known text of the
1630s. Amabile had published some extracts from it,29 but only recently was
it edited in its entirety. The text in question is the Censure sopra il libro del Padre




   28
        Lina Bolzoni, ‘La restaurazione della poesia nella Prefazione dei Commentaria
campanelliani,’ Annali della Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa, ser. III (1971), pp.
307–344; Ead., ‘I Commentaria di Campanella ai Poëmata di Urbano VIII. Un uso
infedele del commento umanistico,’ Rinascimento, ser. II, 28 (1988), pp.113–132.
Published only in part, the Commentaria super poëmatibus Urbani VIII are con-
served in mss., Barb. Lat. 1918, 2037, 2048 of the Vatican Library. The Praefatio (Barb.
Lat. 1918) and the Commentum in Elegia ‘Poësis probis et piis documentis primaevo
decori restituenda’ (Barb. Lat. 2048) have been published in Tommaso Campanella,
Opere letterarie, ed. L. Bolzoni (Turin, 1977), pp. 666–889 (with a facing-page transla-
tion); sections of Barb. Lat. 1918 have been published by R. Tirindelli Sferra-Carini
in Letteratura e critica. Studi in onore di Natalino Sapegno, vol. III (Rome, 1976), pp.
287–316, and C. Ferri, in Tommaso Campanella, De Sancto Ludovico (Rome, 1990);
the texts of the Barb. Lat. 2037 are contained in Gianfranco Formichetti, Campanella
critico letterario (Rome, 1983), pp. 47–109; the same author published a section of
Barb. Lat. 1918 in G. Formichetti, I testi e la scrittura (Rome, 1990), pp. 19-66.
     29
        Amabile, Castelli, II, doc. 243, pp. 179–185; Firpo, Bibliografia, n. 38, pp. 148–149.
228   Chapter 11

Mostro ‘Ragionamenti sopra le litanie di Nostra Signora.’30 The Master of the
Sacred Palace, Niccolò Riccardi (or as everyone called him Padre Mostro,
literally ‘Father Monster’) was always involved in the persecutions to which
Campanella was subjected. Campanella therefore contemplated a kind of
retaliation, directed more against the rage of censorship than against the
person of his adversary. He decided to proceed in a manner comparable to
his enemies. Having extracted a lengthy list of propositions that he held to
be erroneous, ridiculous, or decidedly heretical from Riccardi’s book entitled
Ragionamenti sopra le litanie di Nostra Signora (Genoa, 1626), he commented
on them and subjected them to a rigorous censure. The result is unnerving. On
the one hand, the passages extracted from the original text cannot help but
strike us, even after making allowances for baroque taste, for their insipidness
and awkwardness. On the other hand, Campanella replied to them with seri-
ousness and punctiliousness – and with a complete absence of lightness and
irony. He unmasked the rhetorical tricks employed by the Monster, denounc-
ing its equivocations, its improper metaphors and paradoxes, together with
its affected and histrionic language, accusing him of expressing himself like a
comedian and of taking pleasure in jokes worthy of a ‘buffoon’ on the stage. We
should recall that Riccardi was a famous preacher, proud of his own ‘dexterous’
oratory, with which he was able to bring those who listened to him to tears or
make them laugh. But Campanella did not permit joking ‘about saints.’ Right
from the proem, he condemned ‘the preacher’s excuse that it is convenient
for him to tell lies with grace and make fun of the sacred for the sake of his
listeners’ amusement.’ In general, he did not hide his own intolerance towards
authors such as Lucian or Erasmus, or literary figures such as Boccaccio or
Aretino (denouncing also ‘the nonsense’ with which ‘the buffoon Francis
Rabelais introduced heresy into France’), when they play games with religion
and sacred things – things about which one can argue, certainly, but not joke.31
The frigid comparisons of Riccardi between paradise and Mary’s uterus did
not amuse him. He also replied to philosophical errors: glass when it breaks
does not break ‘into nothing,’ but rather ‘into pieces’; ideas are not at all
illusory, but rather extremely real; one ought not to ‘praise’ but rather ‘honor’
virtue.32 He did not hide his impatience with the exaggeration of ‘false honors’


    30
       Tommaso Campanella, Censure sopra il libro del Padre Mostro ‘Ragionamenti
sopra le litanie di Nostra Signora,’ ed. A. Terminelli (Rome, 1998); the edition of the
text suffers from many oversights and is questionable in several respects. Among
other things, the editor claims improperly to have ‘discovered’ a manuscript that was
already known, cited, and partly published. On the text, see Michele Miele, ‘Tommaso
Campanella e le Censure al padre Mostro,’ in Laboratorio Campanella, pp. 197–211.
    31
       Censure sopra il libro del Padre Mostro, pp. 39–40.
    32
       Ibid., pp. 88; 67; 104.
                                            The Disappointment of Liberty        229

attributed to the Virgin, who, even in the exceptionality of her role, continued
in her own condition as creature. And he did not fail to put ‘maternity’ back
in the context of ‘paternity,’ recalling that for Aquinas ‘Deus masculinis, non
femininis vocabulis est nominandus’ (‘one should use masculine terms when
referring to God, not feminine ones.’)
    He became even more indignant when Riccardi implied the most serious
theological errors in completely inappropriate language, calling Mary ‘Man-
ess, Christ-ess, or Goddess,’ tending to set her up as a divinity, considering her
superior to Christ, making out of her a kind of fourth person in the Trinity.33
Campanella was equally incensed at the linguistic expedients to which the
Monster recoursed. He accused him of attenuating his own audacious affirma-
tions with expressions such as ‘very nearly’ and ‘to put the matter thus.’ Cam-
panella made him the butt of a rare and witty joke: ‘although he might say, out
of fear for the Inquisition, that it is a blasphemy to consider Mary as a fourth
person of the Trinity, nevertheless he adds that being very nearly divine and
treated as if she were divine – such that therefore it is very nearly blasphemy, as
if he were really blaspheming.’34 Campanella’s text circulated in manuscript to
some extent, but never reached the press. In its own way this achieved his aims,
by raising some doubts in Roman circles and above all by alarming Riccardi.
That Riccardi was indeed alarmed is obvious from the conciliatory – rather
unctuous – tones of a famous letter that he wrote to Campanella on 28 Novem-
ber 1638. In that letter, he asserted that he had always had him in his heart, and
protested against the improper and arbitrary extrapolation of his propositions,
which were ‘taken out’ of context. This was, of course, precisely the kind of treat-
ment to which Campanella’s texts had been subject.35
    In the autumn of 1631 and 1632, Campanella was able to stay at Frascati,
in the institution of the Pious Schools, founded by José of Calasanz, offering
lessons to around ten ‘clerical students.’36 Connected to these contacts and this
teaching activity was a small work of great elegance. Taking up the defense of
the Pious Schools (which intended to extend higher education even among
the lower classes), the work responded to a double series of objections, both
political and religious, and dealt with a theme that was particularly dear to the




   33
       Ibid., pp. 68,70.
   34
       Ibid., p. 75.
    35
       The text of the letter is in an appendix in Ambrosius Eszer, ‘Niccolò Riccardi,
O.P.- ‘Padre Mostro’ (1585–1639),’ Angelicum, 60 (1989), pp. 458–461.
    36
       In 1597, the Spaniard José of Calasanz (1558–1648) had founded the Pious
Schools at Rome. Their aim was to offer a free education to all, and they were (espe-
cially after recognition in 1621 as a regular religious order) highly successful.
230   Chapter 11

author – namely, the education and diffusion of knowledge to every level of
society in the broadest possible way.37
   In the opening lines of the work, Campanella returned once again to a
theme that had been a constant in his writing and on which he was now forced
to reflect again – namely, the attacks against those who are divinely inspired,
do their best, and work for the benefit of men. That extremely useful institu-
tions, such as the Pious Schools, should be criticized from political and reli-
gious quarters should come as no surprise, when one considers that when
philosophers and prophets, the apostles and even Christ himself, were all victims
of accusations and persecution. Campanella had experienced it enough in his
own life to know that one was dealing with real slander. He recalled having
confronted the issue in a specific treatise that had been dedicated to proving
that those who bear witness to the truth and operate for the benefit of other
people are persecuted and put to death. Yet later they rise again to fame and
glory, and so it was that the world that had assailed them with scourges when
they were alive honored them once they were dead.
   Politicians insisted on the social harm caused by religious orders in general,
accusing them of consuming goods and resources without offering anything in
return. More precisely they accused popular schools of subverting the social
order. In point of fact, the extension of knowledge to the most humble risked
altering the relationship between the working classes and the nobles – for now
the nobles would be forced to work in their turn, losing their privileged roles
and functions. Before replying to the objections, Campanella launched into a
passionate plea in favor of the sciences, to which all we are called and which
grow and are perfected as they amplify and expand. The diffusion of knowl-
edge to every level of society cannot but be useful to society as a whole and
every government ought to encourage and favor it, rather than putting obsta-
cles in its way. Even he who dedicates himself to practical activity will do it
much better if he knows the principles of his own art and his own trade. A
painter will be more able if he learns mathematics, and a peasant will be more
capable if he knows the rules of agriculture – something, it was worth noting,
that had been held in high esteem by the Romans. Generally speaking, it is




    37
       The work was tracked down and published by Leodegario Picanyol as Tommaso
Campanella, Liber apologeticus contra impugnantes institutum Scholarum Piarum,
Ephemerides Calasanctianae (1932), pp. 170–177, 217–223, 253–258; subsequently, it
appeared in L. Picanyol, Le Scuole Pie e Galileo Galilei (Rome, 1942), pp. 229–239. There
is an Italian translation in Cesare Gamba, II pensiero pedagogico della Controriforma,
ed. L. Volpicelli (Florence, 1960), pp. 571–585, and it was translated into English by
K. Jensen and A. K. Liebreich, Archivum Scholarum Piarum, 8 (1984), pp. 29–76.
                                            The Disappointment of Liberty        231

advantageous that artisans and workers – from sailors to builders, from cobblers
to barbers – understand properly the principles of their own activities and
are not only in possession of a merely empirical expertise. Insisting on a very
important theme, to which he returned on other occasions, Campanella did not
hesitate to assert that only tyrants sustain and support ignorance, for they do
so deluded into thinking that it will permit them to dominate their subjects all
the more effectively. From that perspective even idolatry and false superstition
are arms that work in favor of unjust princes, while belief in the true God and
in his wisdom has an emancipatory function.
    The responses all proceed along these general lines. The supposed social
cost of religious orders is non-existent, in that the religious orders that prac-
tice a communitarian life give society much more than the little that they sub-
tract for their own maintenance. The intention of the Pious Schools to invite
all, irrespective of their class, to the convivium of the sciences is worthy of the
highest praise. With regard to the worries about social order, even Machiavelli
admitted that the contests between the plebs and the nobility turned out to be
useful when they raise the plebs up to higher office. He admitted likewise that
the Roman Republic made great use of this raising up of the lower strata of
citizens, even as the opposite happened at Florence – where the nobles abased
themselves into the lower orders. It is therefore just that poor pupils should
achieve cultural distinction if they are naturally talented. It is a boon for the
state that not only nobles occupy the socially most elevated positions, because
some of those nobles ‘are endowed with obtuse minds that are made worse
by negligence.’ Laziness is always harmful, on account of which it is a positive
thing that the nobility should work. In any case, ‘it is just that those who by
nature are better be preferred to those who are better only in opinion, in that
the plebs of good, natural character are of greater utility than obtuse, negli-
gent nobles.’ A shining example of this tendency is provided by (St.) Carlo
Borromeo, who admitted both noblemen and the poor into the seminaries
that he founded. These pages are yet another example of the polemic against
Aristotle and his theorization of a society that legitimizes inequality:

   Aristotle bestows only a temporal happiness and only to a few, almost as if the
   human genus were divided into different species, one capable of happiness,
   the other not. But God made the entire human race from one progenitor and
   promised eternal happiness to all (as the apostle [St. Paul] says) and declared
   that temporal goods are not enough for the vastness of the human soul. He
   chooses also those who labor in poverty and in other works; they have a better
   hope, in fact, in that they are fighting more for victory in this world.

With regard to the religious objections, Campanella contended that they
seemed motivated by rivalries between different religious orders, particu-
larly on the part of the Jesuits, who were fearful of an unwelcome competitor
232   Chapter 11

in the field of teaching. Those objections perhaps reflected an internal debate
on the possible risks of transforming the duties, purposes, and call to poverty
of the ‘Calasanzians.’ On this point too, Campanella could not but reply by
reaffirming his praise for knowledge and its diffusion. Those who prohibit the
study of the sciences or consider such study useless are not to be listened to –
and, furthermore, they are to be rejected entirely. Since Christ is the wisdom of
God and all the sciences are rays of the divine Word, Campanella concluded
with a happy and synthetic formula (fairly close to the sense of the Apologia
pro Galileo) according to which ‘he who opposes the sciences, opposes Christ.’
Aristotle did not permit peasants, artisans, or anyone else who worked for a
living to be involved in philosophy, because they were all considered to be serv-
ants of society. In making this assertion, Aristotle not only took up a position
that was cruel; he also took up a position that was impious and bestial. Anyone
who upholds similar doctrines ‘abases, obscures, depresses the human race and
transforms it into livestock.’38


              From the Fall of La Rochelle to the Flight to France

While in the prison of Holy Office at Rome, in the spring of 1628, Campanella
received a visit from the learned orientalist Jacques Gaffarel (1601–1681),
scholar of the cabala and occult doctrines. Having defended the De sensu
rerum against the attacks of Marin Mersenne, Gaffarel displayed a constancy
of friendship and esteem towards Campanella. In 1633, at Venice, he pub-
lished Campanella’s De reformatione scientiarum Index. With enthusiasm, he
emphasized the novelty of every doctrine from logic to natural philosophy
to medicine, from politics to astrology to ethics. He thus highlighted the nov-
elty of an author who, ‘for the acuity and almost divine splendor of his spirit,
sets out doctrines so varied and remarkable that no one can do anything but
admire and exalt the wondrous power of his mind.’39 Two years later he would
have the Medicina printed with similar praise at Lyon and dedicate it to Prince
Odoardo Farnese. But it was perhaps Gaffarel’s account of his encounter with
Campanella in prison that contributed most to the diffusion in Europe of the



    38
       Ephemerides Calasanctianae, pp. 176–177, 217–219, 223. Two other theological
works date back to the Roman period: the De conceptione beatae Virginis, ed. L. Firpo,
Sapienza, 22 (1969), pp. 82–248; there is also an Italian translation: Apologia
dell’Immacolata Concezione, ed. A. Langella (Palermo, 2004). The second tract is De
praecedentia, praesertim religiosorum ed. by Michele Miele in ‘Un opuscolo inedito
ritenuto perduto di Tommaso Campanella,’ Archivum Fratrum Praedicatorum, 52
(1982), pp. 267–322.
    39
       De reformatione scientiarum Index (Venice: Andrea Baba, 1633).
                                                The Disappointment of Liberty            233

name and condition of Campanella; he reported the episode in a famous page
of the Curiositez inouyes (1629). Gaffarel evoked the meeting, stressing two
points that were closely related and that would both strike the reader. On the
one hand, there was the curious process of mimetic identification in the pris-
oner. Intent on writing a letter, Campanella would reproduce the grimaces and
facial expressions of the recipient of the letter, so as to make present to himself
the state of mind of that person. On the other hand, there was the horror and
emotion of the visitor upon seeing the effects of the tortures. Even years later,
the torture sessions had left indelible signs on the body and on the lacerated
thighs of the philosopher: ‘ayant le gras des jambes toutes meurtries et les
fesses presque sans chair, la lui ayant arraché par morceux, afin de tirer de
lui la confession des crimes dont on l’accusait.’ The wounds were so striking
that, at first, they give Gaffarel the incorrect impression that Campanella’s
facial grimaces were the result of madness and sufferings connected to those
events!40
    In the 1630s, Campanella struck up friendships, epistolary or personal, with
other French scholars. Particularly important were those with Gabriel Naudé
and Pierre Gassendi. Before meeting him at Rome, Naudé had been a pre-
cocious reader and admirer of Campanella. Already in 1623, he had praised
Tobias Adami, who, in the capacity of a midwife (‘sage femme’), had between
1617 and 1623 published a significant number of texts by Campanella, who was
called ‘phoenix de tous les philosophes et politiques.’41 A couple of years later, in
the Apologie pour tous les grands personnages qui ont été faussement soupcon-
nés de magie (1625), Campanella was cited, together with Socrates, Apollonius
Tyaneus, Cecco d’Ascoli, and Cardano, among those who, in order to reinforce
their own credit with the people, have spread the supposition that the gods
take a special interest in their person ‘par la continuelle assistance de quelque
génie tutelaire et directeur de toutes leurs principales actions.’ Reference was
being made to the passage in the De sensu rerum (3.10) where the author con-
fessed having heard voices in particular instances of danger and to the passage
(2.25) in which he alluded, in a rather obscure and reticent way, to the effect of




   40
       Jacques Gaffarel, Curiositez inouyes sur la sculpture talismanique des Persanes,
horoscope des patriarches et lecture des estoilles (Paris: H. du Mesnil, 1629), pp. 267–274.
    41
       Instruction à la France sur la verité de l’histoire des Frères de la Rose-Croix (Paris,
1623), p. 79; at the end of the work (pp. 116–117), translating it into French, Naudé cites
a lengthy excerpt polemicizing against the Rosacrucians that he thought belonged to
Campanella but that actually is taken from the appendix (anonymous, but in fact the
work of the text’s translator, Christoph Besold) added to the second German translation
of the Monarchia di Spagna.
234     Chapter 11

demonic apparitions on his life and his thought.42 In the Bibliographia politica
Campanella was numbered among those ‘imaginative spirits who endeavored
to show us the form, or rather the idea, of a true and most perfect republic.’43
Having recalled the ‘learned’ and ‘wise’ Thomas More, ‘whose Utopia will live
and will be esteemed so long as justice, modesty, and piety are not entirely
banished from the spirits and the hearts of men,’ Naudé cited the Civitas Solis,
praising the ‘ardent and prodigious spirit’ of its author and ‘the novelty of its
thoughts’ as well as ‘the sublimity of the feeling’ of the work written ‘amidst
the shadows and squalor of prison.’ In the Considérations politiques sur les
coups d’État (a text largely shot through with Campanellian conceits that are
not always explicit), Campanella would be remembered once more for that
kind of “secrecy” and astuteness on account of which some thinkers – from
Pico to Postel and Cardano – were credited with receiving special assistance
from demons. In a further passage, Campanella’s name would return in a
context that stressed the importance of preaching and eloquence in politics.
According to Naudé, the people – which for its irrationality and inconstancy is
subject to all the storms of the passions, but which retains its strength – can be
deceived and seduced by recourse to visions and prophecies, but above all to
the persuasive capacity of the word.44 In his political works, Campanella too
had underlined the power of words, which bind spirits together. The power
of words is the first link on which all the other chains of the body and of the
goods of fortune depend. In the De sensu rerum as well as in the Rhetorica,
Campanella insisted on the magical force that words exert on the imagination
and the passions of he who is listening.45
   Naudé was able to visit Campanella frequently in the course of his stay in
Rome in 1631 and 1632. He showed himself to be an admirer of his erudition
and very devoted to his writings, to the point of conserving even notes and
rough copies. Under the pressing insistence of his friend, Campanella dictated
to him that precious intellectual autobiography that is the Syntagma de libris
propriis and he passed on to him many pieces of biographical information.46
Although the Vita Campanellae would be lost before it was published, many


   42
       Apologie pour tous les grands personnages qui ont été faussement soupconnés de
magie (Paris: F. Targa, 1625), ch. 3, p. 55; the text (there were various editions and
translations in the course of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries) also appears
in the volume Libertins du XVIIe siècle, ed. J. Prévot (Paris, 1998); the passage cited
appears at p. 166.
    43
       (Venice: F. Baba, 1633), p. 35.
    44
       Considérations politiques sur les coups d’Estat (Rome, 1639; Paris, 1673), pp. 606,
711.
    45
       Rhetorica, pp. 742–45; see ch. 10, pp. 197–198.
    46
       See ch. 1, note 2.
                                             The Disappointment of Liberty         235

steps in the life of the philosopher can be identified from that emphatic
Panegyricus addressed to Urban VIII that Naudé published in Paris in 1644.47
In the midst of erudite citations and excessive adulation directed at the Pope,
one encounters passages and information that are of great interest, regarding
the failed conspiracy in Calabria and pertaining to the years of imprisonment
at Naples. Naudé described these things in a grim and gruesome manner but
not without efficacy and emotion, presenting the philosopher against the
background of shadowy places, infested with mice and snakes, echoing with
the cries of owls and bats. The bleak depiction (unfortunately not so far from
the truth) served to confer a greater emphasis on the moral power of the
philosopher and on the originality of his thought, born as it was in a condition
of extreme isolation and concentration. Unlike birds that fly in the open air
and that can make use of the most varied materials for constructing their
nests, the philosopher was forced to reach exclusively inwards for his own
life-blood – in a manner similar to the spider, which (enclosed in a tower or
a cell) constructs its own wondrous thread and by extracting the most deeply
hidden juices from its own interior.
    Among the Epigrammata that Naudé wrote for the philosophers and men
of letters of his time (which would accompany the portraits in the collection
of Cassiano del Pozzo), there is one that is dedicated to Campanella.48 In these
verses, he emphasized the ‘extraordinary appearance of this extraordinary
man,’ who was characterized by a flamboyant gaze and by an unusually
shaped head. This look corresponded well to the originality of his thought;
and it was said that ‘he who was superior to all in talent/was different from
all others in appearance.’49 Some years after the meeting at Rome, the intense
friendship between Campanella and Naudé would be overshadowed by
misunderstandings and polemics that Fabri de Peiresc, a friend to both, would




   47
        G. Naudé, Panegyricus dictus Urbano VIII Pont. Max. ob beneficia ab ipso in M.
Thom. Campanellam collata (Parisiis: apud S. et G. Cramoisy, 1644). See Michel-Pierre
Lerner, ‘Le Panégyrique différé ou les aléas de la notice “Thomas Campanella” des
Apes Urbanae,’ B&C, 7 (2001), pp. 413–451.
     48
        On the iconography of Campanella, other than the fundamental study by L.
Firpo, L’iconografia di Tommaso Campanella (Florence, 1964), see Eugenio Canone,
‘Il volto di Campanella. Dipinti e incisioni,’ in Laboratorio Campanella, pp. 241–251.
     49
        Gabriel Naudé, Epigrammata in virorum literatorum imagines (Rome, 1641), p.
13: ‘Effigies miranda viri mirabilis ista est,/si modo naturae par fuit artis opus. /Nam
geminas torquent oculi sub vertice tedas/et caput in septem scinditur areolas:/scilicet
ingenio potuit qui vincere cunctos/diversam a cunctis possidet effigiem.’ There is a
new edition of this extremely rare book in Gabriel Naudé, Epigrammi per i ritratti
della biblioteca di Cassiano dal Pozzo, ed. E. Canone and G. Ernst (Pisa-Rome, 2009).
236   Chapter 11

seek to mediate with some irritation and effort.50 To the recriminations from
Campanella, who accused his friend not only of not having given to the
press some writings that he had entrusted to him, but also of having used
them to compose his own, Naudé replied with resentful personal attacks,
accusing him of being a charlatan and a cheat. In any case, the episode merits
being reconsidered in a more balanced and precise way.51
    If the issues in Campanella that seemed to interest Naudé most pertained
to some aspects of his political thought (and in particular those that had to
do with rhetoric and religion as powerful forms of magic that work on the
passions and imagination of the common people), the intellectual dialogue
with Gassendi centered on the problem of atomism and its impossibility – to
Campanella’s way of thinking – of giving an exhaustive account of reality.
Evidence attesting to relations between the two scholars is contained in several
letters that date back to the beginning of the 1630s. On 7 May 1632, Campan-
ella – praising Gassendi for having contributed to disclosing the arcana coeli
that had already in part been disclosed by Copernicus and Galileo – remarked
that the schools were occupied by traditional philosophers, who measured eve-
rything not according to what nature teaches (duce natura), but according to
their own choices (proprio arbitratu), such that they kept the minds of people
in the dark, slumbering. Campanella added the most important point towards
the end of the letter: if he could not but rejoice that his friend had chased away
the ‘clouds of Aristotle,’ he also could not approve of the way in which he
had turned towards the delusions of Epicurus. He warned him that the world
was not ruled by chance but was rather guided by wisdom and reason, refer-
ring him to his own Atheismus triumphatus. In a letter written some time later,
Campanella once again emphasized the limitations of the atomist position: in
his opinion exceptional celestial phenomena could not be accounted for ‘‘in
a accidental manner, without the intervention of the author or all things and




    50
       See Nicolas-Claude Fabri de Peiresc, Lettres a Naudé (1629–37), ed. Ph. Wolfe
(Paris-Seattle-Tübingen, 1983).
    51
       The reconstruction put forward by René Pintard ought to be reconsidered on
many points, Le Libertinage érudit dans la première moitié du XVIIe siècle (1943; new
ed. Geneva-Paris, 1983). On the relationship between Campanella and Naudé, see
Anna Lisa Schino, ‘Campanella tra magia naturale e scienza nel giudizio di Gabriel
Naudé,’ Physis, 22 (1980), pp. 393–431; Michel-Pierre Lerner, Tommaso Campanella
en France au XVIIe siècle (Naples, 1995), pp. 33–36; Lorenzo Bianchi, Rinascimento
e libertinismo. Studi su Gabriel Naudé (Naples, 1996), pp. 62–70; Id., ‘Libertas philos-
ophandi et République des Lettres: France et Italie à travers les relations entre
Naudé et Campanella,’ in Les premiers siècles de la République Européenne des Lettres
(1368–1638), ed. M. Fumaroli (Paris, 2005), pp. 342–363.
                                              The Disappointment of Liberty          237

without him doing or saying anything in some way.’ He went on to say ‘how
then can you, such a learned man, … think that comets and phenomena of such
great size come to pass in a purposeless manner on their own account only,
without God being their author? Or perhaps you hold that he attends to some
things only and not to others?’ The scientific explanation of a celestial event
cannot exclude the possibility that it also has some value as a sign. The fact that
the thought of man can turn itself towards the infinite proves that it is not the
result of the clash of material corpuscles. Furthermore, the wondrous ‘structure
of the world and of animals and of plants and the use of their parts and their
force and their understanding – all these things manifest with complete clarity
this first power that we call God.’ Simply because we are ignorant of the ends
and the meanings of many things does not mean that we ought to deny them
in the manner of a child who, upon entering the workshop of a blacksmith, is
amazed at the sight of objects and instruments that he does not know and that
seem to him useless or dangerous. Replying to the letter, Gassendi (having
described his interlocutor as praecipuus (most excellent) among the phi-
losophers of the day) reassured him on the question of divine providence.
He too argued against the Epicureans and he too was ‘a Christian and a theo-
logian.’ Indeed, he praised the Atheismus triumphatus, even if he did not fail to
express a degree of concern that malicious persons could make evil use of the
antireligious arguments listed in the text.52
    In a political sense, the years at Rome were a period of repositioning. At
first cautiously and then ever more openly, Campanella moved towards the
position of France – also defended by Urban VIII. Immediately after the defeat
of the Huguenots at La Rochelle by the Most Christian Sovereign on 15 Octo-
ber 1628 (an event marked at Rome by garish celebrations that profoundly
irritated the Spanish), Campanella exalted the event in a Oratio pro Rupella
recepta that has not survived. The work was read aloud in public, however, by
someone other than the author – on 1 December 1628, in the Church of San
Luigi dei Francesi, the historical church of the French community in Rome,
in the presence of the Pope.53 Another short work followed with the long title


    52
       Lettere, p. 236f; Pierre Gassendi, Opera omnia (Lyon, 1658), VI, p. 54. There is a
French translation by S. Taussig, in Pierre Gassendi, Lettres latines (Turnhout, 2004), I,
pp. 95–96. On the relationship between the two scholars, see Germana Ernst, ‘Atomes,
Providence, signes célestes. Le dialogue epistolaire entre Campanella et Gassendi,’ in
Gassendi et la modernité, ed. S. Taussig (Turnhout, 2008), pp. 61–82.
    53
        Regarding the dating of the speech, see Rodolfo De Mattei, ‘Note sul pensiero
politico di T. Campanella (con tre lettere inedite),’ in Campanella e Vico (Rome:
Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, 1969), pp. 100–101. On the relationship between
Campanella and French circles, both in Italy and in Paris, see Michel-Pierre Lerner,
Tommaso Campanella en France au XVIIe siècle.
238    Chapter 11

of Avvertimento al Re di Francia, al Re di Spagna e al Sommo Pontefice circa
alli presenti e passati mali d’Italia. In that work, Campanella distanced him-
self from the pro-Spanish position and aligned himself cautiously with the
French position upheld by the Pontiff. This short treatise probably dates to
1629, when, following the fall of La Rochelle, France felt free enough to
return to occupying itself with Italian issues in the most direct way, set itself
against the pretenses of Spain, and took an active role in events connected
to the intricate affair pertaining to the succession of the Duchy of Mantua.
In these pages, Campanella once again energetically deplored the squabbles
of the Italian princes, which did nothing but advance the interests and the
territorial acquisitions of the enemies of the faith. Thus, the Turkish sover-
eigns had reinforced and extended greatly their power, taking advantage, with
great political astuteness, of the in-fighting with Christendom. Campanella
expressed the fear that the renewal of the clash between the French and the
Spanish in Italian territory could endanger the security and the very survival
of the Kingdom of Naples, which had always been a prize in the sights of for-
eign powers. Lest it fall victim to their opposing ambitions, Campanella pro-
posed putting the Kingdom in the hands of the Pontiff once again, a solution
that obviously would have been warmly welcomed by Urban VIII, who had
already for years hoped to add the Kingdom to his own estate and to have
his much loved nephew Taddeo govern it after an eventual territorial reor-
ganization following from the weakening of Spain. Beyond contingent events,
however, Campanella brought up points that were very important to him and
that he had upheld since the years of his youth. He stressed that the Pope was
‘a common father’ and that princes had nothing to lose in that ‘giving to the
Church is not giving, but investing in the community.’ Campanella insisted on
the importance of eliminating the dangerous reasons for conflict between for-
eign princes by removing from the mouths of the two warring dogs their bone
of contention, for this preoccupation prevented them from concentrating on
the defense of the Christian flock in a more profitable manner.54
    Campanella’s interest in and understanding of French politics became
deeper and more precise thanks to an assiduous frequenting of the circles
centered on the French embassy. To the Count of Brassac, Campanella dedi-
cated an important theological treatise (the De praedestinatione). At his
request, he wrote a commentary on the ninth chapter of the Letter to the
Romans, which was one of the hottest points of contention with the Reform-
ers. Indeed, it would be another French ambassador, François de Noailles,



   54
     The text – published for the first time in Amabile, Castelli, II, doc. 241, pp. 168–171– is
now in Tommaso Campanella, pp. 945–949.
                                              The Disappointment of Liberty          239

who would organize Campanella’s flight to France in the autumn of 1634.55
The most conspicuous result of this change of position was the lively Dialogo
politico tra un Veneziano, Spagnolo e Francese composed at Rome towards the
end of 1632. In that text, the clash between the positions of the ‘Spaniard’ and
the ‘Frenchman’ was compared to the more detached and rational position of
the Venetian (who was the author’s spokesman).56 It is not improbable that
the reading, in the previous summer, of Galileo’s Dialogo sopra i due massimi
sistemi del mondo had had some influence on this stylistic choice. The political
discourse was punctuated by repeated naturalistic references. The Spaniard
maintains that the efforts of Louis XIII to return France ‘to its pristine state
of its ancient glory’ were vain. The French kingdom was already 800 years old,
it was argued. As is true in all organisms, ‘the old cannot become young once
again,’ and whatever ‘attempt is made at rejuvenation cannot last.’ France
had already completed its cycle and could never return to the grandeur of the
age of Charlemagne, since it had reached ‘the arid period of its arc.’ And it is
precisely on this account that France is afflicted with discord inside the royal
family itself, given that ‘in an old body the old parts are not well coordinated,
with humors disagreeing and the blood becoming dry.’ Furthermore, it has
difficulty restoring itself to health. In fact, only a young organism can eas-
ily recuperate after ‘it suffers some violent scourge, such as war, or internal
malady like sedition.’ To these arguments, the Frenchman replies by making
reference to another naturalistic image: with the passage to the house of the
Bourbons, the kingdom of France has begun again ‘under new auspices’ and
has initiated a new cycle in its own history. The same happens when ‘onto the
trunk of an old plant we graft the sprig of a new and young plant, creating
thereby a new age and allowing for growth, together with plentiful fruit.’57
    With the possibility assured in a preliminary way that the French monarchy
might play a decisive role in European politics, the Venetian will ably demonstrate
in the course of the dialogue that France, despite its difficulties and disagreements,

   55
       Expositio super cap. IX Epistulae Sancti Pauli ad Romanos, in Atheismus triumphatus
(Paris, 1636), pp. 327–344; there is a modern edition in Paolo Ponzio, ‘Predestinazione
divina e volontà umana. L’Expositio super Cap. IX Epistulae Sancti Pauli ecc. di
Tommaso Campanella,’ in Verum et Certum. Studi di storiografia filosofica in onore di
Ada Lamacchia, ed. C. Esposito et al. (Bari, 1998), pp. 369–413, 389–413.
    56
        Rodolfo De Mattei, in ‘Intorno al Discorso (o Dialogo) sui rumori di Francia
attribuito a T. Campanella,’ Atti dell’Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, Rendiconti, s.
VIII, 26 (1972), pp. 583–588, has cast doubt on the authenticity of the Dialogo. In
his opinion, the understanding of French personalities and affairs is too detailed. But
Campanella could have obtained such precise information from the diplomatic circles
that he frequented – diplomatic circles that might have prompted him to draft the
Dialogo, furnishing him with appropriate material.
    57
       Dialogo politico tra un Veneziano, p. 955f.
240   Chapter 11

is entering into an ascendant phase, while Spain displays all the symptoms of
crisis and decline. With these positions, Campanella announced themes that
would be central in the following years. He revealed with clarity (and not
without risk) that the years were now long gone in which he identified the
Spanish sovereign with the mystical Cyrus, from whom the work of rebuilding
a new Jerusalem and gathering together the peoples of the world into a single
flock was expected. The chief motive of the work is a defense of the person
and the actions of Cardinal Richelieu against the accusations of the Queen
mother, Marie de’ Medici, and her son Gaston d’Orléans, the younger brother
of the King and next in line for the throne. On account of their intense hostil-
ity towards the growing power of the Cardinal, they had put themselves at the
forefront of a politics of opposition to and confrontation with the sovereign.
Deploring this dangerous discord (which, dismembering the ruling family
itself, risked paralyzing the energies of the entire nation), Campanella showed
how the initiatives of Richelieu were all directed not egotistically at the acqui-
sition of personal power, but rather at reinforcing the state against the forces
that attacked its unity and at the constitution of an ever more unified ‘politi-
cal body.’ In his interventions, the Venetian rebutted the accusations against
the Cardinal with precision, both on the Spanish side and on the French. He
demonstrated how his politics of centralizing and consolidating power was
inspired by a desire to return France to its ancient glory and splendor. In
this way, Richelieu was acting as a faithful instrument of the King and was
not motivated, as his enemies insinuated, by an unbridled personal ambition
that aimed at excluding him from power. But this project, which privileges
‘the common good’ over the good of the individual, unleashed suspicions and
resentments. As Campanella pointed out in a page of acute psychological
analysis, one of the most difficult things for man consists in ‘rejecting love of
self in preference for the common good.’ This is so much more true in those
who set themselves one against another so as to acquire the same prize. If
‘natural similitude induces love, similitude in claims on goods leads to hatred’;
heat fights against cold precisely because both would like to occupy the same
matter. One can witness such things within the family too, where ‘the chil-
dren all envy one another with each claiming the attention of the father and his
patrimony.’ Above all, such things are evident ‘at court, where all are chasing
the goodwill of the lord in order to acquire those goods that are customarily
given to courtiers, and yet among them one finds the greatest jealousy and
inextinguishable thirst.’ Wives hate those who are loved by their husbands
and they hate most intensely their direct rivals, and despise with ‘a most rabid
                                        The Disappointment of Liberty      241

hatred’ the ruffians ‘who share the love of the husband about or alienate it to
others.’58 One ought not to be surprised, therefore, that Richelieu was hated
by the relatives of the King. The more a counselor is a virtuous person and
exhorts the prince to high and honorable undertakings, the more he is unpop-
ular with the relatives of the prince, who aim only at their own good. And it
is for this reason that ‘powerful men have no greater enemies for their own
glory than their own blood-relations.’ These sympathies for France would be
reaffirmed some months later, when Campanella replied by means of a Latin
couplet to another couplet that accused the French sovereign of being as cruel
as Nero and the Turk put together (the first a matricide, the second a mur-
derer of his siblings). If the crimes of Nero and the Turk were so much more
odious because they were perpetrated against innocents, then on the contrary
the French sovereign showed the greatest piety and generosity in forgiving his
own family members even though they were guilty.59
    But between 1633 and 1634 dramatic new events would bring the period at
Rome brusquely to a close. In August of 1633 Tommaso Pignatelli was jailed
at Naples. Pignatelli was a young Calabrian Dominican who was accused
of having plotted a conspiracy against the Spanish. Since he had been a
disciple of Campanella, renewed suspicions began to take shape, together with
threats from the Spanish authorities. When, in the Autumn of 1634, Pignatelli
was condemned to death (and was in fact strangled in prison on 6 October),
the situation escalated to such an extent that it was deemed opportune, even
by the Pope, to expatriate Campanella to France. Campanella was aided by
Ambassador François de Noailles, in whose carriage – at night, disguised as
a Minim friar, and under a false name – Campanella fled on 21 October 1634
from Rome to Livorno, where he boarded ship, bound for France.




   58
        Ibid., p. 962f.
   59
        Poesie, p. 609f.
