12. The Paris Years


                    The Arrival in France and the Stay in Paris

After disembarking at Marseilles, Campanella wrote a letter in Latin to
the Provençal scholar Nicolas-Claude Fabri de Peiresc on 29 October 1634,
informing him of his arrival on French soil and alluding in a laconic manner
to the grave matters that had forced him to abandon Rome so precipitously –
without even having had time to bid farewell to his friends.1 Peiresc had con-
tacted Campanella by letter the previous year, in order to ask for his opinion
of Herbert of Cherbury’s De veritate, a letter in which Peiresc had expressed
his admiration to the Dominican friar for ‘such exquisite work and such sub-
lime thoughts.’2 Having received the letter in which Campanella manifested
his own lively desire to meet as soon as possible with such a patron and pro-
tector of the learned, Peiresc hurried to send him a litter that brought him
to his home in Aix, where he hosted him for about ten days. As Gassendi
(who would himself also be invited to Aix for the purpose of meeting the
Dominican) would later recall, Peiresc welcomed the exile with a generosity
and affection that elicited from Campanella the deepest emotion and grati-
tude. When, after several days, Campanella resumed his journey to Paris, he
was overcome with emotion upon receiving a sum of money. He confessed
that, if in the past he had had the capacity to hold himself back from tears
even during the most cruel tortures, he could not hold them back now after


    1
      Lettere, pp. 247–248. Érudit and collector of books and ancient objects, Nicolas-
Claude Fabri de Peiresc (1580–1637) was a counselor to the Parlement of Aix-en-
Provence and correspondent to all the scholars of Europe; see Peter N. Miller,
Peiresc’s Europe. Learning and Virtue in the Seventeenth Century (New Haven and
London, 2000); on his connections with Italy, see Cecilia Rizza, Peiresc e l’Italia (Turin,
1965), esp. pp. 239–273.
    2
     Amabile, Castelli, II, doc. 313, pp. 248–249. From 1626, Peiresc hurried to acquire all
the works of the Dominican available on the market. There is evidence of this desire to
collect Campanella’s works in a volume, recently identified, which brings together four
of his works rebound with Peiresc’s monogram; see, Michel-Pierre Lerner, ‘Un recueil
d’oeuvres de Campanella dans la bibliothèque de Peiresc,’ B&C, 11 (2005), pp. 101–110.


G. Ernst, Tommaso Campanella, International Archives of the History                    243
of Ideas /Archives internationales d’histoire des idées 200,
DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3126-6_12, © Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2010
244    Chapter 12

such a generous gesture from a friend.3 In a passage from the Oeconomica, he
would later affirm that he who gives his own money ought to be thought of as
a greater friend than he who offers his own life. This is what Peiresc, glory of
the French as well as of philosophers and patron of famous men, had done.4
    After a brief stop at Lyon, where he checked the printing of the Medicina
(which was underway), Campanella resumed his journey to Paris and arrived
there on 1 December. During the first weeks, he stayed in the home of the
Bishop of Saint Flour. Thereafter, he set himself up in the reformed Domini-
can convent, in the rue St. Honoré. In his first letter to Peiresc from the capi-
tal, while reporting to him the warm welcome he had received (‘I am the
beneficiary of continual acts of care, beneficence, loving duties and visits from
great men and scholars’), Campanella announced a meeting with Richelieu
set for the next day, while also showing a great satisfaction at the pleasant
nature of place, climate, and persons:

   I admired the scale of France, its mountains and its plains … together with the
   fecundity of the hills and the usefulness of the ranges, the bountifulness of the
   plains that can provide bread for four kingdoms – and I have not yet felt cold.
   In fact, one finds all the lands right up to Paris verdant and flourishing, a sign
   of the wonderful temperateness. One notes the variety of land in its texture,
   color, and manner of being worked. For its abundance of meats and butters, it
   is superior; and all of its people are happy. I do not find either complaints or
   sadness, except among those boys who emerge from every village, hamlet, and
   tavern pleading for charity – but then immediately they proceed to laugh.5

On the following 9 February, he would be received by the Most Christian
King, Louis XIII, who embraced him twice, welcomed him to France, and
displayed a joy at the encounter and an empathy for the misfortunes that had
befallen the exile: ‘he laughed with happiness and at the same time showed
compassion for my troubles,’ said Campanella, ‘and empathized with a kingly
decorum.’6
   In the years spent in Paris, Campanella’s literary activity flourished to a
surprising degree. He took part in philosophical and scientific debates, such as
that on the size of the mathematical point, composing the Quaestio singularis


   3
     Pierre Gassendi, Viri illustris Nicolai Claudii Fabricii de Peiresc… Vita (Paris, 1641),
pp. 289–290: ‘…sed accepit etiam discedens quinquaginta aureos, adeo ut tanta benefi-
centia obrutus, et quasi suffusus, testatus fuerit se prius quidem habuisse satis constan-
tiae, ut per tormenta saevissima continere lacrymas posset, at non habuisse, quando
est virum adeo munificum expertus.’
    4
      Oeconomica, in Phil. realis, p. 210.
    5
      Letter dated 11 December 1634, in Lettere, pp. 261–263.
    6
      Letter to Peiresc dated 9 March 1635, Lettere, p. 272.
                                                            The Paris Years     245

in reply to the question circulated among the learned by Jean-Baptiste Poysson
d’Angers.7 He added a fulsome appendix to the sixth article of the twentieth
physiological question on the causes of the flooding of the Nile following a
reading of the text by Marin Cureau de la Chambre, who years later would
publish a volume of his own in response to the argument contained in Cam-
panella’s fragment.8 He maintained a regular correspondence with Rome, in
which he complained to the Pope and the Cardinals about old intrigues and
new persecutions.9 He sent vivid letters to the French sovereign and to the
King’s sister Henrietta Maria, married to Charles I of England. He composed
eloquent dedicatory epistles for the volumes of his own Opera, which – amid
myriad difficulties – began to appear, to his great satisfaction. Furthermore,
we see a significant reprise of Campanella’s political thought and a renewal
of his poetic voice after a long silence. On the occasion of the long-awaited
birth of the Dauphin (at the first news of the event Campanella had written:
‘here one experiences a great joy and celebration on account of the Queen’s
miraculous pregnancy’),10 he composed an inspired Latin Ecloga in which he
took up once again astrological and prophetic themes that had always been
dear to him. Conscious that even being exiled on French soil had its own sig-
nificance and aware that at Paris he was completing the cycle of his extraor-
dinary human and philosophical experience, Campanella did not hesitate to
interpret even the long detention in the prisons of Naples in terms of a divine
wisdom as he dedicated the huge tome of the Philosophia realis to the Grand
Chancellor Pierre Séguier. Likewise, the arrival in France – homeland of lib-
erty – was read as the result of a ‘prodigious fate.’ Cast into solitude, stripped
of normal contacts with the world and with men, far from any everyday hap-
piness, he found the kind of concentration that was necessary for bringing to
completion the great project of reforming the entire encyclopedia of knowl-
edge, a project that he had envisioned even in the years of his youth:

   My mind, a terrain well prepared by persecution, had nourished deep roots.
   But it would never have been able to bear fruit if God had not liberated
   me with a miracle far more wondrous than the cunning stratagem that per-
   mitted Ulysses to escape from the cave of Polyphemus, when I was able



      7See Paolo Ponzio, ‘Tommaso Campanella e la Quaestio singularis di Jean-
Baptiste Poysson,’ Physis, 34 (1997), pp. 71–97; the text of the quaestio is to be
found in Amabile, Castelli, II, pp. 297–299; it is reproduced in Mathematica, ed. A.
Brissoni (Rome-Reggio Calabria, 1989), pp. 92–94.
      8
        P hil. realis, pp. 200–204; see Firpo, Bibliografia, p. 94.
     9
        See especially the letter in which he sketched a portrait of General Niccolò
Ridolfi, unmasking his plots, in Lettere, pp. 282–295 (see ch. 11, note 14).
   10
       Letter to Filippo Colonna dated 10 January 1638, in Lettere 2, p. 138.
246     Chapter 12

   to complete the book on the ages of ages, crowning achievement of every
   science. And while at Rome again, with the benevolence of the most wise
   Pontiff, I wore myself out bringing to light works completed with divine
   inspiration – divinely, I say, since I summon men to God as the master, and
   not to me or any other man. Then once again, innocent though I was (as eve-
   ryone agreed), disaster struck and I was forced, by a kind of prodigious fate,
   to come to the most Christian kingdom of France, homeland of liberty.11

Through his letters, Campanella maintained relations with scholars, such as
Cassiano dal Pozzo, Fabri de Peiresc, and the chancellor Pierre Séguier. Of
particular importance is the correspondence with the Provençal érudit, which
continued after the meeting in Aix. In such letters, Campanella replied to
questions that had been put to him by his kind and learned correspondent.
Campanella would inform him of his own encounters with the most illustrious
personages of the capital and volunteer information on the publication of his
works, sending him exemplars at the first opportunity and communicating to
him his desire to dedicate one of them to him, so as to demonstrate thereby
his gratitude to a man he called ‘a great light for his speculative and moral
powers.’12 But his friend would refuse the offers of a dedication, saying that
he did not seek ‘such vanities,’ and that for him ‘the love of friends without
such pomp’ sufficed.13
    These reciprocal professions of esteem and sympathy suffered a sudden
rupture in the summer of 1635, when Peiresc felt himself duty-bound to write
a very severe letter to Campanella after receiving some troubling informa-
tion. Already in a letter to Naudé that dated from the end of June, Peiresc had
had very harsh words to say about the friar, who – he felt – failed to practice
the precepts of his own moral philosophy. In a letter to Campanella dated
3 July, he criticized the Dominican, on account of alleged derision for the
atomistic doctrines held by Gassendi, warning him that ‘from principles that
may appear ridiculous one can sometimes recognize the most weighty and
exquisite things.’ Peiresc asked Campanella to weigh with greater caution his
own judgments when conversing with French scholars, reminding him that in
France there is ‘the greatest freedom for one man to choose one opinion and
another man another.’ In a subsequent letter, he argued that, given the brev-
ity of human life, it was not worth the trouble to invest one’s own energies in
refuting the doctrines of others. It was more profitable to prize the good that



   11
      Letter dated 6 August 1637 to Chancellor Séguier, in Lettere, pp. 379–380.
   12
      Letter dated 11 December 1634, in Lettere, p. 261. The letters of Peiresc to Cam-
panella are in Amabile, Castelli, II, doc. 313–324, pp. 248–259.
   13
      Amabile, Castelli, II, doc. 321, p. 257.
                                                                 The Paris Years      247

one could find in every philosophy and, leaving aside inopportune and tiresome
polemics, it was better to limit oneself ‘to teaching that which the light of
nature has been able to make clear to you.’14
    Very much embittered, Campanella rushed to reply, defending himself
with passion and dignity against the criticisms that were leveled against him
and that seemed to him to be derived from intolerable slanders. Emphasizing
the coherence of his own doctrines with his way of living (‘I observe whatever
I wrote in the new Ethics’), he reaffirmed his admiration and esteem for his
friend Gassendi, even as he said once again that atomism seemed insufficient
to him on many counts, in that it limited itself to a consideration of the ‘matter
of the universe’ without taking into account ‘the wondrous skill’ exhibited in
the cosmos. With regard to liberty, Campanella noted, he who has been bru-
tally deprived of liberty for so many years not only respects it but also prizes
it to the point that he comes to France precisely because he ‘thirsts’ for liberty
‘after so many troubles.’ He declared himself fully in agreement with regard
to the respect one owes to philosophical positions different from one’s own.
Echoing images from a famous letter to Monsignor Querenghi written many
years earlier, Campanella reaffirmed the principles that inspired his new phi-
losophy and at the same time expressed an interesting judgment on Galileo
and the Copernican system:

   I never fail to learn something from ants, from flies and from all the minute
   creatures of nature, and yet as Your Lordship can see I hate to learn from
   men … And I see that in the most disdained sects of philosophy there are
   wonderful thoughts. And when I examine those doctrines it is necessary that
   I move on to confute them, as Galileo did with Copernicus – and one should
   note that in this matter simple caution did not suffice for him. But I place
   these sects in the theater of the world for the good of all … I call all to the
   school of God, in the book of the universe, where God writes his concepts
   and dogmas in living form. I call them away from the schools of men (and
   indeed from my own school), and I beseech them not to mistake me for
   some master – unus magister vester qui in coelis est (‘your one master who is
   in heaven’) – but rather to dedicate themselves to the school of God.15

The regret that Campanella displayed was so sincere and heartfelt that Peiresc
could not help concluding that the matter was closed. A month later, Campan-
ella could put his mind at rest in the knowledge that he had not lost a friend.16
In the first half of the nineteenth century, three letters to Peiresc from 1636



   14
      Ibid., doc. 321, p. 255–257; doc. 322, p. 258.
   15
      Letter to Peiresc dated 17 July 1635, in Lettere, pp. 316–321: 318–319; see Mt 23, 8.
   16
      Letter to Peiresc dated 22 August 1635, Lettere, p. 322.
248     Chapter 12

kept in the Biliothèque Nationale in Paris were removed by Guglielmo Libri,
the adventurous and unscrupulous count of Florentine origin, whose unbridled
passion for manuscripts and rare books induced him to ransack the libraries
of France and remove great quantities of precious materials. The third letter
(cited above, dated 19 June), the most sought after, has been traced in recent
years and added to the first two letters tracked down and published by Firpo. In
this way, the wound inflicted by Libri on the correspondence between Cam-
panella and Peiresc has been healed completely.17
    The renewal of political interests of the French years is also reflected in the
letters, as in the eloquent appeal to Henrietta Maria of Bourbon, married to
Charles I, in which Campanella – returning to a theme that he held close to his
heart (namely, the denunciation of the negative consequences for political
life stemming from the Protestant doctrine of predestination) – encouraged
the Queen to work on her consort so as to advance the cause of the Catholic
religion, which, in his opinion, was the only faith compatible with a peaceful
political organization.18
    Also connected to the lively political interests of Campanella’s last years
were the two tracts of 1636, found by Firpo in a codex containing seven political
writings from the period. Firpo himself vividly described his adventurous trip
to Paris hot on the heels of a codex that was pursued, lost, and finally recov-
ered.19 In the first tract, Campanella answered the request of an unknown gen-
tleman who was asking for explanations of ‘the prodigy and paradox’ by virtue
of which the empire of Spain (by then exhausted and in economic collapse)
continued to extend itself throughout the world, while the dominion of the
French – which was clearly ‘superior in population, riches, military valor, and
armaments’ – struggled to maintain its natural borders. The second is a passion-
ate appeal to the sovereign Louis XIII, which – as Firpo emphasized – is more
than a private communication and is written as a ‘genuinely political pamphlet,’
directed at influencing public opinion. Campanella intended to dissuade the


   17
        See ch. 1, note 14; ch. 2, note 41.
   18
        See the letter dated 10 January 1637 (and 2 June 1638), in Lettere 2, pp. 126–136,
151–157.
     19
        Firpo gave notice of the rediscovery and the acquisition of the codex, publishing
three of the seven manuscripts it contained, in ‘Gli ultimi scritti politici del Campanella,’
Rivista Storica Italiana, 63 (1961), pp. 772–801. The two tracts of 1636 are published in
Id., ‘Idee politiche di Tommaso Campanella nel 1636 (Due memoriali inediti),’ Il Pen-
siero politico, 19 (1986), pp. 197-221: 207-221; see also Id., ‘Gli “Opuscoli” del Campan-
ella,’ in Tommaso Campanella (1568-1639). Miscellanea di Studi nel IV centenario della
sua nascita (Naples, 1969), pp. 301–337: 312ff. Regarding the journey to Paris, see Enzo
Baldini’s vivid reconstruction, ‘Luigi Firpo e Campanella: cinquant’anni di ricerche e
pubblicazioni,’ B&C, 2 (1996), pp. 325–358: 336–337; on the publication of the last two
unpublished writings, see note 26 below.
                                                                     The Paris Years       249

sovereign from signing a peace treaty with Spain, which he presented as ruinous
and humiliating even as many others hoped for its ratification after the repeated
defeats of the French army. Firpo believed these to be among the most beautiful
pages in the rediscovered political writings, in which ‘the humble foreign friar’
put himself forward as the authentic moral conscience of the country that was
hosting him. Firpo emphasized the particular oratorical power of the letter’s
peroration, in which the French sovereign is exhorted to take up decisively the
role of liberator orbis (liberator of the world) against the tyranny of the Spanish
(who are characterized as oppressors and destroyers of the human race). And,
in an eloquent passage, Firpo pointed out that here it is not simply the political
advisor who speaks, the shrewd purveyor of themes of anti-Habsburg propa-
ganda. Instead it is the old Calabrian conspirator, witness to the oppression of
the kingdom and prisoner in Neapolitan castles, who gives voice to his bursting
indignation and fights lest a great opportunity for liberation be wasted.20


                    From Spanish Decline to French Hegemony

Campanella did not fail to return the warm welcome he had received from
scholars and from the court, taking up political reflection again with a renewed
passion. Thus, we see, in the course of the two-year period from early 1635
to late 1636, a surprising flowering of works of varying lengths, styles, and
persuasiveness that are nevertheless united by a reaffirmation of consistent
themes and by the exhortation directed at France to see itself as the paladin
of liberty against the tyranny of the Hispanic-Habsburg power, the inexorable
decline of which Campanella pointed out with lucidity.
    Already in the spring of 1635, he sent to the Pope the quick-witted Aforismi
politici per le presenti necessità di Francia, which would later be translated into
Latin and amplified, informing the Pope that he had ‘given [the Aforismi] in
secret to the Cardinal.’21 In the following year, Richelieu himself would com-
mission a discourse entitled De auctoritate Pontificis supra imperio instituendo
et mutando from Campanella. The philosopher had the honor of presenting
this discourse at a lecture on 8 June 1636, at Conflans, in the presence of
leading dignitaries of the realm and the Cardinal himself.22 Campanella paid
homage to Richelieu in the new edition of the De sensu rerum, dedicated to


    20
       Firpo, ‘Idee politiche,’ p. 20; the letter to the King is also in Lettere 2, pp. 126–130,
151–154.
    21
       See the letter to Urban VIII dated 23 April 1635, in Lettere, p. 297.
    22
       For the Conflans discouse, see the letter to Francesco Barberini dated 15 July
1636, in Lettere, p. 349; John M. Headley, ‘Tommaso Campanella’s Military Sermon
before Richelieu at Conflans – 8 June 1636,’ Archiv für Reformationgeschichte, special
issue Die Reformation in Deutschland und Europa: Interpretationen und Debatten, 84
(1993), pp. 553–574.
250     Chapter 12

him with the highest praise as someone who ‘out of a divided, dismembered
realm that was infested with nests of impious and rebellious men’ had made
‘a united kingdom, home to the good, scourge of the bad, secure bulwark for
the Christian Church, and refuge of the Muses’ thanks to his own remarkable
prudence and to the power of a most pious and most strong king.23 The year
1635 also saw the appearance of the Documenta ad Gallorum nationem, a
treatise in which it was imagined that Charlemagne himself had returned to
his own nation, so as to underscore the merits of the present sovereign and his
ministers, together with the insidiousness of the Spanish political agenda.24
    To these years dates the drafting of a vast work, untitled and incomplete,
that we may refer to as the Monarchia di Francia and the texts of 1636 recov-
ered by Luigi Firpo.25 The last two unpublished writings of the codex have
appeared recently. We are dealing here with two groups of brief texts, in which
the style and argumentation seem at points to grow obscure, but they testify
to the renewed energy of these years. The first group includes the three dis-
courses that the author directed towards the Christian princes, so as to exhort
them to reconsider once again their relationships with the papacy and so as to
demonstrate to them how it might be advantageous and necessary to enter
into relations of alliance and full accord with the Pontiff, who is put forward
as the guarantor of peace and justice, defender of their rights, and the cause of
union and defense against enemies of the faith. The final cluster of texts bears
the title Avvertimenti a Venezia, and it deals, in a lucid synthesis, with various
points of prime and constant importance in Campanella’s thought concerning
the connections between theological and political beliefs.26
    At the core of the political reflection of this period we find a comparative
analysis of the two great European powers, from which it was inferred that
France found itself in an ascendant phase of ‘increasing fortunes,’ while Spain
was experiencing an inexorable decline, as can be seen in the comparison of
the two powers sketched in an effective and direct style in the exordium to the
Aforismi politici per le presenti necessità di Francia:
 1. In all wars, ventures, and negotiations that are done with speed and
     promptness, the French win and the Spanish lose.
 2. In all wars and matters that are done slowly or by procrastinating, the Spanish win.
 3.	When undertakings and negotiations are conducted in secret, the Spanish
     win.

   23
        The dedication is also to be found in Lettere, pp. 372–374: 373.
   24
        The text of the Documenti is in Opuscoli inediti, pp. 57–103.
     25
       See note 19.
     26
       See Germana Ernst, ‘Ancora sugli ultimi scritti politici di Campanella. I. Gli
inediti Discorsi ai principi in favore del Papato,’ B&C, 5 (1999), pp. 131–153: 137–153;
‘II. Gli Avvertimenti a Venezia del 1636,’ ibid., pp. 447–465: 452–465.
                                                              The Paris Years     251

 4. When such matters are brought out into the open, the French win.
 5. It is said that, for the most part, the Spanish are by nature cunning; the French,
    courageous. But sometimes, by accident, these characteristics can be inverted.
 6. He who plays his own game wins; he who plays the game of others loses – as
    when one plays strap with gypsies, which is their stock in trade.
 7. Thus, when the Spanish play in the open and with speed, they lose; and the
    French lose when the game is played in secret and slowly.
 8. The Spaniard is more apt to conserve; the Frenchman, to conquer.
 9. Thus, all the great acquisitions of the Spanish have come from intrigue or
    marriage, and under the guidance of Italian captains; the preservation of French
    gains ought to be done in the same manner.
10. Engaging in combat with someone whose fortune is on the rise is extremely
    dangerous, even though he who is attacked is not powerful. And attacking he
    who is without fortune renders victory easy, even though he who is attacked is
    more powerful.
11. One recognizes the ebb and flow of fortune from events, stars, and from the
    nature of similar cases – and likewise from the origin, present state, and decline
    of principalities.
12. A principality that is dying under its own, old auspices can renew itself by using
    foreign, young auspices.
13. One ought to reckon that the aged power of the French under the house of Valois
    is being rejuvenated under the house of Bourbon, just as when a new branch is
    grafted onto an old one.
14. And one ought to reckon also that the power of Spain, dying under the royal
    houses of Castile and Lusitania, has been rejuvenated by the House of Austria,
    which has been tied to it.
15. Things that grow quickly, die quickly, as one sees in mushrooms, melons, grains,
    and the like, whereas on the contrary those trees that bear fruit only with time
    live long – as one sees with oaks, orange trees, and the like.
16. The monarchy of Spain grew with great speed; in 100 years it occupied more
    lands than the Romans occupied in 700 – whence one can conclude that it is by
    now in a state of decline.27
The formation itself of the empire – which had come to pass remarkably
quickly (thanks to exceptionally favorable external conditions such as mar-
riages, successions, heredity, and the aggregations of states) – could not but
cause astonishment. Indeed, ‘all false things that have more appearance than
reality are quick to grow and quick to fail,’ as one sees in torrents that, gener-




   27
      The Aforismi (composed in 1635 and published for the first time by Amabile,
Castelli, II, doc. 344, pp. 291–297) now in Tommaso Campanella, pp. 999–1007: the pas-
sage cited is at p. 1000.
252     Chapter 12

ated by sudden rains, rise and disappear with great speed, while ‘great rivers
that have their own source of water are perpetual.’ Products such as ‘marrows,
melons, and oats grow quickly and bear fruit in the first year, and then die in
the summer,’ while trees such as the oak and the beech that bear fruit only
with time live a long life.28
    But for Campanella there were two points above all that more dramati-
cally announced the fatal decline of Spain: it knew neither how to ‘hispanisize’
nor how to accumulate savings. If the Romans were masters of assimilating
populations piecemeal, rendering them participants in the empire (such that
the larger it became territorially, the more its population of citizens grew), the
Spanish, on account of their immense arrogance, disdained any integration
with other populations whatsoever. Thus, as their empire grew they came to
‘lack citizens and forces.’ Having failed to adopt the wise politics of mixed
marriages proposed in the Monarchia di Spagna, the Spanish Empire experi-
enced an alarming demographic contraction, due to the losses of troops in war
and on account of the sterility of its women, who were subject to excessive
heat. Thus, the Spanish, from the eight million that they had been, were now
reduced by half and ‘just as marrows and grains send all of their substance,
juice, and spirit outwards without setting down roots (such that luxuriating
and dilating they deflate and grow old), so Spain had sent all its power and
life-blood beyond its borders and was left without inhabitants and without
value – left only with clergy, friars, priests, monks, and whores.’29 Owing to the
scarcity of inhabitants they are forced (and in Campanella’s opinion it was a
very grave consequence) to depopulate the countries in which they arrived,
‘such that there are no longer any indigenous peoples in Cuba, in Hispaniola,
nor in South America; they are called destroyers of the human race, and they
make themselves the object of hatred.’ Chosen by occult divine providence
to evangelize the entire globe, the Spanish have betrayed their own mission
so as to transform themselves into executioners and instruments of divine
wrath. Incapable of governing nations with laws adapted to their own particu-
lar nature, ‘they depopulate and destroy them, such that wherever they have
gone, they have made a desert of the earth … and are hated by every nation
for their cruelty and immense arrogance.’30 They ‘destroy the nations that are
not able to adjust to their customs, as they did in the New World, which was
rendered desolate on their account.’ They leave nothing behind them but des-
olation and death: ‘you go to the Americans and in those immense lands you



   28
      Mon. Francia, pp. 461–462.
   29
      Ibid., p. 463.
   30
      Ibid., pp. 451, 395.
                                                            The Paris Years     253

will not find living beings any more, but rather only bones and ashes, and the
land grown fat on the blood of its inhabitants.’31
    The second point, which condemns the politics of Spain even more gravely,
is its incapacity to accumulate savings and its ruinous economic policy. Its enor-
mous income is badly administered, and infinite sums of money are wasted on
‘buffoons, women, piazze morte (deadheads), clergymen, and a treacherous
people.’32 As early as the Monarchia di Spagna Campanella had asserted that
‘we can say that in truth the gold of the New World has in part ruined the old
world, because it created avarice in our minds and broke the reciprocal love
between men.’ In the later works, Campanella reaffirmed that the influx of
riches had rendered social inequality (and the vices that come along with it)
more extreme.33 That influx had contributed to the abandoning of agriculture
and the trades, activities already gravely compromised due to the banishments
of the Moors and the Jews, such that all preferred to give themselves over
to ‘business deals involving money and serving rich men’ rather than work
itself.34 Valuable coins passed into France, for the purchasing of foodstuffs, or
so as to corrupt political leaders. Thus, while the rival nation abounded with
people, with money, and with goods of all kinds, Spain offered to the visitor
an ever more miserable spectacle. Men were forced to enlist, so as to have
something to eat and a pair of shoes to put on their feet (and only the most
fortunate also had laces to tie them) and ‘the homes are few, either deserted
or fallen into disrepair. Even where the population is low, there is nothing
to eat and sometimes things get to the point that blinded by hunger they kill
each other so that the one may rob the other of a piece of bread.’35
    The most dramatic results of this unwise economic policy could be con-
firmed precisely in southern Italy, of which Campanella repeatedly painted a
desolate picture. He had not spared Spanish misgovernment from harsh criti-
cism in some pages of the Monarchia di Spagna. In the first of the Arbitri
sopra le entrate del Regno from many years earlier he had exhorted the sover-
eign to assume the true and natural function of father and pastor to his people
by eliminating at its roots the most odious of speculative businesses: the com-
merce of grain, which subjected citizens to hunger and desperation. Dearth,
Campanella asserted, does not come from nature or God, who gives to each
country a supply of grain sufficient to keep it from hunger. It comes instead



   31
     Ibid., p. 459; Documenta ad Gallorum nationem, in Opuscoli inediti, p. 95.
   32
     Mon. Francia, p. 447. In mercenary armies, the post of a purely nominal soldier
who was paid but did not exist was called a piazza morta.
  33
     Ibid., p. 161.
  34
     Ibid.
  35
     Documenta, pp. 91–92.
254   Chapter 12

from merchants and from usurers, who acquire the whole supply in order to
store it and resell it at triple the price. When ‘they do not find the profit their
greed lusts after,’ they prefer storing it and let it rot:

   And then they sell it putrefying or mixed with other grains and invite in this
   way not only famine but also pestilence. This has the effect of depopulat-
   ing the country, because some flee the Kingdom altogether, while others
   become robbers and bandits simply in order to eat, and still others die from
   that noxious food, or from eating poisonous plants. Oppressed by usurers,
   hunger, disease, and troubles, many do not take wives so as not to pass on
   such miseries to their children, while women become whores in return for
   a piece of bread.36

References to the Kingdom of Naples return in the later political writ-
ings too. In the ninth chapter of the Documenta, a particularly striking
image of southern Italy is conjured. The French subjects, who complain of
incessant tributes (which are in truth used for the purpose of augmenting
the strength and glory of the nation), ought to consider what happens in the
unhappy Kingdom of Naples, where ‘the greed and arrogance of the Spanish
set the standards for what is just and what is permissible.’ In Naples, more
taxes are paid than goods are possessed; there, every last person – even the
poorest, without home, without field, who lives from his own labor – pays
twenty ducats simply ‘to carry his own head on his neck.’ There, every month,
taxes go up indiscriminately on every good, both natural and manufactured,
both bought and sold. He who earns fifteen ‘carlino’ coins by extracting the
thread of silk from cocoons with great effort has to hand over eleven to the
tax collector. There, one pays both for real goods and for imaginary ones too.
In Apulia, the king buys land from peasants in order to sell it to pastoralists
and then sells it back to the peasants at a much higher price arguing that it
has been fertilized by the pastoralists’ sheep. By now, almost no one is the
owner of the house he lives in or the field he ploughs, and even other goods
are sold for small amounts of money to usurers or the Genoese, who collect
the taxes:

   Therefore unfortunate souls are forced to work the fields of others so as
   to be able to eat and so as to pay their personal tribute; and if that is not
   enough, they are forced to emigrate to other regions or to enlist themselves
   as soldiers, abandoning wives and children. Yet they never receive the pay
   they are promised, and they die desperate men. What is more, if a man has




   36
       Arbitrio primo, in Discorsi ai principi d’Italia, pp. 168–169; the three Arbitrii
sopra l’aumento delle entrate del Regno di Napoli date back to 1607.
                                                           The Paris Years    255

   something to say about all of this, he is at once condemned to death as the
   perpetrator of an act of treason.’37

But the degradation of the country is nothing but a mirror in which is reflected
the general decadence of Spain itself, which, while it lacks any of the virtues
present in a nation on the rise, abounds in the vices belonging to countries in
decline. It displays an extremely rapacious avarice, both in the old world and
in the new, where, according to the Milanese Girolamo Benzoni, indigenous
people gave a Spanish captain gold to drink. It displays the most arrogant dis-
dain for other peoples, all of them treated as if they are slaves, and it displays
the foulest ingratitude towards its benefactors. No one is ignorant of the sad
end of Christopher Columbus, discoverer of the New World, and among those
who had been persecuted Campanella did not hesitate to count himself – he
who, although he had written admirable works for Spain, had suffered years
of imprisonment. Moreover, the Spanish monarchy appeared as a monstrous
organism, devoid of compactness and intrinsic unity. It was similar to a gigan-
tic serpent with three heads (that of its essence, which was empire; that of
existence, which was Spain; and that of value, which was Italy), the body of
which was made up of parts that were disunited and far from one another.
Stronger and more prosperous and ready to take over the role of hegemonic
power from its adversary, France ought not to fear Spain and ought in fact to
undertake bold initiatives suited to accelerating the fall of a power that was
no longer able to hide its own fragility and inadequacy. Given that one ought
never to play the games of others, the French ought to counterbalance their
own strength with the cleverness of the Spanish, hitting them quickly without
giving them time to recover and recourse to delaying and secret maneuvers.
Thus, ‘it is necessary, as is proper for the lion, to begin the war in the French
manner, that is with ceaseless rapidity, and openly, not in the manner of Spain,
by delaying and operating in secret, as is characteristic of the wily fox.’38 The
French ought to denounce the Spanish and unmask their religious hypocrisy,
hitting the most vulnerable points of the monstrous Geryon, so as to shatter it
and liberate people from such odious Spanish tyranny.
    Campanella’s attention was focused above all on two things: the author-
ity of the empire and the Italian peninsula. To the first of these questions
he dedicated the so-called Comparsa regia, a legal speech written in Latin
and addressed by the French king to the Pope. He sought to argue that on
account of its tyranny and heresy the house of Austria no longer had a just




   37
        Documenta, p. 94.
   38
        Mon. Francia, p. 582.
256     Chapter 12

claim on the prerogatives of empire and that the pope should appoint the king
of the Romans motu proprio, since the empire had become the property and
an exclusive prerogative of the house of Austria and since it had lost any uni-
versal pretension whatsoever and lost also the specific purpose of defending
Christianity. Just like all timid nations, the Spanish maintain themselves with
hypocrisy, ‘pretending to be highly religious and reliant on God and zealous
in the faith.’ On the pretext of fighting in defense of Christianity, they arrogate
to themselves huge sums of money, offering in return nothing but vain titles,
‘for the purpose of cheating people.’ They accuse all other nations, France
included, of being heretics; the Spanish cardinals in Rome are nothing by spies
for their sovereign. So as to enforce belief, they have discovered the tribunal of
the Inquisition, ‘the true instrument of their power.’ They have destroyed the
populations of the New World, and, in order to justify their actions, they have
cast into doubt the very membership of those peoples in the human race. They
excuse every misdeed with religion, in the name of which they have ‘depopu-
lated, occupied, killed, and acted like sharks towards people.’39
    Even if Campanella had plenty to work with in his demonstration of the com-
pletely political nature of the appeal to religion on the part of the Spanish,
this did not mean that for him politics might be detached from religion. On
the contrary, he reaffirmed that religion ‘in all nations at all times has domi-
nated politics, regardless of whether that religion was true or false’ and that
‘political leaders are able to rule insofar as they can show themselves derived
from God, lord of lords.’ Campanella concluded that ‘thus, dominion consists
in the will of people, bound with the chain of religion among themselves and
to the prince.’40 To the instrumentalization of religion carried out by Spain,
Campanella opposed the exhortation to follow the politics that was practiced
and espoused by Charlemagne, who, turning to his own nation, combined in
the following fashion the directives to which he conformed his own political
actions, with a highly interesting allusion to ‘living’ faith and to the powers of
the imagination and persuasion:

   I, raising up the good and casting down the bad, have gained such a great
   glory for my fellow Franks that, owing also to the help of the virtue of the
   Apostles Peter and Paul, I have transferred to you the Roman Empire, master
   of the world, when I built my kingdom subject to God and not against him,
   not with a false and simulated faith (that renders the heart cowardly and vile,
   deprived of all hope of divine recompense and eternal immortality, a faith
   that is on that account attached only to the terrestrial life), but rather with a



   39
      Ibid., p. 427, 505, 503.
   40
      Ibid., p. 484.
                                                             The Paris Years     257

   true and living faith, a faith that renders the heart steady and true and ready
   to act with courage in the face of any undertaking, in that it is animated by
   the hope of divine help that is present (although imagined in the case that it
   be denied that it is authentic, but it is unnecessary to prove how great is the
   power of the imagination) and at the same time boosted by the desire of the
   prize of eternal life. Believe me, o my sons, the pseudo-politicians fight with
   a dead heart, while pious princes fight with a living heart.41

But the most vulnerable point of the empire, that against which one ought to
move quickly if one wanted to accelerate its dismemberment, was precisely the
kingdom of Naples and Italy itself. Campanella was convinced that the Italian
princes – even those who displayed submissiveness and friendship towards
Spain – hated it in their hearts, but dared not state it publically out of fear.
Above all, France ought to make it her business to reassure them, undoing the
web of prejudices and fears that Spain had put about deliberately with respect
to the French and make those princes understand that they do not present
themselves as new masters (wishing only to displace the old rulers) but rather
as liberators from a tyrannical domination. They ought to clarify that they did
not aspire to territorial enlargement, and reassure the Pope and the clergy,
who were fearful of what they presumed was the French desire to restrict
the prerogatives and jurisdictions of the Church. On that issue, Campanella
addressed three eloquent speeches to Genoa, to the Duke of Savoy, and to
the Grand Duke of Tuscany, for the purpose of inviting them to sever without
delay every political and economic tie with Spain, a nation from which they
could receive no real advantage, but rather only ruin and shame. The reversal
from the early Discorsi ai principi d’Italia, which exhorted the princes of Italy
to support the universalist project of the Spanish empire, thought to be clearly
‘founded on the hidden providence of God … dedicated to the purpose of
unifying the world under a single law,’ could not have been more complete.
    In the appeal to Genoa, the reference to a glorious past served to empha-
size the present condition of voluntary slavery to which it had been reduced,
blinded by greed for a profit more imaginary than real. Genoa was forced to
hand over to Spain the money that it received from the Kingdom of Naples,
as a kind of loan that would never be repaid. Paying the price for taking upon
itself the hatred and the disdain of its tormented vassals, the republic became
impoverished and lost prestige from the point that the Genoese made them-
selves the ‘publicans of Spain.’ With regard to Vittorio Amedeo I, Duke of
Savoy, Campanella reminded him of the false promises, the unbridled ambition,




   41
        Documenta, pp. 59–60.
258     Chapter 12

the senseless cruelty of the Spanish, dissuading him from following the ambig-
uous politics of his father, who, maneuvering between Spain and France, had
made of their conflicts ‘a hugely profitable business.’ That double game would
now be merely dangerous, because ‘now is not the time to play the fool, but
rather the time either to lose all or to acquire a kingdom.’ The Grand Duke of
Tuscany, Ferdinand II, was also brusquely invited to open his eyes to the reality
of his submission to Spain – a nation that ‘is like a griffin,’ with claws planted
in the ports and the fortresses of Tuscany. He was invited to abandon every
illusion of alliance and friendship with anyone who takes him to be ‘a hare or
a dove in his hands.’
    Determined to awaken the Italian princes from a kind of spell (as a result
of which they give money and soldiers to reinforce a power that would devour
them, acting like ‘a goat who gives succor to a wolf, when it enters its herd in
order to hunt’ or like the man who gives money to the executioner who will
hang him), Campanella spurred them to become conscious of their own power,
to emancipate themselves from the tyranny of a power in decline and by now
exhausted, so as to recover – with their liberty – their own dignity. At the same
time, he certainly knew that these steps required commitment, courage and
sacrifice, as one can confirm contrarily from the worrying behavior of some
galley slaves, who prefer to live and die as slaves when the period of their
forced labor is over, because ‘they do not know the goodness of liberty, and
they return to jail over and over, until they die.’42
    So as to dispel the hypnotic attraction of power, it is necessary for a ‘wise
philosopher’ to unmask it in front of those who are being deceived and reveal
the intrinsic fragility of a power in decline. The exile Campanella – notwith-
standing the disappointments, the weariness of years, the bitter experiences –
took this role upon himself energetically, both for the purpose of reawakening
the Italian princes and also so as to exhort the French to take on the respon-
sibility of being liberators of the globe having become conscious of their own
superiority. After all, ‘it is shameful that France, more powerful in arms, in
fleets, in soldiers, in captains, in valor, and in population, is overshadowed by
the Spanish, who are timid, few in number, poor, beggars, without leaders,
without troops, and who have to resort to subterfuge and foreign valor and
the appearance of being what, in fact, they are not.’43




   42
      Firpo, ‘Gli ultimi scritti politici,’ pp. 784, 796, 798, 793, 800.
   43
      Mon. Francia, p. 591. The first letter of 1636 – in Firpo, ‘Idee politiche,’ pp. 207–211
– is also dedicated to this paradox.
                                                          The Paris Years    259

                                 Last Writings

During the Paris years, Campanella dedicated a great deal of energy to editing
his writings for publication. Many of those writings successfully obtained the
necessary permissions and were published, despite the obdurate hostility of
cliques and individuals at Rome. The projected Opera omnia opened, at the
beginning of 1636, with a volume comprised of the Atheismus triumphatus, the
De gentilismo non retinendo, the Disputatio on the Papal bulls condemning
astrology, and the De praedestinatione. Then it was the turn of the new edi-
tion of the De sensu rerum, dedicated to Richelieu, preceded by a Defensio
that supported the doctrine of the animation of all beings by employing the
authority of many theologians and philosophers. On 6 August 1637, Campan-
ella dedicated the imposing tome of the new edition of the Philosophia realis
to the Chancellor Pierre Séguier, ‘second sun’ of France and third patron to
the author (after the King and Richelieu), to whom he noted that with the
sound of his ‘bell’ he had intended to recall men to the book of nature and to
the infallible school of God, the sole true master worthy of a faith free from
doubt. In 1638 the Philosophia rationalis was published preceded by a dedica-
tory letter to the brothers François and Charles de Noailles, signed on 15 March
1635, in which the author expressed the deepest gratitude both to François (to
whom he owed ‘liberty, honor, and life’ for helping him flee to France) and to
Charles who had welcomed him with affection upon his arrival in Paris. There-
after followed the Metaphysica, dedicated on 15 August 1638 to Claude Bullion,
General Superintendent of Finances of the Kingdom, who generously sup-
ported the publication of Campanella’s books and his very life. Campanella
praised him for his political and administrative gifts, calling him the architect
of the prosperity of a nation that thanks to his work enjoyed incomes greater
than those of the Turk, Spain, and England put together. Recalling a visit to his
home (which, as Campanella put it, had occasioned an astonishment greater
than that experienced by the Queen of Sheba as she admired the house of
Solomon on account of its structure, its objects, and its order), Campanella was
happy to dedicate to him the most important of his books, the true ‘Bible of
philosophers.’44
    As for theology, during the final years in Paris Campanella would rework
his doctrines on predestination, articulated and discussed in various places in
particular books of the Theologia and in the De praedestinatione, into a lim-
pid synthesis in the deft Compendium.45 He sent it to the Chancellor Pierre



    Letter dated 15 August 1638, in Lettere, p. 395; see ch. 10, p. 201.
   44

    Compendium de praedestinatione, reprobatione et gratiae divinae auxiliis, in
   45

Opuscoli inediti, pp. 123–142.
260     Chapter 12

Séguier, for the purpose of clarifying once more his own positions and seeking
to rebut the criticisms and the censures that he knew came from the theolo-
gians of the Dominican convent at Santa Maria sopra Minerva in Rome and
that he had not been able to see, despite repeated protests and supplications.46
Campanella’s doctrine was strongly characterized by the principle of the dou-
ble will of God, according to which God, as a father who created men as his
own children and in his own image, extended to all without favor the natural
and supernatural gifts apt to lead to salvation. Antecedenter, that is to say as
part of this first will, men were loved equally and were thus all equally predes-
tined, so that no one was doomed to damnation. As Campanella effectively
underscored, ‘no father gives birth to his own children so as to send them to
the gallows; a father may destine some for lesser goods, but certainly not for
evil.’47 But to this first divine will is added a second will subsequent to the first,
one in which God is a righteous judge, beyond being simply a loving father. It
is from this second point of view that, with a determination that follows from
the foreseeing of merits and demerits in men, God does not predestine all for
glory, but condemns to punishment those who have ‘defiled’ the image of and
the similitude with the father and those who have persisted in sin, rejecting
all divine help.
    With regard to the incarnation, God – foreseeing that man, a free creature,
would deviate from the end for which he had been created – knew also that the
Word, by means of which he had originally created everything, would become
incarnate in order to heal the wound inflicted by sin. Once again, that remedy
was offered indiscriminately to all, gratiose et copiose et affluenter et efficaciter
ex parte sui (‘graciously and copiously and abundantly and effectively on his
part’) and not only to some. Human beings might render the remedy ineffec-
tual, if they were to reject it and close their eyes to the light. In this way, grace
(both natural and supernatural) was for all abundant and effective. But, as John
Chrysostom (one of Campanella’s favorite authors and an authority he often
cited in order to smooth the harsher edges of Augustine) had pointed out, such
grace non salvat te sine te (‘cannot save you without you’).48 Grace, which came
to all abundantly extended by God, absented itself from no one. It was man,
through his indigence and rejection, who absented himself from grace.
    In this way, Campanella distanced himself decisively from the doctrine
of an indiscriminate (indiscrete ad libitum) condemnation on God’s part,
before considering the demerits and the final impenitence of man. This would


   46
      See Luigi Firpo’s Note, in Opuscoli inediti, pp. 174–175.
   47
      Ibid., p. 124: ‘nullus enim pater generat filios propter furcam, et si quosdam ad
minora bona, non tamen ad mala.’
   48
      Ibid., pp. 124–125.
                                                                   The Paris Years      261

prove either the original evil of men or of God, who who thus hate the good.
The Spanish theologians, such as the Dominican friars Diego Alvarez and
Domingo Bañes, in turn maintained that predestination for glory or damna-
tion was irrevocable, without respect to the good or evil use of free will. They
emphasized instead the absoluteness of the decree of God, who would have
decided the matter thus, so as to demonstrate his generosity to some and his
power and anger to many.49 Campanella, who analyzed and discussed the subtle
distinctions of such doctrine, did not hesitate to define it nugax et sine fructu
(‘clumsy and fruitless’) and contrary to the entire tradition of the Fathers. He
saw it as a doctrine that was instead in accordance with the anti-Christian
positions of those who according to the prediction of Daniel would worship
the god Maozim, who would operate in all things with power and not with
wisdom and goodness, designating a few for heaven and the majority for hell
not on the basis of justice or mercy, but only in order to show his own power
in accordance with a decree that did not depend on the goodness or badness
of works and that was instead an absolute and, on that account, diabolical
decree. This was a god who would abandon without being first abandoned,
a god who would make evil those who he had already decided to condemn
in order be able to punish them and ‘to give vent to his irrational anger’ (satu-
rare iram suam irrationalem). To these positions, Campanella did not tire of
opposing those of John Chrysostom, according to whom the ‘mercy of God is
given to all without exception,’ so that ‘just as fire always heats and the sun
always illuminates, so God always does good and does not stop doing good
on account of our sins or of some passion of God.’ This is a God that does not
forsake even if he has been forsaken in the manner of a lover who runs after
his beloved, as one reads in one of Chrysostom’s most beautiful passages that
is often cited: ‘God did not create us in order to damn us: he never forsakes
us, even when we forsake him, as a lover does who is delirious for the beloved;
damnation is due to us alone and not to some defect in grace.’50
    Beyond simply his political advice, however, Campanella was appreciated in
court circles for his astrological knowledge and understanding of the occult. A
short work of chiromancy has recently been located that was composed at the
fervent request (ardenter expostulavisti) of Richelieu, a man who harbored
interests in such doctrines.51 In the 1630s, the Cardinal had not remained

    49
       Such opinions Campanella blamed on the long cohabitation of the Spanish with the
Muslims, upholders of fatalistic doctrines, conducive to their politics of military conflict.
    50
       Tommaso Campanella, Della grazia gratificante, Theologicorum l. XIII, ed. R. Amerio
(Rome, 1959), pp. 103–105.
    51
       Germana Ernst, ‘Note campanelliane. I. L’inedita Chiroscopia a Richelieu,’ B&C,
1 (1995), pp. 83–94: 90–94; also in Tommaso Campanella, Dalla Metaphysica. Profezia,
divinazione, estasi, ed. G. Ernst (Soveria Mannelli, Cz, 2008).
262   Chapter 12

above the astrological–political affair regarding the Pope’s horoscope, and
his curiosity in this field is confirmed by numerous pieces that were dedicated
to him. Jacques Gaffarel – his chaplain, sent to Italy to search for the rarest
Hebrew, Siriac, and Chaldean manuscripts – offered to him the Abdita divinae
cabalae mysteria in 1625. Furthermore, in 1635 a young boy of twelve years of
age dedicated to him his own translation from the Greek of the physiogno-
mic work by Adamantius, which contained maxims very similar to ‘those that
you have happily practiced for the purpose of discovering the strengths and
weaknesses of enemies of this crown.’52 The Lyonais physician Lazare Meys-
onnier, translator of della Porta and author of texts imbued with mysticism and
natural magic, dedicated to the Cardinal the Nova et arcana doctrina febrium
(Lyon, 1641). Likewise, the Venetian Dominicus De Rubeis sent him his own
Tabulae physiognomicae (Venice, 1639), emphasizing the utility of the science
that aids the understanding of the inclinations and the affections of men judg-
ing from their exterior features and habits. Campanella certainly could not
refuse the imperious desire of such a personage, and he composed a slender
tract, conventional but not vulgar, asking for the protection of this famous
dedicatee. If already in the introductory epistle to the De sensu Campanella
had noted how a single look from the powerful minister could be enough to
dissolve the malevolent clouds of slander and persecutions that afflicted him,
he noted in the brief words of dedication for the short work that treated the
lines of the palm that his own destiny lay in the hands of the Cardinal – only
then to add that all matters remain in the hands of God.
    After the bull Inscrutabilis, which had reiterated and intensified the condem-
nation of the divinatory doctrines of the Coeli et terrae of Sixtus V, Campanella
adopted an attitude of extreme caution with regard to divination. He was attentive
to distinctions and specifications, but did fight to preserve some space (even if
meager) for predictive doctrines. The real aim of this Disputatio on the Bulls
was that of specifying the limits of astrology for the purpose of salvaging from
it at least its ‘natural’ aspect and, in this way, a degree of legitimacy. Distin-
guishing therefore the doctrines that derive from an authentic studiositas from
those that make appeal to a vain curiositas and distinguishing likewise the
sciences that proceed on the basis of signs placed by nature or by God from
those that are based on artificial or arbitrary signs, Campanella condemned
geomancy as vain and baseless along with practices such as aeromancy, hydro-
mancy, and pyromancy. Chiromancy, however, was to be saved, because it was
limited to observation of physical signs and to the expression of opinions on


   52
      Henry de Boyvin du Vaurouy, La Physionomie ou les indices que la Nature a mis
au corps humain par ou l’on peut descouvrir les moeurs et les inclinations (Paris:
Toussaint Du Bray, 1635).
                                                                The Paris Years     263

tendencies and aspects of character, without presuming to pronounce definitively
on future events.
   The minute treatise on chiromancy was limited to several general considera-
tions on three principal lines of the hand. It made references to a successful
and continuous tradition that had begun at the outset of the century with the
Anastasis chiromantica, in which Bartolomeo Cocles boasted, following a motif
typical of the Renaissance, of having brought back to light a doctrine that had
become buried and neglected and restoring it to the dignity of a science. The
art had enjoyed a wide diffusion in the first half of the sixteenth century and
authors such as Cardano had dealt with it. Indeed, Cardano dedicated a chapter
of his De varietate to the subject, and Giambattista della Porta wrote a detailed
Latin treatise, which remained unpublished (probably because of censors) and
was only published in 1677 in a beautiful Italian translation by Pompeo Sarnelli
with the title of Chirophysiognomy. This is a work that is famous for its splendid
autobiographical piece in which the author remembers his own association with
the Neapolitan hangman, a certain Antonello Cocozza, so as to have the chance
to analyze the hands and feet of those who had been hanged, convinced as
he was that the doctrine could make use of observations of persons in whom
the passions had prevailed and in whom rational control had proven fragile:

   When he took down from the gallows those who had been hanged and carried
   them to the Ricciardo bridge (this is a place about a thousand yards from the
   city of Naples, where the wretched are left hanging, so as to terrorize those
   scoundrels who might pass by, until they rot, and are consumed by wind and
   rain), he would inform me of the hour of those transportations. Going to that
   place, I observed the markings on the hands and feet, and drew them with a
   stylus on paper made for that purpose, or took their forms in plaster so that
   I might apply wax later and have their prints at home. And in this way I had
   the chance to study them by night at home and to compare them with others.
   I would piece together all the signs that might reveal the truth, doing always
   the same thing, until I found all the signs that pointed towards a person being
   strung up. In this way, I satisfied my desire of knowing.53

Upon the birth of the future Sun King, which finally came to pass after long
years of disappointment on Sunday, 5 September 1638 (the same day on which,
seventy years earlier, he himself had been born), Campanella was called to
the palace, because the Queen wanted a horoscope for the new-born. Having



    53
      Della C hirofisonomia (Naples: A. Bulifon, 1677), p. 23; the Italian translation by
Sarnelli is reproduced after the Latin text edited in Giambattista della Porta, De ea
naturalis physiognomoniae parte quae ad manuum lineas spectat libri duo, ed. O. Trabucco
(Naples, 2003).
264     Chapter 12

examined the naked child with care and having considered the matter for sev-
eral days, the friar announced a synthetic and not adulatory prognostication.
He emphasized the future sovereign’s inclinations to luxury and to arrogance,
his long reign, together with the unhappiness and confusion of his last years.54
In the next weeks, he composed the Latin hexameters of the Ecloga in nativi-
tatem Delphini.55 In the last verses of this piece, there emerged, once again, a
convergence between utopia, astrology, and prophecy. Already, the dedicatory
epistle to Richelieu for the De sensu rerum had concluded with an invitation
to the Cardinal to build the city of the sun that the author had described
(with the wish that its splendor would never diminish). Then, in the eclogue
the citation of the exordium from Virgil’s verses on the return of the reign
of Saturn is followed by a call to the celestial signs and to the prophecy that
announced the advent of a new age, which the ‘portentous child’ was called
to instaurate. He called upon the Muses of Calabria to shake off old age so
as to demonstrate once again signs of divine judgments and to communicate
faith in the approaching of an age in which ‘somber colors, signs of grief and
ignorance’ would be rejected, so as to put luminous clothing over pure hearts,
an epoch in which impiety, fraud, lies, and quarrels will be over and done with;
lambs will no longer fear the wolf, nor the herds the lion; tyrants will learn to
rule for the good of the people; idleness will cease and painful toil will come
to an end. Indeed, labor will be a game shared amicably between many, since
all will recognize a single father and god.56
    Almost anticipating the approaching of the end, on 6 July 1638, Campanella
had sent to Ferdinand II de’ Medici, along with a copy of the Philosophia realis, a
letter in which some of the most important themes of his own life seem to come
together and constitute a genuine spiritual testament: praise for the house of
Medici for having favored the rebirth of Platonism and an emancipation from
the yoke of Aristotle; the youthful hopes of finding a place under the protection
of the Medici, wrecked by his adherence to the philosophy of Telesio; the reform
of knowledge in the light of the two divine books of nature and Scripture; the
‘fatal secret’ of the arrival in French territory, for the purpose of bringing his own
works to press, among which he would not fail to remember the early and still
much loved Civitas Solis; the remote, but indelible encounter in his youth with
Galileo at Padua, which had signaled the beginning of a constant friendship and
esteem, despite the lack of agreement on some issues:


   54
      See Lerner, Tommaso Campanella en France, pp. 83–84.
   55
      See Germana Ernst, ‘“Redeunt Saturnia regna.” Profezia e poesia in Tommaso
Campanella,’ B&C, 11 (2005), pp. 429–449. The term nativitas in the title indicates that
one is dealing with a genuine horoscope.
   56
      Poesie, p. 650.
                                                              The Paris Years         265

   Your Highness will see in this book that in some things I am not in agree-
   ment with the admirable Galileo, your Highness’s philosopher and my dear
   friend and master since the time in Padua when he brought me a letter from
   the Grand Duke Ferdinand. Intellectual discord can co-exist with a concord
   of the wills of each party, and I know that he is a man so sincere and perfect
   that he will take more pleasure from my criticisms – for which each of us
   has given permission to the other – than from the approval of others.

And finally, there is also Campanella’s reflection on the destiny of prophets
who, defeated and persecuted, rise on the third day – or in the third age. As he
said, ‘the next age will judge us, because the present always crucifies its ben-
efactors, who then rise again on the third day or in the third age.’57 Worried by
the approach of a solar eclipse, he sought in vain to ward off the threat with
astral remedies well known to him and already practiced in the past with Pope
Urban VIII. Campanella died some hours before dawn on 21 May 1639.
    On 28 May, Théophraste Renaudot’s Gazette announced the sad event.58
On July 3, Naudé wrote a long letter from Rome to Schoppe at Padua, hop-
ing to feel himself united in grief with him at the loss of their mutual friend.59
Amplifying both the merits of Schoppe in relation to the deceased and the
conditions of his life at Paris, he related that Campanella – hit suddenly by
strong colic pains that lasted for twenty days (the result perhaps of the erro-
neous administration of a drug) – died three or four hours before daybreak,
serenely, in his sleep. As he went over the writings and the teachings of the
man, the arcane doctrines and the meditation on eternal things, Naudé was
pleased that Campanella had died satisfied that many of his own works had
been published, works ‘in which he had stretched the nerves of his genius to
their breaking point.’ Assuring his reader of his profound esteem for Cam-
panella, Naudé asked Schoppe to hold alive the memory of their friend and
asked him likewise to defend him against slander.
    Rather than end with the solemn moment in which Campanella realized
the impossibility of brightening the gloom and the shadows that were about
to engulf him and to put an end to the life that he well knew was nothing but
‘a child’s game played in the dusk before dinner,’60 it is better to recall a gen-
tle anecdote, relayed by Nicolas Chorier, that testifies to his love for life and
nature. Chorier had met Campanella in Paris, and he tells us that the old phi-
losopher, with the ingenuity and happiness of a child, would run after small
birds, imitating their twittering – Campanella had always been fascinated by


   57
      Letter to Ferdinand II de’ Medici dated 6 July 1638, in Lettere, pp. 388–390.
   58
      Lerner, Tommaso Campanella en France, p. 91.
   59
      Gabriel Naudé, Epistulae (Geneva: I. H. Widerhold, 1647), pp. 614–629.
   60
      Ath. triumph., VIII, p. 93.
266   Chapter 12

the varied voices and languages of creation. He would throw his hat in the air,
and, running with a certain ungainliness that testified to a body weighed down
by the years, he would invite whoever was with him to breathe deeply in the
pure air, because (as he would say) it was the soul of the world: ‘“Let us draw
life from the life of the world.” He would call air the life of the world – air,
which is the soul of nature.’61




    61
      Luigi Firpo, ‘Apppunti campanelliani. XIX. L’amicizia con Christoph von Forstner,
Pierre de Boissat e Nicolas Chorier,’ GCFI, 29 (1950), p. 91: ‘‘Hauriamus, hauriamus
vitam de vita mundi.” Aërem vitam mundi vocabat, qui naturae anima est.’
