1 — Background

There was excitement the first time too. In the 1960s and 1970s artificial intelligence was in its first flush. Computers’ stunning power had only recently come into focus, electrifying the newly minted AI labs. What gripped our imagination was not just computing’s potential impact on society, impressive as that was, but the thought that we humans, too, might be computers. The idea unleashed visions of grandeur. If we could just “program things up,” we dreamed, we could put paid to thousands of years of philosophy, surround ourselves with intelligent companions, and understand the human condition.

It is easy to disparage that bravado now. Those “first-wave AI” systems were brittle, unconducive to learning, defeated by uncertainty, and unable to cope with the world’s rough and tumble. Yet there were also successes, many of which paved the way for what is now commonplace—online commerce, navigation systems, social media. But in a long-standing pattern, once tasks were automated they no longer seemed to require so much intelligence. Gradually the ebullience waned.

There is excitement once again—for “second-wave” AI, this time, for a new “AI spring.” Deep learning and affiliated statistical methods, backed by unimagined computational power and reams of Big Data, are achieving levels of performance that trounce the achievements of the earlier phase. The profession is psyched, the commercial world scrambling, the press giddy with anticipation. But there is also anxiety. What captures our imagination is not so much awe, this time, as consequence. Exhilaration is being replaced by terror—that new and perhaps alien AIs are going to take over our jobs, our lives, our world.

Are we genuinely on the cusp of what we only prematurely imagined in the 1970s? Or is this, too, a phase destined to pass? One thing is sure: there is no dearth of opinions. Testimonials about second-wave AI flood the web, along with comparisons with first-wave, and, as new limitations come into view, proposals for “third-wave” AI—for what it will take to achieve the ultimate goal of “artificial general intelligence” (AGI). There has certainly been astounding progress. World-beating Go programs, serviceable machine translation, and uncanny image recognition are genuinely stunning. Respected scientists are serious about the magnitude of the impending upheaval—the prophets of doom as well as the inveterate triumphalists.

But respected scientists were serious 50 years ago, too.

To take stock of what is happening, we need to understand the ontological, epistemological, and existential assumptions on which each wave of AI has been based. Viewing things historically will help us judge the capacities, implications, and limitations of the first two stages, and assess prospects for a third. It will also allow for a more discerning analysis than the standard characterizations of first-wave AI as based on “handcrafted symbolic representations” and second-wave on “statistical pattern matching over large data sets.” Taking the measure of each, and soberly assaying the future, requires something deeper: not just a unifying architectural perspective that subsumes both options (and perhaps others as well), but, more broadly, an understanding of what intelligence is, on the one hand, and what the world is like, on the other. It is time to channel McCulloch:1 what is the world, such that we can understand it—and who are we, such that we can understand the world?

Three methodological preliminaries. First, as already indicated, it is imperative not to frame the debate in terms of human and machine. The problem is not just that those labels are vast, vague, and emotionally charged. More seriously, to avoid ideology and prejudice, we need independent evaluative criteria. To judge what kind(s) of intelligence current AIs have, what kind(s) we humans have, and what kinds are on offer for both machines and people, we need an understanding of “intelligence” and its “kinds” not circularly defined in terms of the entities to which we want to apply it.

Second, it is important to deflect potential confusion due to terminological differences between computer science and adjacent fields. A variety of classic terms from logic, philosophy, linguistics, and epistemology, having to do with relation of an intentional (representational, meaningful) system to the wider world, have been repurposed in computational parlance to refer to causal behaviors and arrangements within the confines of the machine itself. Especially important are meaning, semantics, reference, and interpretation. Consider the phrase “the semantics of program P.” Many (including I) would take this term to refer to a relation between P and the world or task domain that P is “about” (that its data structures represent, in which it is deployed, about which it performs calculations). But from a perspective I call blanket mechanism, which has largely engulfed computer science, the phrase is used to refer to the behavioral consequences, within the computer system, of P’s being executed. In computer science, that is, the term “semantics” no longer takes one outside the boundaries of a mechanistic device. Since my concerns in this book are with the very “into the real world” relations that the terms traditionally referred to, I will use them here in their classic sense, marking those points where confusion is most likely to arise.2

Third, the gravity of the stakes suggests addressing the issues at a relatively high level of generality. Some questions are foundational: What is intelligence? What are its physical limits? What lies beyond the line of possibility, so that we can give up longing for it? And on this side: Where are we, now, and where are our creations? How will we want—how should we want—to live with other forms of intelligence, including not just products of natural evolution, but entities of our own devising, and eventually of theirs as well? What impact will and should the development of synthetic3 intelligence have on human intelligence, on our sense of self, on standards for humanity?

There are also practical questions. What sorts of intelligence are required to perform different sorts of task—driving a car in the city, reading an X-ray, building houses, teaching children, detecting racism, routing propaganda and fake news? How can we responsibly assign specific kinds of work to appropriate configurations of people, machines, and processes? What divisions of labor, between and among organisms and devices and communities and systems and governments, are sustainable, honorable—and humane?

These questions target the future. To address them, we need a grip on the past.


______________

1. Warren McCulloch, “What is a Number, that a Man May Know It, and a Man, that He May Know a Number?,” General Semantics Bulletin, no. 26/27 (1960): 7–18.

2. Not a few computer scientists have suggested, over the years, that I “get with the program” and realize that these internal mechanical relations and behaviors are what the terms semantics, reference, interpretation, and the like now mean. But the suggestion raises numerous difficulties. First, I need terms that mean what these terms classically meant. If I were to accept the redefinitions, or (more plausibly) were to avoid them in order not to sow confusion, I would lose any way to talk about what I do want to address. Second, I believe that retaining the classical meanings is necessary in order to understand the relations among AI, computing, mind, language, and thought. Third, even scientifically, I believe we need to retain the classical meanings in order to get at technical issues within computing itself (see my Computational Reflections, forthcoming). Fourth, and most importantly, I have no interest in supporting blanket mechanism in general, which I see infecting wider and wider swaths of intellectual inquiry. On the contrary, I believe it is vital that we not submit to the rising tide of entirely mechanistic world views and explanations. So the redefinitions and repurposings are moves I want to resist.

3. A better word than “artificial,” if it can ever be achieved.
