7 — Epistemological Challenges

Start with the first and easier goal, of integrating the merits of both first- and second-wave AI.

One of GOFAI’s strengths was its ability to deal with articulated reasoning—inferences involving (sometimes long) chains of structured propositions involving implications, negatives, quantification, hypotheticals, and so on. “Since Randy and Pat are in Tokyo for the Paralympics, they won’t be here for dinner on Saturday,” for example. Or: “17% of London’s population have parents who speak different mother tongues.” Or even: “One reason why public support for higher education is proportionally lower in Canada than in the U.S. is that social healthcare, unassailable in Canada but not in the U.S., takes up a large fraction of the public purse, and Canadian voters are reluctant to devote much more money to other social programs—a category of which education is viewed as an instance.” An illustrative list of the articulated capacities that even early AI systems were designed to deal with is given in the sidebar on the next page. They remain critical to general intelligence.1

Characteristics of Articulated Reasoning

Some forms of conceptual structure that were common features of knowledge representation and models or reasoning in the GOFAI mold.

Identity and nonidentity (“Tully is Cicero,” “the baker is not my aunt Hilda”)

Quantification (“every Canadian owns a tuque,” “there is a rattlesnake in the grass over there”)

Variables (“marriages in which one parent of each partner immigrated from the same country”)

Logical operators (and, not/negation, implies, etc.: “no one who is both a curler and a classical violinist likes garlic”)

Sets (“the president, vice-president, and treasurer,” “all bonobos in captivity”)

Opacity and intensional contexts (“she said that France has a king,” “he believes that π is rational”)

Categories and subcategories (“angel investors,” “everyone who was invited”)

Possibility and necessity (“she might have transferred from Swarthmore”)

Default reasoning (“unless otherwise noted, the tide must be considered in the design of all saltwater harbors”)





If GOFAI could deal with such logical intricacies, why did it fail? Because, as has been argued throughout, the ontology in terms of which it was formulated was all wrong. First-wave AI had no resources to ground its abstractions and conceptual symbolizations in the richness of the world, giving them a tendency to float free of reality—threatening them to devolve, as it were, to mix a little Derrida and Shakespeare, into an endless play of signifiers, signifying nothing.

Still, the internal structure of articulated reasoning is critically important, and must be a part of any genuine model of intelligence. Our current best understanding of it has been worked out in the context of logic, complete with its presupposition of formal ontology, clear and distinct concepts, and so on. Think about such paradigmatic logical expressions as “∀x[F(x)⊃G(x)]” or “[ϕ⊃ψ≡ψ∨¬ϕ].” These formulae are normally interpreted with reference to determinate semantic and ontological facts about the meanings of their constituents. Any x is assumed to be clearly individuated and either F or not F, and G or not G, without ambiguity or matter of degree. Similarly for ϕ, ψ, and so on.

It was argued in the last chapter that perception, classification, nonconceptual reasoning, and even the sorts of reasoning employed in analyses of Big Data, do not require that degree of ontological clarity—in fact, that their power, as demonstrated in ML systems, arguably derives exactly from not assuming it. Per se, that does not address logical complexities of the present sort, though it is clear that human intelligence does not require perfectly “clean” categories in order to deploy commonsense versions of such logical relations. (The longer the chains of reasoning grow, the more likely conclusions will fall apart—grow false or unreliable—in proportion to the extent that the relevant objects and properties are not homogenous and sharp-edged.) Support for articulated forms of reasoning is one of conceptual classification’s great powers—but how clean or “discrete” the categories must be in order for it to be usefully applicable is far from well understood. It is also clear that some degree of logical reasoning can apply to nonconceptual content (“that red sofa will not go well with the wallpaper in our living room,” “write here on the board, not over there,” etc.2).

These considerations raise a suggestion for AI, prefigured in the last chapter: to figure out what would be required to construct an architecture able to support ML’s extremely rich, high-dimensional representational vectors as elements in complex patterns of articulated reasoning. Fuzzy logic might be considered an early stab in that direction, but it was restricted to single, real-valued truth values, and was “higher-order discrete”3 in the sense that any given “fuzzy value” was exactly (rather than “roughly”) what it was represented as being—that is, some exact real number. Rather, what is being suggested is to develop systems that integrate ML’s ontologically rich and nonconceptually presumptive representations with the patterns of articulated reasoning paradigmatic of first-wave AI—not by gluing the two capacities together in a “bimodal” system, but seamlessly integrating them, so that the nuances, subtleties, adjustments, and so on, embedded in the underlying subconceptual webs underlying the concepts being combined could play a role in establishing the subconceptual webs underlying the result, in ways that would give nuance and inflection to relatively immediate inference, but allow increasingly long chains of articulated reasoning only the more distilled, abstracted, and “discretized” the representations become.

The architectural implications of this proposal are nontrivial. In the classical (GOFAI) case, complex hypotheticals, disjunctions, implications, and so on, can easily involve dozens or even hundreds or more conceptually articulated constituents. In current neural architectures, anything that the systems ⌈know⌉ may be encoded in weights distributed across the entire network; how to make states of the network into parameters or constituents of compositionally structured other states of the network is neither evident nor likely straightforward.

Nevertheless, this goal of compositionally structured states backed by reams of subconceptual detail does not seem fundamentally at odds with the sorts of problem that AI researchers are already tackling—and indications that the need for such projects is being recognized.4

• • •

The other epistemological challenge is more profound.

No matter how otherwise impressive they may be, I believe that all existing AI systems, including contemporary second-wave systems, do not know what they are talking about. It is not that we humans cannot interpret their outputs as being about things that matter to us. But there is no reason to suppose, and considerable reason to doubt, that any system built to date, and any system we have any idea how to build, ⌈knows⌉ the difference between: (i) its own (proximal) state, including the states of its representations, inputs and outputs; and (ii) the external (distal) state of the world that we at least take its states, its representations and those inputs and outputs, to represent. And it is those external states of affairs that they are talking about (remember claim P2, about semantic interpretation).

What is required in order for a system to know what it is talking about? What is it that present day systems lack, such that they do not? That is the question to which the rest of the book slowly develops an answer. I can say now that it will at least require authenticity, deference, and engagement in the world in which that which is talked about exists—and that neither interpretability nor “grounded interpretation” will suffice.5 What this means will become clear, but some examples may help in developing motivating intuitions.

Suppose an automatic X-ray reading system constructs what we take to be, and therefore call, a 3D model of the lungs.6 Call the model α. Does the system know what we know: the difference between α and the lungs of which α is a model? More generally, what is the computer likely to understand about the notion of a model, at all? Even if we encoded meta-level information into α stating that it is a model—that is, even if we were to add something like “MODEL(α)” to its data structures—how would the system know that that meant that α was a model of something in the outside world, in the way we do? Per se, meta-level information does not help; the problem simply recurses.7

By the same token, it is unlikely that AlphaGo and its successors8 have any sense of the fact that Go is a game, with an illustrious millennial history, played by experts from around the world—or even, for that matter, and more pointedly, that there is a difference between the particular game it is playing and the representation of that game in its data structures. Siri and Alexa, similarly, though they may ⌈tell⌉ you about restaurants, bathrooms, thunderstorms, and operating system updates, do not really know what restaurants are, or bathrooms, or thunderstorms—likely not even system updates. As I have said since the beginning, these systems, being computational, are semantically interpreted, and so we understand their behavior as being about and referring to their represented worlds. But they do not understand themselves “under interpretation”—or realize that their thoughts and deliberations and utterances matter only under interpretation. That is why I question whether what they do warrants the label “understanding” at all. At best it is ⌈understanding⌉, but the stakes are high enough in these AI games that that might be a phrasing we do well to avoid entirely.

This is not to say that the structures and behaviors and ingredients of these systems are not interpretable by us; I take it that they are, as a condition on their being computational (P2). Indeed, that is exactly why Siri and Alexa are so useful. It is also not to say that contemporary computer systems do not act in the worlds that their representations are about. Many of them do, increasingly. Nor, importantly, is it to say that their symbols do not have determinate interpretations. This is not the place to rehearse what is wrong with Searle’s Chinese Room argument, but let me just say that, in spite of some superficial similarities, I am not talking about formality, or about the legions of arguments (such as Searle’s) that a formal system cannot have real semantics, because the interpretations are unanchored, and can be reassigned at whim. I would go to court to deny that the symbols in present day AI systems are “formal” in this sense—that is, in the way in which Searle understood that word. Some contemporary systems, in particular, are plugged into the world in such a way that their symbols are unambiguously grounded (think about transfer paths in internet routers, database entries in real-time financial accounting systems, email addresses, etc.). I would even argue that the semantic interpretation of many noncomputational symbols (e.g., words on signs and in books) are grounded by the practices in which they play a role. But neither signs nor books understand what their words mean, even if they have nonarbitrary interpretations. Rather, I am talking about something deeper—about whether the systems in which these (grounded) symbols play a role genuinely understand anything.

Put it this way. At the outset I said that semantics, in order to be semantics, must be deferential. At the moment, although we may design our systems with deferential semantics, the deference is ours, not theirs. If we are going to build a system that is itself genuinely intelligent, that knows what it is talking about, we have to build one that is itself deferential—that itself submits to the world it inhabits, and does not merely behave in ways that accord with our human deference. To do that, it will have to know (i) that there is a world, (ii) that its representations are about that world, and (iii) that it and its representations must defer to the world that they represent.

• • •

What then is deference, what is the world, and what is it to know that there is a world to defer to in which objects exist? Those are the questions to which the rest of the book is addressed. But first something preliminary: Why does it matter? Why should we care whether our creations really are deferential—or, for that matter, whether they are genuinely intelligent? Would it not be enough if we could merely interpret them as if they were intelligent, deferential, and the rest?

No, it would not. If we are to trust their deliberations, AI systems need to be genuinely intelligent in order to be able to take responsibility for the adequacy of the abstractive ontologies in terms of which they register the world. Otherwise we should use them only in situations where we are prepared to take epistemic and ontological responsibility for every registration scheme, every inferential step, and every “piece of data” that they use along the way.

This is not a hypothetical problem. We are already presented with the results of data mining algorithms that have not just run over large individual data sets (such as census tallies) but surveyed vast collections of data sets, where we do not know what normative standards, registrations schemes, ethical stances, epistemological biases, social practices, and political interests have wrought their influence across the tapestry. Just as we would not trust an uneducated child or insensitive journalist to summarize the suicidal tendencies of teenagers at risk in diverse cultures, so too we should not trust an AI system unless we can similarly trust its ability to critically assess the merits, humanity, conceptual compatibility, legitimacy of assumptions, and so on, of all of the data sets that it surveys—to say nothing of those on which it has been trained.


______________

1. The articulative capacities listed in the sidebar are interdependent, both syntactically and semantically. Some of the relations among them are theorized in cognitive science and philosophy under notions of productivity (the fact that cognitive production and comprehension are unbounded), systematicity (the fact that the meanings of whole sentences and whole thoughts are systematically related to the meanings of the words or tokens they are made up of), and compositionality (the fact that the meaning of a complex sentence or thought is determined by its grammatical structure and by the meanings of its constituents). The significance of these combinatoric relations for human cognition is bluntly suimmarized by Jerry Fodor, but the point would generalize to any computational system aiming at achieve general intelligence: “Human cognition exhibits a complex of closely related properties—including systematicity, productivity and compositionality—which a theory of cognitive architecture ignores at its peril. If you are stuck with a theory that denies that cognition has these properties, you are dead and gone.” Jerry Fodor, “Connectionism and the Problem of Systematicity (Continued): Why Smolensky’s Solution Still Doesn’t Work,” Cognition 62, no. 1 (1997): 109–119.

2. These examples are considered nonconceptual because the sense of redness pointed to in the first is likely not redness in general, but the particular red of the sofa—a shade that the speaker is unlikely to possess adequate conceptual resources to describe, and because the patches of wall signified by “here” and “there,” in the second, are unlikely to be well-defined regions with determinate boundaries.

3. John Haugeland, “Analog and Analog,” Philosophical Topics 12, no. 1 (1981): 213–225.

4. See, for example, Gary Marcus, The Algebraic Mind: Integrating Connectionism and Cognitive Science (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001); the papers in Joe Pater, “Generative Linguistics and Neural Networks at 60: Foundation, Friction, and Fusion,” plus comment articles (Language, 95:1, 2019); and Hector Levesque, Common Sense, the Turing Test, and the Quest for Real AI: Reflections on Natural and Artificial Intelligence (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017).

One challenge for such projects will be to determine whether helpful insights will emerge in the experience and techniques that have been developed in contemporary machine learning systems trained on the outputs of human conceptualization, such as Wikipedia articles, Twitter feeds, etc. Along with the evident issues of bias, prejudice, etc., discussed in the previous chapter, a serious issue that would need to be addressed, explored in the remainder of this book, is that the data sources these systems use as training sets are not held systematically accountable to the highly variable conceptions (registration schemes) in terms of which they have been formulated. Including the results of any such “data mining” without evaluating the registrational practice underlying each and every one of them (every article, every post) would constitute exactly the sort of “gluing together” that would defeat the aim of the project.

I suggested that this first integrative goal would be easier to address than the second, but at a deeper level doing it properly may depend on successful treatment of the second as well.

5. The engagement must be enough to secure the reference, which is something less than genuine engagement with that referent. I can refer to something that is outside of my light cone, even though engagement with the limits of light cone are proscribed. My ability to refer to a π meson, or to Mesopotamian culture, or to women’s experience of sexism, are dependent on the intentional capacities of my culture and community; I cannot shoulder such intentional directedness on my own. But the “reach” to such referents cannot be so indirect, mediated, and externally brokered that reference is impossible, in the way that it is for Siri, which surely lacks the ability to refer to a pizza parlor in any substantive sense, if in fact it can refer at all.

6. A 3D model “under interpretation,” needless to say—a model of the lungs’ 3D structure, that is, not a model that is itself three-dimensional.

7. To know that “MODEL(α)” means that α is a model requires exactly what I am saying we as yet have no warrant in assuming—that the system is capable of reference and denotation (not merely ⌈reference⌉ and ⌈denotation⌉).

8. Including AlphaGo Zero.
