11 — Discussion

Seven comments.

HUMAN VS. MACHINE: As mentioned at the outset, the distinction between reckoning and judgment is not intended to get at, or to mark, any present or future distinction between people and machines.1 For one thing, humans are likely also machines, in at least some sense, if the word “machine” is to have any merit (see sidebar on the next page). More seriously, I see no principled reason why systems capable of genuine judgment might not someday be synthesized—or anyway may not develop out of synthesized origins. It is not my purpose to outlaw the Golem—to banish synthetic constructions from obtaining the highest reaches of humanity.2 Also, as I have said repeatedly, by no means all human cognitive activity, especially in the small, meets the standards I am proposing for judgment. Perhaps the best we can say—though it is a lot to say—is that we hold human adults accountable for their actions. Even if they do not invoke full scale deliberative judgment in their every local move, we believe that they should act in such a way that they could do so if necessary. More generally, my purpose, in framing judgment as a category, is to establish an appropriate standard on cognition such that it becomes an empirical question whether any given system (human or machine) can or does meet it.

Machines

The term “machine” has two connotations at least arguably inapplicable to people: being constructed, and being mechanical. Unless one is a dualist, however, the pertinence of the first to humans is difficult to deny unless one embraces, a priori, the belief that having children is not a form of “constructing” them. While that may seem obvious, it is not an easy thesis to defend. Needless to say, we do not understand “how children work” simply by participating in their natural procreation, but we increasingly do not understand the computer systems we devise, either—especially when their constitutive regularities (that which makes them the machines that they are) result from machine-learning algorithms, the details of whose “machinations” we do not grasp. If to be a machine requires being comprehended by engineers at the level of constitutive regularities, that is, then ML-based systems (image ⌈recognizers⌉, ⌈diagnosis⌉ systems, ⌈planners⌉, and the like) would have to be considered to be outside the realm of machines. (And understanding the regularities at just some level is not enough to separate us, since we largely understand how oxygen, hydrogen, carbon, and so on, work—out of which our organic selves are built.)

As for being mechanical, again unless one is a dualist, we are mechanical in some sense—just not constitutively mechanical (unless “mechanical” means some special way of being physical that we are not, but as above any such construal is likely to exclude computers as well). But then neither are computers constitutively mechanical; computation, I believe, is a constitutively semantical or intentional notion. So again, if people fail to be machines for that reason, so do computers.

Either we fall within the scope of the machinic, in other words, or, at least arguably, contemporary computers do not. Neither option supports a clear human vs. machine distinction relevant to AI.



Another way to look at this was suggested in the introduction. One of the challenges raised by developments in AI is how they will—and should—affect not only our sense of ourselves, but the constitutive standards on what it is to be human (since “human” is in part a normative predicate, not merely a biological one3). How should AI affect humanity itself, that is, not just the world that humans live in? Without raising judgment into too much of an ideal, we would hardly go awry if, by turning reckoning tasks over to our synthetic constructions, we could “up the ante” on people—raise the standards on what it is to be human—by establishing judgment of the sort described here as a defining bar on what constitutes authentic adult thought.



DETAILS: In suggesting a distinction between reckoning and judgment I have said little about what judgment comes to in detail. Myriad issues arise—such as whether the requisite values and existential commitments that judgment involves are or should be culturally local, generically human (humane?), or of wider compass.4 I have suggested—and in fact endorse, but have not defended here—the idea that accountability to the world can serve as the grounds not just of truth but of ethics as well (accountability to the “One,” to the preregistered, not to the postontological reality that most people take the word “world” to name). I have similarly left open such questions as whether the possession of judgment requires having a history, being enmeshed in a society, and so on. And I have said nothing about whether we can, or what it would be to, develop an amalgam of people, machines, institutions, practices, values, and the rest such that the assembly might be capable of judgment not attributable to the judgment of any of its members. And so forth. Questions of this sort, I take it, should occupy our attention once we have established a workable understanding of the capacities of the systems we are building. My hope is that a first-order cartographic map of the territory occupied by people and AIs might free us from paralysis in the face of the overarching question of “whether intelligent machines are coming, and will take over.” Once we have conceptual equipment adequate to the task of taking stock of them—of testing their mettle—we can take up the raft of detailed questions we will need to answer, even if only inchoately and provisionally at first, in order to reach our aim of sensibly deploying these systems in ways that are sound, beneficial, practicable, and sane.



CONSCIOUSNESS: It will be argued that some of the characteristics I have attributed to judgment have more to do with consciousness than with intelligence—and will be claimed, for that reason, that it is unfair to pose them as criteria for AGI. There is something that is right about this comment, but much more that is profoundly wrong. Fundamentally, the objection gets the situation exactly backwards. What is right is that some of the properties of full-blooded intelligence that I am describing—perhaps especially its dealing with a world of surpassing richness, exceeding the grasp of discrete concepts—are typically associated with “qualia” and other phenomenal characteristics recognized as being beyond the compass of discrete propositions and traditional logic. But to think, as a consequence, that the notion of judgment being defended here includes more within its scope than “mere rationality,” and thus must be treading into the territory of consciousness (here) or emotion (next section), is to miss the fundamental ontological point that has underwritten the entire analysis.

If present-day theories of logic and of rationality, based on “clear and distinct” concepts, considered as given and unproblematic, do not provide an analysis of what it is to take responsibility for those concepts (responsibility for how they abstract, and idealize, and do both justice and injustice to, the worlds to which they apply), then so much the worse for those theories of rationality. Rich is how the world is, to which reason (not just feeling and consciousness) must be accountable. Various are the registration schemes suitable for characterizing it, including schemes beyond the reach of discrete concepts. That the world outstrips these schemes’ purview is a blunt metaphysical fact about the world—critical to any conceptions of reason and rationality worth their salt. Even if phenomenological philosophy has been more acutely aware of this richness than has the analytic tradition, the richness itself is a fundamental characteristic of the underlying unity of the metaphysics, not a uniquely phenomenological or subjective fact.

More generally, I have tried to argue that making sense of first- and second-wave AI, on the one hand, and of the difference between reckoning and judgment, on the other—two aims of this book—requires rejecting a widely accepted divide between: (i) a cut-and-dried realm of conceptually discrete calculative rationality, of the sort that GOFAI tried to emulate, and that has perhaps unduly influenced Western metaphysics and epistemology for too long, based on a flawed ontological presupposition of a world of unproblematic discrete objects and properties; and (ii) a qualitatively richer, more fluid realm of “subjective” consciousness attuned to the subtleties and nuances of the world’s resplendent underlying richness.5 Second-wave reckoning (not even judgment) is succeeding by recognizing the world itself as ineffably dense. Judgment requires holding rationality relentlessly to account for this abundance, constantly ready to relinquish allegiance to registration schemes when they do it too much injustice. None of these things have uniquely to do with the first-person subjective character of consciousness.6

Put it this way: logic and GOFAI failed by viewing rationality as a postregistration—“post-ontological”—process of articulated moves, on the model of a chess game. Machine learning is helping to open our eyes to what phenomenologists have long understood: that holding registrations accountable to the actual (nonregistered) world is part and parcel of intelligence, rationality, and thought. If these insights lead to a reworked understanding of rationality, reason, and thought, which in turn impinges on and adjusts our understanding of consciousness (as I believe it should and will), well and good. But that is the direction of the implication: from the nature of reality to consciousness, not the other way around.



EMOTION: The distinction between reckoning and judgment is also not a difference between reason and emotion. Some may feel that being committed, going to bat, giving a damn, and so on, must be emotional states, in virtue of being action-inducing and motivational. For many reasons, I believe this is radically incorrect. Authentic judgment requires detachment and dispassion, for starters7—freedom from some of the very vicissitudes most characteristic of emotional states (“set your emotions aside,” we appropriately tell children, when guiding them toward considered judgment). Interpersonal commitments, too, must similarly reach well beyond emotion, in my book, if they are to endure. But the present point is not to impugn emotion, which some will argue to be essential to achieving humanity, instilling compassion, and so forth. Rather, as suggested above, I want to reject the idea that intelligence and rationality are adequately modeled by something like formal logic, of the sort at which computers currently excel. That is: I reject any standard divide between “reason” as having no commitment, dedication, and robust engagement with the world, on the one hand, and emotion and affect as being the only locus of such “pro” action-oriented attitudes, on the other.8 It would be ruinous, I believe, to phrase this in terms I owe to Charis Thompson,9 to cede logos to reckoning, and force judgment to take refuge in pathos. Even the increasingly popular suggestion that “good thinking” requires combining rational understanding with emotion and affect buys into this impoverished conception of rationality.

As an example of such a misconception, consider Thomas Friedman’s suggestion10 that since industrial era machines replaced work of human hands (physical labor), and second-wave AI systems are now taking over the work of human heads (mental labor), what remains for humanity is labor of the heart: passion, character and collaborative spirit. Though superficially elegant, the suggestion is fatally flawed. It “disappears” the deliberative judgment that I am arguing is fundamental to reason itself, and is thereby blind to anything approaching genuine intelligence or dispassionate inquiry. Determining, standing for, and going to bat for the truth—all foundational components of reason—require active and “resolute commitment,” as Haugeland puts it, far beyond anything computers can yet do.



RESPONSIBILITY: Fifth, only a system capable of authentic judgment can truly shoulder responsibility for its actions and deliberations. If an automated guidance system causes an airplane to miss the runway and to slam into a mountain, it is unexceptional to say that the system failed; we might even say that it was at fault (though I would want to write as ⌈at fault⌉). But we would—and should—balk at holding any presently constructable computer system responsible for the tragedy. An ethical stance can be shouldered only by an existentially committed system capable of judgment. Historically, it has been said that responsibility can be shouldered only by a system capable of human judgment. One of my aims in eschewing the human/machine distinction is to make room for the development of a notion of judgment substantial enough for the qualifier “human” to be neither necessary nor sufficient. We need to be able to ask where responsibility for a given task is and should be located, without prejudice as to whether that judgment resides in person or machine (or in policy, practice, law, community, etc., or an amalgam of them all).11



ETHICS: For two reasons, I have intentionally not taken up the topic of ethics. It has long been my view, first, that substantial discussion of ethics and AI requires a deeper understanding than we have had, to date, of the issues I have been addressing here: what AI is, what intelligence requires, and so on. This book can thus be viewed as an attempt to lay out some of the understandings that I take to be prerequisite to meaningful conversations about the ethics of AI. Second, as this book again demonstrates, I do not believe, although it seems tempting to some, that approaching the subject of AI through an ethical lens is the best route into the deepest and most serious issues about its nature, capacities, role, impact, and proper deployment. One preliminary ethical comment can be made, though, preparatory to any substantial discussion. On the one hand, many of the (critical) ethical questions raised by the development of reckoning technologies are unprecedented in detail, but of a kind familiar from the deployment of any new technology: genetically modified organisms, social media, nuclear weapons, and so on. Entirely different considerations arise, unprecedented except perhaps in the context of child rearing, when we ask what it would be for AI systems themselves to be moral agents—that is, to be able (and hence mandated) to take ethical responsibility for their own actions. I believe we are a long way from this, but the question will arise if and as our creations start to “think for themselves.” My view is straightforward: such systems must be capable of moral judgment, understood as a species of exactly the sort of judgment under discussion here.

If does not follow that an AI capable of being a moral agent must for that reason be capable of employing ethical concepts explicitly, in the sense of holding or reasoning with an explicitly articulated moral theory. Just as a young adult might demonstrate estimable ethical judgment and behavior (perhaps even preternatural wisdom) in the absence of an explicitly held moral theory, so too might a synthetic system. Contrapositively, it is easy to imagine a reckoning system devised to calculate and manipulate symbolic representations of ethical worths and values, which did not even have the ability to refer authentically to the entities we would take its intentional states to represent—a system, that is, inherently incapable of ethical behavior at all. What grounds ethics, in person or machine, is the moral character of the subject’s (semi-autonomous) judgment, intentional orientation to, deference, and engagement with the world—not, in the first instance, its possession or lack thereof of an articulated (ethical) theory.

A postscript might be added on a topic of intense current debate: the issue of driverless cars. To clear a potential distraction aside first, one of the difficulties of raising “trolley problems” in this context,12 perhaps reflected in the fact that humans rarely know what they would do in such situations, is the presupposition that driving requires deliberative ratiocination. The human case is complex; we build roads and constrain traffic patterns and develop complex social practices so as to minimize the cognitive demands on human drivers; it would actually be dangerous for human drivers to need to assess, anew at every instant, whether the road continues around the corner or drops off a cliff, whether the vehicle in front will be grabbed by a hook rising from the road’s surface and instaneously come to a halt, etc. Human drivers are held accountable only within highly regimented domains in which as much judgment as possible has been shouldered and prefigured by material arrangements, social practices, and norms.

That said, the issue we face as a society is one of configuring traffic in such a way as to ensure that vehicles piloted by (perhaps exceptionally acute) reckoning systems can be maximally safe, overall. It may be that in some situations—long distance highways, for example—we can restrict the driving context sufficiently, as we currently do for aircraft, so that reliable reckoning confers adequate safety. That is, one possibly sane way to deploy currently imagined driverless cars would be to ensure that the various kinds of information available to them can be combined, via reckoning alone, to lead to outcomes we humans judge to be safe. Then, if and as we are able to develop systems that approach anything like judgment, the contexts in which they could be safely deployed will proportionally increase. But I do not believe that automated judgment, as I have emphasized throughout, is on any immediate horizon.

The conclusion generalizes. We should not delegate to reckoning systems, nor trust them with, tasks that require full fledged judgment—should not inadvertently use or rely on systems that, on the one hand, would need to have judgment in order to function properly or reliably, but that, on the other hand, utterly lack any such intellectual capacity.



CONSTRUCTION: Finally, I have said nothing about how judgment might be constructed. While in detail I do not believe any of us know, a number of points can already be made. Note, for starters, three facts already stated about judgment’s constitution. First, all intentional and semantic properties, of which judgment is an instance (along with being right, telling the truth, being reliable, etc.) are noneffective, relational properties.13 They are not facts about the mechanical (effective) shape of what is in the machine.14 So any question about the presence of judgment is a question about the system “under interpretation,” not about its mechanical form. Second, as has also been emphasized, judgment is a holistic property of how a system works—how things are tied to other things, what the system does when encountering conflicting evidence, what other events or processes one perceptual event will trigger, how it responds to situations overall, etc. Even under interpretation, therefore, judgment is unlikely to be an isolable or categorical property of an architecture. Third, judgment involves a system’s giving priority to the world, over its internal states and representations—and over the patterns exemplified by any inputs, machinations, and “interior” processes. What “giving priority to the world” looks like, from an internal architectural point of view, is at this point anyone’s guess.

Several consequences follow directly. First, the presence of judgment within a system is unlikely to be detectable at any level of implementation below the full system or personal level. It is unlikely ever to be realized by a structure or pattern of activity identifiable as such within the system’s internal architectural configuration. Even less is it likely to have an effectively detectable neural or mechanical correlate (just as the presence or shape of true sentences within a logical system cannot be determined purely on the basis of syntactic shape). No fMRI of a person, that is, and no analogous description or diagram of the effective state of a synthetic system, is ever likely to reveal whether the system has anything approaching reliable judgment.15

Second, because of the constitutive importance of giving priority to the world over any internal representations or states, judgment is unlikely to be achievable by any system that does not engage with the world itself, in ways appropriate to what is required to hold its judgments to account. Judgment is available to systems and organisms that participate in the world; it will never be accessible to a mere bystander or disconnected reckoner.

Third, as already remarked, I do not believe that genuine intelligence can be explained within the bounds of science as currently conceived—from within a methodology of blanket mechanism, that is—because of (at least current) science’s commitment to physical mechanism and causal explanation, which blocks its ability to encompass both the noneffective reach of semantics and the normative nature of existential commitment.16

It is considerations of this sort that underwrite the first sentence in the book—that genuine intelligence, or anything worthy of the AGI label, will not be achieved with “more of the same”: increased processing power, accelerated practical development, new technoscientific research of the sort that has been conducted to date. Contemporary research tends to focus on effective mechanisms, algorithms, architectural configuration, etc.—none of which are of the right conceptual sort to lead to insight about deliberation and judgment.

What could lead a system to judgment? Child-rearing is an instructive example. Developing judgment in people requires steady reflection, guidance, and deliberation over many years—interventions, explanations, and instruction in situations where judgment is required, even if that need is not superficially evident. What are those situations, where guidance and instruction is warranted? How is it determined that (and what kinds of) intervention and guidance are required? These are questions with which every parent wrestles on an ongoing basis. The issues, symptoms, and recommended courses of action are deeply embedded in human culture; the patterns of behavior and thought that we hew to have been crafted over centuries of civilization (including in the religious traditions that have served as stewards for ultimate questions in all major historical civilizations).The stewards of a child’s education—parents, schools, religious institutions, mentors, literatures, communities, and so on—bring to bear attention, wisdom, and reflection that build on this cultural legacy, skills distilled over many generations, and handed down from one generation to the next.

There are requirements on the child, as well. At each stage, a child must have some ability, increasing as they mature, to reflect on their own behavior, to “step outside” the situations they are engaged in enough to be able to assess the appropriateness and consequences of acting or responding in various ways, and so on. Notably, there is nothing in principle limited about what sorts of consideration might be applicable or worth considering in any particular case. There are maxims that are applicable; but any attempt to put them into articulated form would almost surely be vapid and contextually insensitive.

• • •

What does all this mean in the case of AIs and computer systems generally? Perhaps at least this: that it is hard to see how synthetic systems could be trained in the ways of judgment except by being gradually, incrementally, and systematically enmeshed in normative practices that engage with the world and that involve thick engagement with teachers (“elders”), who can steadily develop and inculcate not just “moral sensibility” but also intellectual appreciation of intentional commitment to the world.

Is this a realistic route forward for AI? That is not for me to say. As I have made clear since the beginning, it is not my aim to bring the imagination of AI designers to a halt. But if synthetic judgment is an end toward which we want to aim,17 these are not only the sorts of goals that will need to be embraced, but also the sorts of methods that may need to be undertaken. If that proves to be correct, attaining synthetic judgment will require a profound shift in the nature of research and a radical widening of approach. One of the aims of laying out the seven standards in chapter 8 is to suggest what would need to be addressed in order to make good on that original AI dream.

In passing, I should say that I expect advocates of evolutionary explanation and deep reinforcement learning to suggest that we could approach this process with appropriate “reward structures” and/or “threats,” designed to mimic cultural and personal development. For at least two reasons, I doubt that such strategies will succeed. For one thing, they seem liable to drift into calculative reckoning about morality, rather than engagement with the world of the sort that will lead a system out of commitment to its internal representations and toward deferential commitment to the world. In addition, it seems unlikely that any simple exploitation, by a regimen of rewards, of even genuine existential vulnerability would suffice. Famously, you cannot “buy” generosity or kindness in people through any simple behaviorist pattern of stimulus and response, reward and punishment. There is no reason to suppose that the situation would be any different for a synthetic creature.

Judgment requires a finely-honed sensitivity to epistemic and ontological subtleties in ontological webs of practices and entities whose importance has been forged through cultural and historical processes beyond any one person’s comprehension. I find it unlikely that judgment could be instilled or inculcated in a synthetic device through anything less than a moral and ethical upbringing and steady process of education, apprenticeship, enculturation, guidance—perhaps even friendship.





______________

1. Judgment is not a mark of the human. Perhaps it is a mark of the humane.

2. See previous note: the highest reaches of humānity, we might say.

3. Alligators do not need to try to be alligators. Their claim on alligatorhood is secure, no matter how indolent, peculiar, or bone-crushingly violent. Humans are different: we must strive to be human. To commit an “inhuman” act is to fail to achieve the minimal ethical standards constitutive of membership in the fellowship of the human at least, perhaps even the “good.” Homo sapiens is one thing; fully human, another. (Alligators need not worry about being “inalligator.”)

The category “human,” that is, is normative, not merely biological. It is affiliated with good and bad, better and worse—with values, morality, perhaps even spirit, those vexed interpretive issues, immortalized by the tree of knowledge, that Descartes clove away from the physical ones, back at the beginning of the Scientific Revolution.

4. See Alasdair MacIntyre, Whose Justice? Which Rationality? (London: Duckworth, 1988).

5. It is “underlying” only with reference to the short-sightedness of an excessive allegiance to conceptual abstraction. As machine learning should if nothing else alert us to, there is nothing “hidden” about the world’s indelible variety.

6. Consciousness does have its peculiarities, including its ineliminably first-person, unshareable character, which I will address elsewhere (e.g., in “Who’s on Third? The Physical Bases of Consciousness,” unpublished manuscript). I believe, however, that the identification of phenomenal qualia as uniquely characteristic of consciousness and as scientifically inexplicable are both mils, deriving from an ontologically inadequate understanding of the nature of reality.

7. See the introduction, note 2 (p. xv).

8. Among other issues, if one draws into the same category of emotion not only dispassionate concern with the truth of one’s thoughts, the adequacy of one’s registration, and the detachment of one’s perspective, but also self-indulgence, bias, prejudice, self-interest, revenge, and so on, one would then require the wherewithal with which to distinguish “good” emotions, as it were, from “bad” (the former from the latter)—a discriminating task, in my book, that would need to rely on dispassionate judgment.

9. Charis Thompson, personal communication, 2018. See the introduction to her Getting Ahead: Minds, Bodies, and Emotion in an Age of Automation and Selection (forthcoming).

10. “From Hands to Heads to Hearts,” New York Times, Jan. 4, 2017.

11. This injunction must be treated with care. It would be disastrous to water down what responsibility is, what it takes, and the standards to which we should hold both people and machines accountable, if they are granted it, under pressures to delegate judgment to first- and second-wave AI. See pages xix–xx of the introduction.

12. The original trolley problem, popularized by Philippa Foot but originating at the beginning of the twentieth century, concerned the difference between doing nothing or intervening to affect the outcome of a situation with varying moral consequences. In discussions of driverless cars, the problem is usually simplified to one of merely choosing between two courses of action with distinct moral consequences (such as killing more elderly people or fewer children, or giving higher priority to passengers than to pedestrians).

13. Calling them relational properties is technically suspect, because in general a relational property would be taken to be one that related two (or more) other ontologically secure entities. On the metaphysical and ontological world view being suggested here, however, registrational properties are partially (not wholly!) constitutive of anything’s being the thing that it is, and so the entities “related” by the intentional or semantic properties are not necessarily ontologically individuable except in the relational properties’ terms.

14. See my forthcoming Computational Reflections for an account of how even internal reference, where the target of the intentional act is an interior process or structure, is not an effective relationship.

15. Someone might argue that there may be neural or mechanical correlates of judgment rather along the lines of the presence of a chemical or hormone corresponding to existential anxiety, which would perhaps not exist in a purely reckoning system—but these are speculations of fantasy rather than anything rationally defensible at present.

16. Some will argue that psychological theories of memory are legitimately scientific and crucially traffic in the situations or phenomena that the memories are about (such as childhood experiences). The difficulty is that, although such accounts may help themselves to the contents of the memories, they cannot, within a mechanistic conception of science, explain or give an account of what makes those distal in-the-world situations be the memories’ contents. (It would not do, of course, to say that those are the situations that the subjects describe when the memories are invoked or reported on; the problem just recurs—how can a mechanistic scientific account explain what their statements are about?)

17. Whether we do or not is a question on which I am not taking a stand here—though it is hard to imagine current efforts to develop AGI drawing to a close.
