EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION





MEDITATION AS A SELFLESS EXPERIENCE



Meditation (zazen) can be restful and enjoyable, according to Dogen.1 Its state (samadhi) can be like an ocean that is serene and yet dynamic.2 Its field can be as vast as spring time, which encompasses all of its flowers, birds, and mountain colors.3 Being in spring, we hear the sound of a valley stream or become a plum blossom swirling in the wind.4

Dogen’s poetic descriptions may seem contrary to our usual meditation experience. Often we are troubled with physical pain and sleepiness; our mind may be scattered, and our daily concerns continue to preoccupy us. We may feel that we have had a bad meditation. Dogen, however, seems to show no interest in these specific issues.5 He simply speaks of the magnificence of meditation and asserts that we can experience luminosity as soon as we start to meditate.6

What we think we experience in meditation may be different from what we actually experience. What, then, do we experience? How do we recognize our deep experience and apply it to our daily lives? These are some of the questions Dogen addresses in the essays presented in this volume.

If we were to summarize Dogen’s teaching in one word, it might be “nonseparation.”7 In meditation, the body experiences itself as not separate from the mind.8 The subject becomes not apart from the object.9

While our thinking is often limited to the notion of “I,” which is occupied by “my” body, “my” mind, and “my” situation, Dogen teaches that we can become selfless in meditation. Then, we are no longer confined by our self-centered worldview and a dominating sense of possessions. Only when we become transparent and let all things speak for themselves can their voices be heard and their true forms appear.10

As we calm down and move away from the usual mode of physical and mental activities, we often have a good idea or even, at times, an extraordinary insight during meditation. However, this is only a beginning stage. If we go further, we may experience a dissolving of the notion of the self. Dogen describes such an experience of his own at the climactic moment of his study as “dropping away body and mind.”11


BEYOND SPACE AND TIME



The distance from here to there is no longer concrete. A meditator walks on the top of a high mountain and swims deep in the ocean, not only becoming an awakened one but also identifying with a fighting spirit.12 A person who bows becomes one with the person who is bowed to.13

Sizes become free of sizes. The depth of a dewdrop is the height of the moon.14 The entire world is found in a minute particle. Extremely large becomes extremely small, and vice versa.15 Here is another view of reality distinct from our usual way of seeing.

It is not that duality stops existing or functioning; the small is still small and the large is still large. The body remains the body and the mind remains the mind. Without discerning the differences between things, we could not conduct even the simplest task of our daily lives. And yet, in meditation the distinctions seem to dissolve and lose their usual significance. Dogen calls this kind of nondualistic experience nirvana, which exists at each moment of meditation.16

Dogen is perhaps the only Zen master in the ancient world who elucidated in detail the paradox of time. For him, time is not separate from existence: time is being.17

Certainly, there is the passage of time marked by the movement of the sun or the clock that always manifests in one direction, from the past, to the present, to the future. On the other hand, in some cases we feel that time flies, and in other cases it moves slowly or almost stands still.

In meditation, according to Dogen, time is multidirectional: Yesterday flows into today, and today flows into yesterday; today flows into tomorrow, and tomorrow flows into today. Today also flows into today.18Time flies, yet it does not fly away.19 This moment, which is inclusive of all times, is timeless.20

Further, time is not apart from the one who experiences it: time is the self.21 Time flows in “I,” and “I” makes the time flow. It is selfless “I” that makes time full and complete.22


BEYOND LIFE AND DEATH



Time is also life. In the same manner, time is death. Like other Zen teachers, Dogen repeatedly poses an urgent existential question: realizing the brevity of our life, we need to clarify the essential meaning of life and death.23

Life and death are often called “birth and death” in Buddhism, based on the understanding that we are born and die innumerable times moment by moment.24 Meditation is a way to become familiar with life and death. If we realize that we keep on being born and dying all the time, we become intimate with death as well as life. Thus, we may be better prepared for the moment of our departure from this world than we would be otherwise; and this, in turn, reduces our fear of dying.

For Dogen, each moment of our life can be a complete and all-inclusive experience of life.25 The life of “I” is not separable from the life of the whole—the life of all beings.26 In the same way, death is a complete and all-inclusive experience.27

When we fully live life and fully die death, life is not exclusive of death; death is not exclusive of life. Then life and death are no longer plural but singular as life-and-death or birth-and-death.

It is a dilemma of life: We all die, and yet, avoiding death is no solution. When we thoroughly face death, death becomes “beyond death.”28 Dogen tells us that this is the meaning of “life-and-death” for an awakened person.


ENLIGHTENMENT AND BEYOND



The Zen way of going beyond the barrier of dualism is to meditate in full concentration. This is called “just sitting.”29

Dogen’s invaluable contribution to clarifying the deep meaning of meditation is his introduction of the concept called the “circle of the way.” It means that each moment of our meditation encompasses all four elements of meditation: aspiration, practice, enlightenment, and nirvana.30

“Aspiration” is determination in pursuit of enlightenment. “Practice” is the effort required for actualizing enlightenment. “Enlightenment” is the awakening of truth, the dharma. “Nirvana,” in his case, is the state of profound serenity, in which dualistic thoughts and desires are at rest.31

Dogen says that even a moment of meditation by a beginning meditator fully actualizes the unsurpassable realization, whether that is noticed or not.32 In this way, enlightenment, often regarded as the goal, is itself the path. The path is no other than the goal.33

The word “enlightenment,” a translation of the Sanskrit word bodhi (literally, “awakening”), has layers of meaning:

1. According to Mahayana sutras, Shakyamuni Buddha said, “I have attained the way simultaneously with all sentient beings on the great earth.”34 That is to say that all sentient and insentient beings are illuminated by the Buddha’s original enlightenment and thus carries buddha nature—the potential for or the characteristics of enlightenment.35 In other words, in the Buddha’s eye, all are equally enlightened and none are separate from the Buddha.36 However, this does not mean, from the ordinary, dualistic perspective, that all beings become wise and free of delusion.37

2. In Dogen’s explanation of the “circle of the way,” all those who practice meditation are fully enlightened. Enlightenment is not separate from practice; enlightenment at each moment is no other than the unsurpassable enlightenment.38 This aspect may be called the unity of practice-enlightenment or practice-realization.39 Dogen emphasizes practice that is inseparable from enlightenment as the essential practice of the way of awakened ones—the buddha way. The awareness of enlightenment, however, may not necessarily be recognized by everyone all the time, as it is an experience deeper than one grasped by intellect alone.

3. When we practice meditation, we often don’t notice that we are already enlightened, and thus we look for enlightenment somewhere other than in practice. Dogen calls this tendency of separation “great delusion.”40 This pursuit, however, provides us with the potential for “great enlightenment,” which is a merging of the unconscious practice-enlightenment and conscious understanding.

This enlightenment can happen unexpectedly and dramatically as a body-and-mind experience of the nonseparation of all things, rather than as a theoretical understanding. Such spiritual breakthroughs, sometimes called “seeing through human nature” (kensho in Japanese), may bring forth exuberance. Dogen quotes many such stories of “sudden realization” by ancient Chinese Zen practitioners as cases of study (koans).41

However, Dogen discourages his students from striving for breakthroughs, cautioning that this pursuit is based on the notion of a separation between practice and enlightenment.42 This kind of realization or “attaining the way” takes time and usually follows a series of failed attempts. In regard to this, Dogen says, “. . . even if you are closely engaged in rigorous practices, you may not hit one mark out of one hundred activities. But by following a teacher or a sutra, you may finally hit a mark. This hitting a mark is due to the missing of one hundred marks in the past; it is the maturing of missing one hundred marks in the past.”43

An awakened person, a buddha, is someone who actualizes enlightenment. If enlightenment is nothing separate from practice, it is clear that all those who practice meditation as recommended in Buddhism are buddhas. And those who have experienced and reached deep understanding of the nonseparation of all things are regarded as ones who have attained the way.

However, for Dogen, attaining the way is not the final goal. He encourages practitioners of the buddha way to go beyond buddhas and leave no trace of enlightenment.44 That is to say, we are not supposed to remain in the realm of nonduality.

Going beyond the boundary of all things is important. It is wisdom, which is the basis of compassion. Only when we identify ourselves with others can we genuinely act with love toward others. At the same time, however, for practical and ethical reasons in our daily activities, we need to maintain the boundaries of self and other. An enlightened person is someone who embodies the deep understanding of nonduality while acting in accordance with ordinary boundaries, not being bound to either realm but acting freely and harmoniously.45


IRONY OF AUTHENTICITY



“Self-realization without a teacher” is seen as a cause of self-righteousness and arrogance, and thus is traditionally discouraged in Zen. Dogen, however, is free and radical enough to say that studying dharma with a sutra or a teacher is none other than self-realization without a teacher.46 As everyone has a different background, character, and situation, one has to arrive at one’s own realization. On the other hand, Dogen is orthodox enough to say that realization without a teacher is to study with the teacher and to study with a scripture.

The single point Dogen repeatedly brings out throughout his teaching career is authenticity. He describes himself as one who has authentically received transmission of the true dharma from his teacher, Rujing.47 All of the effort in his writings is directed toward understanding, enlivening, expounding, and transmitting what he sees as the authentic teaching of the Buddha.48 Dogen sometimes uses the words “authentic” and “authentically” several times in one sentence!

The main sources of his inspiration, other than Rujing’s words, are Indian Buddhist scriptures and Chinese Zen texts. Dogen draws stories, sayings, verses, and guidelines from these texts to authenticate the practice of the way he is engaged in. Dogen’s words “longing for the ancient” well reflect his admiration of and dedication to the teachings of Shakyamuni Buddha and the subsequent dharma descendants up to Rujing.49

Some of the earlier Zen practitioners in China were eccentric and wild-spirited, and did not live in monasteries. Dogen draws teachings from their examples, but he himself chooses to follow the tradition of thorough and solemn daily monastic practice. He regards all daily activities, including wearing the robe, cooking, and engaging in administrative work, as sacred. Dogen orchestrates the whole monastic life in ceremonial patterns, highly choreographing every movement—when and how to enter the meditation hall, how to bow, how to sit down, how to eat, and even how to use the toilet.50

His operating principle is based on guidelines from Chinese Zen monasteries. The seating and movements are organized hierarchically around the abbot as the supreme authority. The status of monastery officers and the dharma ages (years from the time of ordination) of monks are next in line. Geographically, north is regarded as higher than south and the left side as higher than the right side. Perhaps this reflects a combination of ancient Indian custom and the Chinese imperial court system. Everyone in the monastic community is expected to follow the guidelines exactly.51 By participating in a well-established communal environment, he seems to believe, practitioners can mature their spirituality with little chance to create unwholesome actions.52

Being authentic for Dogen means being true not only to the tradition, but to the particularity of each person’s experience, which is intuitive and fresh. This may explain why Zen practitioners have produced enormous amounts of literature. The emphasis on spontaneity and individual creativity may explain why Dogen himself produced a unique and extensive body of writing.

It is striking to note that Dogen’s obsession with strict monastic guidelines does not confine him in his imaginative and thought-provoking expressions. Rather, his highly patterned daily life becomes the basis for the unprecedented degree of freedom in his use of language. For him, the realm of unbounded imagination derives from reality itself—brought about only by authentic practice.


DOGEN’S STYLE OF WRITING



Dogen was one of the first Buddhist teachers to write in Japanese. (Until then, Japanese students of Buddhism commonly read and wrote in Chinese, which was pronounced in a Japanese approximation of Chinese pronunciation.) He wrote the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye in medieval Japanese, although he retained ancient and medieval Chinese forms when quoting from Zen and secular Chinese texts, as well as Buddhist sutras. While some of his poetry was composed in Japanese, Dogen wrote all official statements, most of the monastic guidelines, and many of his poems in Chinese.

The Chinese language has thousands of ideographs and is rich in expressing poetic images and philosophical concepts. Meanwhile, it has no grammatical conjugations and lacks definite parts of speech. The relationship between words is often implicit. Thus, its sentence structure is suggestive and ambiguous.

The Japanese writing system combines Chinese ideographs and Japanese phonetic letters. Its grammar has inflections and parts of speech, so sentence structure is usually explicit. The logical structure of the Japanese language thus allowed Dogen to pioneer a genre of immensely critical essays in his own language.

When Dogen takes up Chinese texts and makes his own translations, he sometimes stretches the original meanings. Part of the poetry and surprise of Dogen’s thinking is characterized by this stretching. For example, a line of Rujing’s poetry can normally be translated as “Plum blossoms open in early spring.” Dogen translates it as “Plum blossoms open early spring.” Also, a line from the Great Pari-nirvana Sutra is traditionally translated as “All have buddha nature.” He translates it as “All beings are buddha nature.”

At times Dogen also breaks down a Chinese line into individual ideographs and rearranges the sequence. For example: “The mind itself is buddha,” “The mind is buddha itself,” “Buddha is itself the mind,” “The mind itself buddha is,” “Buddha is the mind itself.”53

A fascicle of the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye often starts with a summary paragraph in Dogen’s own tempered sentences, giving the topic an ultimate value. When he talks about the monastic robe, for example, he describes it as the most essential thing in Buddhist practice. In the same manner, all monastic activities, as well as scriptures, ancestors, and dharma transmission, are given absolute values.

Then, he quotes from Buddhist scriptures, Zen dialogues, or Zen poems and comments on each line, making a detailed examination of the meaning behind the words. He does not hesitate to harshly criticize great masters like Linji and Yunmen, while admiring their teachings in other passages. At the same time, he reveres the accounts of the earliest Chinese masters, such as Bodhidharma and Huineng, the Sixth Ancestor, as well as later ancestors of his lineage.

Dogen focuses on theoretical aspects of the teaching, while constantly reminding students that awakening is beyond thinking. In some of his essays and monastic guidelines, he gives detailed instructions on the practical aspects of zazen and communal activities, often mixed with philosophical interpretations and poetic expressions.

Commenting on earlier Zen masters’ words, Dogen develops his own thought and finds a way to expand the meaning of their words to elaborate his understanding of the utmost importance of each moment. A remarkable example of this is his interpretation of a verse by Yaoshan (ninth-tenth century): “For the time being, stand on a high mountain . . .” From this, Dogen develops his thought that time is no other than being—the concept of “time being,” which I alluded to previously.

The Chinese Zen literature contains a number of stories in which teachers of scriptures abandon lecturing in favor of practicing Zen, or in which Zen teachers make comments that appear to question the primacy of the scriptures. Actually, it is not common for Zen teachers to make extensive efforts to examine the meanings of scriptural phrases. It seems that Chinese Zen marked a distinct departure from the Mahayana texts that embody splendorous cosmic mythology and highly systematic theories. Instead, Chinese Zen leaders focused on a practitioner’s experience of the very moment in each individual situation. They tended to point to concrete daily objects such as sandals, a whisk, or a walking stick. Parts of the body—top of the head, eyeballs, nostrils, fists, and heels—were their favorite points of reference.

Dogen speaks such Zen language as this. At the same time, however, he conducts a thorough investigation of phrases from a number of sutras, which makes him unique as a Zen teacher. His writings in the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye provide a synthesis of these two traditional aspects: studies of scripture that contain vast systematic expressions of the Buddhist teaching, and Zen, which emphasizes direct experience of the essence of Buddhist teaching through meditation.

Most of the texts in the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye were delivered to Dogen’s practicing community. He may have read the text aloud (as opposed to speaking spontaneously from a rough note) but there is no evidence that he received questions. His main audience consisted of resident monks, and possibly some senior nuns who were his students. Laypeople such as donors and laborers who happened to be working on the monastery construction were at times invited. He also had an invisible audience of heavenly beings, and sometimes describes dharma teachers as “guiding masters of humans and devas.”

It is clear that Dogen’s thinking and understanding deepened as he wrote his essays. He made a careful revision of his texts with the help of Ejo, his senior student and successor-to-be. Either Dogen or Ejo made final clean copies of the manuscripts.


DECODING THE ZEN PARADOX



Dogen’s writings are known for their impenetrability. Zen practitioners who study the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye say that it often takes years to understand some passages in the text. The difficulty of his writings comes from the depth of Buddhist thinking in general and the use of Zen stories or words that are enigmatic, plus his own idiosyncratic style of writing.

In exploring the deeper meanings of Zen stories, poetry, teachings, and Buddhist sutras, Dogen expands, twists, and manipulates the meanings of the words from the texts he quotes.54 By presenting unique and at times outrageous interpretations, he unleashes a great variety of descriptions on the state of meditation.

Dogen makes use of a full range of Zen rhetoric on the paradox of awakening beyond thought. The traditional teaching device includes nonverbal expressions such as silence, shouting, beating, and gestures, which have been recorded in words. Sacrilegious or violent words and absurd images that are intended to crush stereotypical thinking are not uncommon in Zen heritage. Opposite answers to the same question may be given, and different questions may be responded to with the same answer.

Here are examples of other types of Zen rhetoric that Dogen adopts and employs:

1. Startling images: “There is [a mountain] walking, there is [a mountain] flowing, and there is a moment when a mountain gives birth to a mountain child.”55

2. Upside-down language: “The forest runs around the hunting dog.”56

3. Tautology: “A fish swims like a fish. . . . A bird flies like a bird.”57

4. Negative tautology: “An ancient buddha said, ‘Mountains are mountains, waters are waters.’ These words do not mean mountains are mountains; they mean mountains are mountains.”58

5. Chopped logic: “At the very moment of asking the meaning of Bodhidharma’s coming from India, this dharma wheel is nothing is essential. Nothing is essential doesn’t mean not to utilize or break this dharma wheel. This dharma wheel turns in nothing is essential.”59

6. Contradiction: “We manifest the voice of insentient beings speaking dharma with the eyes. Investigate the eyes extensively. Because the voice heard by the eyes should be the same as the voice heard by the ears, the voice heard by the eyes is not the same as the voice heard by the ears.”60

7. The same word with contrasting meanings: “To study the self [selfless universal self] is to forget the self [ego]. To forget the self is to be actualized by myriad things.”61

8. Opposite uses of the same metaphor: (a) “When Bodhidharma came from India, the root of twining vines [entanglement with letters and theories] was immediately cut off and the pure, single buddha dharma spread. Hope that it will be like this in our country.”62 (b) “‘Teacher and disciple practice mutually’ is twining vines [intimate interactions] of buddha ancestors.”63

9. Reversed statement: “An ancient buddha said, ‘A painting of a rice cake does not satisfy hunger.’ . . . there is no remedy for satisfying hunger other than a painted rice cake.”64

10. Non sequitur: “Zhaozhou . . . was once asked by a monk, ‘I heard that you personally saw Nanquan. Is it true?’ Zhaozhou said, ‘A giant radish was here in Zhen Region.’”65

11. One equals half: “Since intimacy surrounds you, it is fully intimate, half intimate.”66

12. One equals many: “When even one single thing is serene, myriad things are serene.”67

13. Seemingly mundane talk: “Zhaozhou, Great Master Zhenji, asked a newly arrived monk, ‘Have you been here before?’ The monk said, ‘Yes, I have been here.’ Zhaozhou said, ‘Have some tea.’”68

These modes of absurdity, contradiction, and double meaning are partly East Asian but mostly Zen, where there is inherent distrust in conventional language and logic. Dogen often makes an effort to crush and penetrate normal intellectual views, going directly to the source of consciousness that is reality itself, before reasoning in duality and nonduality arise. He sometimes calls this mode of communication “intimate language” or “true expression.” It is a realm of word beyond word and logic beyond logic.


IMAGE OF TRANSCENDENCE



Awakening starts with the recognition that there are those who are awakened and those who are not. Once awakened, you are free from the distinction between them. This freedom is transcended to the point that there are those who are awakened and those who are not, which appears similar to the beginning stage. On this advanced level of freedom, however, you are totally yourself and act without hindrance.

Thus, there are: affirmation, negation, negation of negation, and negation of “negation of negation.” This direction toward the next level of experience can be characterized as: duality, nonduality that is transcendence of duality, transcendence of transcendence, and transcended activities.

This may be seen as a map of freedom, an intellectual analysis. But, in fact, this kind of transcendence is experienced freely and intuitively. Let us examine some of the terms Dogen employs to demonstrate an immediate experience:

“Dropping away body and mind,” “casting off limitations,” and “hurling away enlightenment” are some of the basic images of release from restricted self-experience. That means you “set aside” usual concerns and are “detached” from both awakening and not awakening.

While you “give up holding back,” you are not motionless. Rather, you “break away” and take “the path of letting go.” You “leap out,” “leap over,” and “leap clear.” You “jump,” “fly beyond,” and “leap beyond ancient and present.” In Chinese and Japanese, transcending is described as “going beyond” (as in “going beyond buddhas”), which indicates the direction of “going upward,” “surpassing” buddhas and ancestors.

The act of “inquiring beyond” and “expressing beyond” is none other than “breaking through the bamboo node [intellect and theories]” and “going beyond discriminatory thoughts” by “breaking open,” “penetrating,” and “passing through the barrier of dualism.” Being “free and transparent” may be possible by “cutting through,” “cutting apart,” “cutting to the original,” “crushing,” “smashing,” and “vanishing.” This is sometimes represented by such graphic expressions as “cracking open particles” and “plucking out eyeballs.”

When all preconceived notions of goals and objectives are “lost,” you “float free” and “let myriad things advance themselves.” That is the “realm of the unconstructed,” “beyond knowing,” and “beyond thinking.” Here, there is “no effort” and “no creation.”

This place of “no doing” is not being lazy or idly thinking about freedom. Instead, it is an experience “beyond obstruction” for the purpose of “thorough understanding,” “fully actualizing,” “realizing through the body,” and the “embodiment” of “directly clarifying the source beyond words.” It is not separate from each moment of “sitting through” and “cutting through sitting.”


THE TIME WHEN DOGEN LIVED



In Japanese history, the era when Dogen lived is called the Kamakura Period (1185–1333). The preceding periods are the Asuka Period (593–710), the Nara Period (710–794), and the Heian Period (794–1185).

Buddhist doctrine was introduced to Japan through Chinese-language texts from Korea in the mid-sixth century. Since Buddhism was accompanied by the writing system and advanced technology of a great civilization, it quickly received imperial patronage and spread throughout the country. The appointment of Prince Shotoku as the regent, who was to dedicate his life to the practice and propagation of Buddhism, marked the beginning of the Asuka Period.

The grid-shaped city planning of Nara, the new capital of Japan, followed that of the Chinese capital city Chan’an. The construction of the Todai Temple, which housed an enormous Buddha statue, exemplified a concerted national effort initiated by the monarch to create a society based on the infinite luminosity of the universal buddha light described in the Avatamsaka Sutra. The six schools of Buddhism, most of which were based on various philosophical principles, flourished.

A larger-scale planned city of Heian (Kyoto), to the north of Nara, became the imperial capital, where a highly refined court culture developed. Trade with China increased, and a number of monks studied in Tang China, a flourishing world empire. The Shingon (mantra) School, focused on highly ritualized Esoteric Buddhist prayers, became one of the two most influential schools of Buddhism in Japan. The Tendai School—the Japanese form of the Tiantai School in China—was the other powerful school, with a comprehensive Buddhist training center on Mount Hiei in the northeast of Kyoto.

Assimilating with the indigenous Shintoism, Buddhism became an indispensable part of everyday life. Buddhist masters competed with one another to gain imperial patronage, offering a variety of magical prayers. Mount Hiei housed one of the strongest armies of monk-soldiers, who frequently engaged in battles, sometimes burning other monasteries. The Tendai armed forces were known for their frequent demonstrations in Kyoto and for forcing their demands upon the imperial government.

According to Buddhist texts, the period of five hundred years after the time of Shakyamuni Buddha is the Age of True Dharma, which is followed by another five hundred years of the Age of Imitation Dharma. Then the Age of Declining Dharma emerges. Many Japanese Buddhists believed that this last period of no true practice or enlightenment started in 1052. People attributed calamities such as famines, epidemics, social disorder, and wars to the decline of dharma. The wish to attain rebirth in the Pure Land prevailed among those who felt that it was hopeless to attain enlightenment in the present world.

The samurai families—the Taira Clan from the western part of the country and the Minamoto from the east—served as imperial guards and expanded their influence. First, Kiyomori Taira became a powerful military ruler, still serving the emperor. Then, Yoritomo Minamoto defeated the Taira armies in a series of battles and established the Shogun government in Kamakura. This was the beginning of the Kamakura Period. Later, the Hojo Family took over the Kamakura government and called its head “Regent.”

Buddhism in this period may be characterized by the emergence of “single practice.” Honen and his noted disciple Shinran came into conflict with the Tendai establishment, which forced them into exile, but they succeeded in spreading the wholehearted practice of chanting homage to Amitabha Buddha. Dogen established the Zen practice of “just sitting.” Later, Nichiren spread the practice of chanting homage to the Lotus Sutra—Namu-Myoho-Renge-Kyo. This “single practice” of Buddhism, in all its variations, appealed to great numbers of farmers, warriors, and court nobles, eventually becoming the mainstream of faith in Japan.


THE EARLY LIFE OF DOGEN



The first biographical account of Dogen was written by Keizan Jokin, who was a dharma successor of Gikai, one of Dogen’s senior students. It appears as a chapter of Keizan’s book, Transmission of Light, completed forty-seven years after Dogen’s death. We have included it in appendix 2.

Three other early biographies, all of which were written more than a century after Dogen’s death, are also important sources for reconstructing the first part of Dogen’s life. They are Biographies of the First Three Ancestors of the Eihei Monastery (Eihei-ji sanso gyogo-ki), author unknown, already in existence during the Oei Era (1394–1428); Biography of the First Ancestor, Zen Master, Priest Dogen (Shoso Dogen zenji osho gyoroku), author unknown, published in 1673; and Kenzei’s Biography of the Founder Dogen of Eihei (Eihei kaisan gyojo Kenzei-ki) by Kenzei (1415–1474).69

According to the biography by Keizan, Dogen—whose given name is unknown (his name Eihei is taken from the name of his monastery)—was born in 1200 C.E. By Dogen’s own words, he was an adopted son of a “minister of the Minamoto family.” Keizan identifies Motofusa, Lord of the Pine Palace, as this mysterious person. It seems, however, that a later theory by Soto historians which attributes Michitomo Minatomo (1171–1227) as Dogen’s foster father is most convincing. Michitomo was a distinguished poet known as an editor of Shin Kokin Shu, a celebrated imperial anthology of waka (a traditional Japanese poem consisting of thirty-one syllables). Dogen presumably received a high tutorial education in Chinese literature and Japanese poetry. He says, “When I was young, I loved studying literature that was not directly connected to Buddhism.”70

Dogen lost his mother when he was eight (by the Japanese way of reckoning age). Possibly referring to this early misfortune, he himself says, “Realizing the impermanence of life, I began to arouse the way-seeking mind.”71 At thirteen, he visited monk Ryokan, who lived in a hut at the foot of Mount Hiei, northeast of Kyoto, and subsequently entered the monkhood himself. In the following year he was formally ordained by Koen, Head Priest of the Tendai School. Probably Koen was the one who named this novice Buppo Dogen, meaning “Buddha Dharma, Way Source.” Dogen left Mount Hiei after receiving basic training as a monk and studying the scriptures. Later he reflected: “After the aspiration for enlightenment arose, I began to search for dharma, visiting teachers at various places in our country.”72 We don’t know whom he visited, except Koin, who was abbot of the Onjo Monastery—a noted Tendai center of esoteric practices—and a dedicated follower of Honen, the main propagator of the Amitabha chanting practice. Dogen recalls: “The late Bishop Koin said, ‘The mind of the way is acquired after understanding that one thought embraces all existence in the billion worlds.’”73 Dogen summarizes the first four years of his pursuit: “I had some understanding of the principle of cause and effect; however, I was not able to clarify the real source of buddha, dharma, and sangha. I only saw the outer forms—the marks and names.”74

Dogen continues: “Later I entered the chamber of Eisai, Zen Master Senko, and for the first time heard the teaching of the Linji School.”75 Myoan Eisai, who had visited China twice and received dharma transmission from Xuan Huaichang, was among the first to teach Zen in Japan. But because the Tendai establishment was oppressing new movements of Buddhism, he had to teach conventional esoteric practices along with Zen. It was around 1214 when Dogen visited Eisai at the Kennin Monastery in Kyoto, one of the three monasteries Eisai had founded. Eisai was seventy-four years old, and he died the following year.

In 1217, Dogen became a disciple of Butsuju Myozen, Eisai’s successor as abbot of the Kennin Monastery. We can assume that Dogen was trained by Myozen in koan studies, which was the principal method of training in the Linji School. Koans are exemplary stories of ancient masters pointing to realization, which are investigated by the students under the personal guidance of their teacher, and may lead to direct experience of the nondual aspect of all things beyond intellect. In 1221, Dogen received a certificate of full accomplishment from Myozen.

Myozen was respected in Kyoto and even gave the bodhisattva precepts to the former emperor Gotakakura, but he was aware of the need to deepen his studies. As China was the only place where he could study authentic Zen, he wanted to follow Eisai’s example of traveling to the Middle Kingdom. Dogen, a young but outstanding student at the Kennin Monastery, was allowed to accompany Myozen.

Myozen’s party, including Dogen and two other disciples, left Japan from the Port of Hakata on Kyushu Island in the second month of 1223. Two months later, the boat arrived at the then main trading port of Ninbo (in present-day Zhejiang Province). Reflecting on this Dogen writes, “After a voyage of many miles during which I entrusted my phantom body to the billowing waves, I have finally arrived. . . .”76

Dogen’s first encounter with Chinese Zen happened the following month when he was still on board, waiting for permission to enter a monastery. Myozen, who was acknowledged as Eisai’s dharma heir, had already left the boat and been admitted to the monastery. An old monk who was the head cook of a nearby monastery came on board to buy dried mushrooms. After some conversation, Dogen said, “Reverend Head Cook, why don’t you concentrate on zazen practice and on the study of the ancient masters’ words, rather than troubling yourself by holding the position of head cook and just working?” The old monk laughed and replied, “Good man from a foreign country, you do not yet understand practice or know the meaning of the words of ancient masters.” Dogen was surprised and ashamed.77

China’s highest-ranking Zen monasteries were located in Zhejiang Province, where Dogen arrived. He entered one of them, the Jingde Monastery on Mount Tiantong, also known as Mount Taibai. Soon he noticed monks around him holding up their folded dharma robes, setting them on their heads, and chanting a verse silently with palms together: “How great! The robe of liberation . . .” Seeing this solemn ritual for the first time, he vowed to himself: “However unsuited I might be, I will become an authentic heir of the buddha dharma, receiving authentic transmission of the true dharma, and with compassion show the buddha ancestors’ authentically transmitted dharma robes to those in my land.”78

The abbot of the Jingde Monastery was Wuji Liaopai, in the dharma lineage of Dahui Zonggao who had been the most influential advocate of koan studies in the Linji School. While studying in Liaopai’s community for a year and a half, Dogen familiarized himself with formal monastic practices. Then, he started visiting other monasteries in search of a true master.

In early 1225, Dogen went to meet Abbot Yuanzi of the Wannian Monastery at Mount Tiantai, who showed Dogen his document of dharma heritage and offered dharma transmission. Dogen had learned the significance of documents of heritage in the Chinese Buddhist tradition, as the proof of the completion of studies and succession of the dharma lineage. They were often kept strictly confidential, but Dogen had managed to see some and made careful studies of them. Moved by Yuanzi’s offer to transmit dharma to him, Dogen bowed and burned incense, but did not accept.

The more closely he saw what was happening in monasteries in the heartland of Chinese Zen, the more he was disappointed. He comments in his journal: “Nowadays elders of different monasteries say that only direct experience without discrimination—to hear the unhearable and to see the unseeable—is the way of buddha ancestors. So they hold up a fist or a whisk, or they shout and beat people with sticks. This kind of teaching doesn’t do anything to awaken students. Furthermore, these teachers don’t allow students to inquire about the essentials of the Buddha’s guidance and they discourage practices that aim to bear fruit in a future birth. Are these teachers really teaching the way of buddha ancestors?”79

Dogen also saw corruption in monastic practices. Even documents of dharma heritage that were supposed to be valued with utmost respect were given to those who were not qualified. Monks tended to seek credentials from famous masters who had given dharma heritage to retainers of the king. Some monks, when they grew old, bribed public officials in order to get a temple and hold the abbot’s seat.

In 1225, Dogen heard that Rujing, who had been abbot of the Qingliang and Jingci monasteries, had just become abbot of the Jingde Monastery on Mount Tiantong, where Dogen had first stayed. Rujing was a monk from the Caodong School, in which “just sitting,” rather than koan studies, was emphasized. He was known as a strict and genuine teacher, not easily admitting monks into his community and often expelling those who did not train seriously. Dogen returned to Mount Tiantong. While he participated in the practice of the monastery as one of hundreds of monks, he wrote to Rujing, explaining why he had come from Japan and requesting the status of a student who could enter the abbot’s room for receiving personal guidance. This letter impressed Rujing, who must have heard from officers of the monastery that Dogen was a remarkable student. Rujing wrote back and granted his request, saying, “Yes, you can come informally to ask questions any time, day or night, from now on. Do not worry about formality; we can be like father and son.”80

On the first day of the fifth month of 1225, Dogen entered the abbot’s room and met Rujing for the first time. On this occasion Rujing affirmed his recognition of Dogen and said, “The dharma gate of face-to-face transmission from buddha to buddha, ancestor to ancestor, is actualized now.”81

This exhilarating time for Dogen was also a time of great loss. Myozen died from illness on the twenty-seventh day of the same month. He had been teacher to Dogen for eight years, as well as a traveling companion and fellow seeker.

Expressing his doubt to Rujing about the current trend of Zen teachers who would emphasize “transmission outside scriptures” and discourage students from studying the Buddha’s teaching, Dogen asked for Rujing’s comment. Rujing said, “The great road of buddha ancestors is not concerned with inside or outside. . . . We have been followers of the Buddha for a long time. How can we hold views that are outside the way of the Buddha? To teach students the power of the present moment as the only moment is a skillful teaching of buddha ancestors. But this doesn’t mean that there is no future result from practice.”82 Thus, Rujing demonstrated that he was an ideal teacher for Dogen, who was seeking Zen that fully embodied the teaching of the Buddha described in scriptures.

While receiving rigorous training from Rujing, Dogen asked him further questions in a respectful but challenging way, showing his sincerity as well as his brilliance. Rujing was confident of himself as an authentic carrier of the Zen tradition, and Dogen sought to experience the heart of his teaching. The culmination of his practice came one day in zazen when he heard Rujing speak in the monks’ hall. Reflecting on this experience, Dogen says, “Upon hearing Rujing’s words ‘dropping off,’ I attained the buddha way.”83 In the fall of 1227, after completing his study and receiving a document of heritage from Rujing, Dogen ended his four-year visit to China. He went back to Japan to teach people in his own country.


DOGEN AS A DHARMA TEACHER



In the tenth month of 1227, soon after returning to the Kennin Monastery in Kyoto, Dogen wrote a record of bringing home the relics of Myozen, the former abbot.84 In the same year he wrote a short manifesto called “Recommending Zazen to All People,” in a brief but formal and elaborate Chinese style. This text, a translation of which is included in appendix 1, was his declaration of establishing a new form of Buddhist practice in Japan, based on his understanding of the traditional Zen teaching he had studied in Song-Dynasty China. Dogen was twenty-eight years old in the Japanese way of counting.

The Treasury of the True Dharma Eye provides detailed information about the teaching life of Dogen, as he meticulously recorded the dates of creation in the colophons of most of its fascicles. Some other writings of his, including monastic guidelines, were dated. Dogen’s students recorded his frequently given formal talks, whose dates either were recorded or can be guessed. We present an outline of his life as a Zen master through textual evidence in the section headed “Texts in Relation to Dogen’s Life and Translation Credits.”

The first part of Dogen’s teaching career was the wandering and preparation period, from age twenty-eight to thirty-four (1227–1233). Then he constructed and taught at a small monastery as abbot: the Kosho Horin Monastery period, from age thirty-four to forty-four (1233–1243). He continued to teach and write during the construction period of a full-scale monastery, from age forty-four to forty-six (1243–1245). Then he taught at the Daibutsu Monastery, later renamed the Eihei Monastery, from age forty-six to fifty-four (1245–1253).

Dogen first intended to spread zazen widely to all people, but he gradually put more and more emphasis on training committed Zen students to the point of saying that attaining the way would only be possible for home leavers (ordained monks and nuns). He gave dharma transmission to a few students, including Ejo—his lifetime teaching assistant and editor, who succeeded him as abbot of Eihei Monastery.

The Treasury of the True Dharma Eye is Dogen’s lifework, while the Extensive Record of Priest Eihei Dogen—edited by his students, Sen’e, Ejo, and Gien—is a huge collection of his texts including formal talks, monastic guidelines, Chinese-style and waka poems, as well as other writings.

Although he rejected calling his community a Zen school or a Buddha Mind school, it was difficult for his dharma descendants to distinguish their group from other schools of Buddhism. Thus, Dogen became regarded as the founder of the Soto School—the Japanese form of the Caodong School, of which Rujing transmitted the lineage to Dogen.

By the efforts of his dharma heirs and descendants, in particular by that of Keizan Jokin (1268–1325), who incorporated Dogen’s teaching into that of Esoteric Buddhist practice, the Soto School spread largely in the countryside as its main base. This was in contrast to the Rinzai School, which was supported by the shoguns of the Ashikaga Clan and the emperors during the Muromachi Period (1336–1573), and developed high Zen culture, centering in the city of Kyoto. The Soto School is currently the largest school of Buddhism in Japan.


TRANSMISSION OF THE TEXTS AND LATER SCHOLARSHIP



Originals and hand copies of Dogen’s writings were scattered in temples all over Japan. But thanks to traditional and contemporary scholarship, a critical edition that compares variants in all available versions of Dogen’s texts has been published and is available for study.85

While Dogen’s dharma descendants increased, gaining popular support and building temples all over Japan, most of his writings were quickly forgotten. Not one substantial commentary was written on his essays between the fourteenth and seventeenth centuries.

There was a movement in the Soto community after the seventeenth century, however, to restore the founder’s spirit. The movement included extensive studies of his writings, resulting in the publication of the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye by the Eihei Monastery, along with the emergence of commentaries on Dogen’s writings by several monk-scholars.

Studies about Dogen remained in the domain of Soto sectarian scholarship until the 1920s, when Japanese scholars of Western philosophy started to realize the importance of Dogen’s thinking. That was when Tetsuro Watsuji’s Shamon Dogen (Monk Dogen) awakened interest in Dogen’s work among intellectuals.

In the 1960s, Dogen began to be recognized as one of the greatest essayists in the history of Japanese literature. His writings were selected for various collections of classical literature. Since the 1960s, six translations of the entire Treasury of the True Dharma Eye have been published, making much of Dogen’s thought available to Japanese readers.

As Zen meditation began to spread to the Western world in the 1950s, translations of some of Dogen’s writings started to appear in Western languages. Over fifty books of Dogen translation and studies have been published in English, which makes Dogen by far the most extensively studied East Asian Buddhist in the Western world. How his influence will extend is yet to be seen.


DOGEN IN OUR TIME



Meditation is increasingly gaining importance in contemporary society. As technology advances and the pace of life becomes faster and faster, participants of the global society feel constantly stressed and driven by anxiety in their efforts to catch up with the speed and complexity of everyday life. In this state of the world, there is a tremendous need for us to slow down, relax, and heal.

Dogen’s way, along with meditative arts such as yoga and taichi, can be one of the practices that help us to calm down and remain peaceful while being attentive to body, mind, and outer situations.

Although it is possible for us to meditate for years and still be self-centered, the teaching of the self beyond self—the experience of selflessness through meditation—is enormously useful. How, then, can we achieve inner freedom? How can we be free from polarizing ourselves from others? How can we be free from dualistic thinking and from language itself? Dogen seems to provide clues to these questions.

Dogen’s descriptions of meditation point to a radical expansion of our view of the world. That is, through a meditation-based life, awareness of the interconnection of all things expands our sense of self beyond the conventional confines of a world centered on our personal egos. Thus, the distinction between us and others becomes less significant. More and more we feel the joy and pain of others. This helps us to be compassionate and leads to action that helps others and ourselves by way of loving-kindness.

We may not understand or agree with everything Dogen says: We may not favor his criticism of other Buddhists or non-Buddhists. His teaching may be too austere, too strict, and too monastic for us. His view of history may not accord with contemporary scholarship. However, his unshakable belief in the power of meditation and the immense potential of an individual action can be inspiring.86

For Dogen, dreams and illusions have as much reality as actual phenomena. This notion leads us to confirm the power of fantasy and vision, which is often the basis for all types of creative, scientific, and social pursuits. Although Dogen was neither a social reformer nor a peace activist, as a Buddhist he was a pacifist. At the same time, his thoughts on the power of vision can be immensely helpful for those who work for peace and the environment.

Dogen’s discourse on karma illuminates the inseparableness of cause and effect. Where there is a cause, whether it is large or small, good or bad, there is and will be an effect. We may not agree with his point, based on Buddhist scriptures, that some of the effects will take place in our future lifetime or lifetimes after death and rebirth. In fact, we may not believe in reincarnation at all. It is possible, however, for us to imagine that our actions will affect others, future generations, and the environment, instead of ourselves alone. We can also see that we, other people, all beings, and the environment are closely interconnected. Thus, it is possible to establish an understanding that all causes have effects, and that there is no cause without effect. Such trust in and identification with causation can be a basis for actions in our time.

Dogen’s recommendations on how to brush the teeth and how to use the toilet may no longer be valid, as our lifestyle today is different from that of his time. On the other hand, much of Dogen’s instruction on how to sit and move in the meditation hall and how to work in the kitchen still has relevance in Zen monasteries and Zen centers in the Western world. His utmost positivity and trust in the power of action are compelling for those who are discouraged by the enormity of our social problems and who tend to be cynical and inactive. Furthermore, his teaching of sitting up straight helps us to sit, stand, walk and face the world in a forthright way. His ironic statement, “We will thoroughly engage in each activity in order to cultivate fertile conditions to transform the ten directions,”87 is an excellent reminder that we need to pay full attention to every detail of our work with others in order to prepare ourselves to transform ourselves and, hence, the world.


NOTES



1. Dogen’s term for meditation is zazen, meaning meditation in a sitting posture. He says, “The zazen I speak of . . . is simply the dharma gate of enjoyment and ease” (Recommending Zazen to All People, appendix 1).

2. The state of meditation is called samadhi. For Dogen, this samadhi has been passed on by a number of awakened ones from the past. He says, “Buddhas and ancestors continuously maintain ocean mudra [form] samadhi” (Ocean Mudra Samadhi, chapter 32).

3. For Dogen, the state of meditation is all-inclusive. It is also in constant movement, which he calls “flowing.” He says, “Spring with all its numerous aspects is called flowing. When spring flows there is nothing outside of spring” (The Time Being, chapter 12). Dogen encourages meditators to experience this all-inclusive state: “When you paint spring, do not paint willows, plums, peaches, or apricots—just paint spring” (Plum Blossoms, chapter 59).

4. Dogen quotes and comments on a poem by Su Dongpo, expressing the poet’s understanding which emerged in meditation: “Valley sounds are the long, broad tongue [of the Buddha]. Mountain colors are no other than the unconditioned body [of the Buddha] . . .” (Valley Sounds, Mountain Colors, chapter 10).

Dogen also quotes a poem by his teacher, Rujing, which expresses a state of meditation: “Old plum tree bent and gnarled all at once opens one blossom, two blossoms, three, four, five blossoms, uncountable blossoms, not proud of purity, not proud of fragrance; spreading, becoming spring, blowing over grass and trees . . .” (Plum Blossoms, chapter 59).





5. There is no mention of “good meditation” or “bad meditation” in Dogen’s extensive writings. Nor does he discuss physical or psychological problems in meditation.

6. “When even for a moment you sit upright in samadhi expressing the buddha mudra [form] in the three activities [body, speech, and thought], the whole world of phenomena becomes the buddha seal [expression] and the entire sky turns into enlightenment” (On the Endeavor of the Way, chapter 1).

7. “Nonseparation” may be also described as “undividedness” or “nonduality.”

8. The state of meditation Dogen explains is based on general and Zen Buddhist teachings. He says, “In buddha dharma it is always taught that body and mind are not separate, and that essence and characteristics are not two” (On the Endeavor of the Way, chapter 1). As he uses the words “body” and “mind” not separately from each other, “body-and-mind” can be a suitable translation. For example: “When you see forms or hear sounds, fully engaging body-and-mind, you intuit dharma intimately” (Actualizing the Fundamental Point, chapter 3).

9. In continuation of the above line, Dogen says, “Unlike things and their reflections in the mirror, and unlike the moon and its reflection in the water, when one side is illumined, the other side is dark” (ibid.).

10. “To study the way of enlightenment is to study the self. To study the self is to forget the self. To forget the self is to be actualized by myriad things. When actualized by myriad things, your body and mind as well as the bodies and minds of others drop away” (ibid.). Also, “To carry the self forward and illuminate myriad things is delusion. That myriad things come forth and illuminate the self is awakening” (ibid.).

11. According to Keizan’s biography of Dogen: “One day during the late-evening zazen, Rujing said to the assembly, ‘Practicing Zen is dropping away body and mind.’ Upon hearing this, Dogen suddenly had great realization. Immediately [after zazen], he went up to the abbot’s quarters and offered incense to Rujing, who said, ‘Why are you offering incense to me?’ Dogen said, ‘I have dropped away body and mind.’ Rujing said, “You have dropped away body and mind. Your body and mind have been dropped away’” (appendix 2).

12. Dogen quotes a verse by Yaoshan, a Chinese Zen master: “For the time being, stand on top of the highest peak. For the time being, proceed along the bottom of the deepest ocean. For the time being, three heads and eight arms [of a fighting demon]. For the time being, an eight- or sixteen-foot body [of the Buddha]” (The Time Being, chapter 12).

13. A verse by Rujing, Dogen’s teacher: “Both the bower and the bowed-to are empty and serene by nature and the way flows freely between them. How wondrous!” (Journal of My Study in China, Enlightenment Unfolds, p. 8).

14. “Enlightenment does not divide you, just as the moon does not break the water. You cannot hinder enlightenment, just as a drop of water does not crush the moon in the sky. The depth of the drop is the height of the moon” (Actualizing the Fundamental Point, chapter 3).

15. “Understanding these words [about the entire universe] is going beyond buddhas and ancestors by seeing that extremely large is small and extremely small is large” (Awesome Presence of Active Buddhas, chapter 24).

16. This is a special usage of the word “nirvana.” For Dogen, each moment of practice encompasses this experience. “Between aspiration, practice, enlightenment, and nirvana, there is not a moment’s gap; continuous practice is the circle of the way” (Continuous Practice, Part One, chapter 31A).

17. Dogen elaborates the poem by Yaoshan, quoted in note 12, by saying: “For the time being here means time itself is being, and all being is time” (The Time Being, chapter 12).

18. “So-called today flows into tomorrow, today flows into yesterday, yesterday flows into today. And today flows into today, tomorrow flows into tomorrow” (ibid.).

19. “Do not think that time merely flies away. Do not see flying away as the only function of time. If time merely flies away, you would be separated from time” (ibid.).

20. “‘Before the emergence of a single mind, single thought’ [immeasurable past] is this very day. Temper your practice without missing this very day” (Old Mirror, chapter 21).

21. “In essence, all things in the entire world are linked with one another as moments. Because all moments are the time being, they are your time being” (The Time Being, chapter 12).

22. “To fully actualize the [buddha’s] golden body with the golden body—to arouse the way-seeking mind, practice, attain enlightenment, and enter nirvana—is nothing but being, nothing but time” (ibid.).

23. “The real issue here, to clarify birth and to clarify death, is the great matter of causes and effects in the buddha house” (Refrain from Unwholesome Action, chapter 11).

24. “. . . those who clarify the Tathagata’s treasury of the true dharma eye, the wondrous heart of nirvana, believe in this principle of birth and death moment by moment” (Arousing the Aspiration for Enlightenment, chapter 70).

25. “Birth is just like riding in a boat. You raise the sails and you steer. Although you maneuver the sail and the pole, the boat gives you a ride, and without the boat you couldn’t ride. But you ride in the boat, and your riding makes the boat what it is” (Undivided Activity, chapter 42).

26. After the line quoted in note 25, Dogen continues: “At just such a moment, there is nothing but the world of the boat. The sky, the water, and the shore are all the boat’s world, which is not the same as a world that is not the boat’s. Thus, you make birth what it is, you make birth your birth” (ibid.).

27. “At the moment of death’s undivided activity, while it covers the entire earth and the entire sky, it hinders neither death’s undivided activity nor birth’s undivided activity” (ibid.).

28. “Death is a phase that is an entire period of itself, with its own past and future. For this reason, death is understood as beyond death” (Birth and Death, chapter 93).

29. “Just sitting” is the practice of zazen with no attempt to solve questions or expectation of attainment or enlightenment, and without either repressing or holding on to thoughts and feelings. Dogen emphasized this way of sitting.

30. For the meaning of nirvana, see note 16.

31. The essence of what is transmitted in Zen is described as “the treasury of the true dharma eye, the wondrous heart of nirvana.” Dogen, however, did not fully explain what he meant by “nirvana” here. So we need to guess from such statements as: “How can you differentiate this into body and mind, and separate birth-and-death from nirvana?” (On the Endeavor of the Way, chapter 1) and “In awakening there are aspiration, practice, enlightenment, and nirvana. Within the dream there are aspiration, practice, enlightenment, and nirvana. Every awakening within a dream is the genuine form, without regard to large or small, superior or inferior” (Within a Dream Expressing the Dream, chapter 39).

32. “Because practice within realization occurs at the moment of practice, the practice of beginner’s mind is itself the entire original realization” (On the Endeavor of the Way, chapter 1).

33. In the “circle of the way” (see n. 16), the way toward enlightenment is not linear, but rather is complete at each moment, encompassing practice and enlightenment.

34. “At age thirty, after practicing continuously, he [the Buddha] attained the way simultaneously with all sentient beings on the great earth” (Continuous Practice, Part One, chapter 31A).

35. Dogen interprets the statement from the Maha Pari-nirvana Sutra, “All sentient beings have buddha nature,” as “Living beings all are buddha nature.” He reads “all have” (shitsu u in Japanese) as “all are” (Buddha Nature, chapter 23).

36. “Because earth, grass, trees, walls, tiles, and pebbles in the world of phenomena in the ten directions all engage in buddha activity, those who receive the benefits of the wind and water are inconceivably helped by the buddha’s transformation, splendid and unthinkable, and intimately manifest enlightenment” (On the Endeavor of the Way, chapter 1).

37. The paradox of buddha nature is that although buddha nature is all beings, it is only actualized. “Buddha nature invariably arises simultaneously with attaining buddhahood” (Buddha Nature, chapter 23).

38. “To suppose that practice and realization are not one is a view of those outside the way; in buddha dharma they are inseparable” (On the Endeavor of the Way, chapter 1).

39. This concept is called “inseparableness of practice and realization”; or “practice within realization” (ibid.).

40. “. . . those who are greatly deluded about realization are sentient beings” (Actualizing the Fundamental Point, chapter 3). Here Dogen refers to the term “sentient beings” as those who are not awakened.

41. Early in his teaching career Dogen collected three hundred koans and called them the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye, later known as Shinji [Chinese] Shobo Genzo. He used many of the koans in the essays presented in the present book.

42. In an informal talk Dogen said, “Even if you obtain some ideas by studying koans and words, it may cause you to go further away from the buddha ancestors’ path. Instead, dedicate your time to sitting upright, not seeking achievement, and not seeking enlightenment. This is the ancestral way.” Treasury of the True Dharma Eye: Record of Things Heard. Enlightenment Unfolds, pp. 57–58.

43. Speaking of Mind, Speaking of Essence, chapter 49.

44. “When actualized by myriad things, your body and mind as well as the bodies and minds of others drop away. No trace of enlightenment remains, and this no-trace continues endlessly” (Actualizing the Fundamental Point, chapter 3).

45. For Dogen’s teaching on ethics, see Refrain from Unwholesome Action, pp. 95– 103. Also on harmonious practice, “The assembly of students in the hall should blend like milk and water to support the activity of the way” (Regulations for the Auxiliary Cloud Hall at the Kannondori Kosho Gokoku Monastery, chapter 5).

46. “When you study buddha dharma with a sutra or with a teacher, you come to realization without a teacher” (Dharma Nature, chapter 55).

47. “I, Dogen, first bowed formally to Rujing, my late master, Old Buddha Tiantong, and received transmission face to face on the first day of the fifth month, the first year of Baoqing Era of Great Song, and was thereby allowed to enter the inner chamber” (Face-to-Face Transmission, chapter 57).

48. “. . . I made a vow to myself: However unsuited I may be, I will become an authentic holder of the buddha dharma, receiving authentic transmission of the true dharma, and with compassion show the buddha ancestors’ authentically transmitted dharma robes to those in my land” (Power of the Robe, chapter 13; Transmitting the Robe, chapter 14).

49. “We come to know the ancient sutras and texts as a result of our longing for the authentic teaching. As we long for the ancient teaching, the sutras of old come forth” (Continuous Practice, Part Two, chapter 31B).

50. See Practice Period (chapter 79) and Guidelines for Practice of the Way (Beyond Thinking, pp. 103–117) for procedures in the monks’ hall. See Cleansing (chapter 7) for instruction on use of the toilet.

51. See Regulations for the Auxiliary Cloud Hall at the Kannondori Kosho Gokoku Monastery, chapter 5.

52. See Refrain from Unwholesome Action, chapter 11.

53. The Mind Itself Is Buddha, chapter 6.

54. For a typical example, see note 35.

55. Mountains and Waters Sutra, chapter 15.

56. Spring and Autumn, chapter 66.

57. The Point of Zazen.

58. Mountains and Waters Sutra, chapter 15.

59. The Buddhas’ Teaching, chapter 25.

60. Insentient Beings Speak Dharma, chapter 54.

61. Actualizing the Fundamental Point, chapter 3.

62. On the Endeavor of the Way, chapter 1.

63. Twining Vines, chapter 47.

64. Painting of a Rice Cake, chapter 41.

65. Seeing the Buddha, chapter 61.

66. Intimate Language, chapter 52.

67. Thusness, chapter 30.

68. Everyday Activity, chapter 64.

69. The four biographies of Dogen mentioned here are included in Eihei Kaisan Dogen Zenji Gyojo Kenzei-ki, edited by Kodo Kawamura.

70. Editor’s translation of a line from Treasury of the True Dharma Eye: Record of Things Heard.

71. Ibid.

72. On the Endeavor of the Way, chapter 1.

73. Treasury of the True Dharma Eye: Record of Things Heard.

74. Journal of My Study in China, Enlightenment Unfolds, p. 3.

75. Ibid.

76. Ibid.

77. Instructions for the Tenzo, Moon in a Dewdrop, p. 59.

78. Power of the Robe, chapter 13.

79. Journal of My Study in China, Enlightenment Unfolds, p. 4.

80. Ibid., p. 3.

81. Face-to-Face Transmission, chapter 57.

82. Journal of My Study in China, Enlightenment Unfolds, pp. 4–5.

83. Extensive Record of Priest Eihei Dogen, Beyond Thinking, p. 145.

84. Record of Bringing Master Myozen’s Relics, Enlightenment Unfolds, p. 30.

85. Okubo Doshu, ed., Dogen Zenji Zenshu (Entire Work of Zen Master Dogen), 3 vols. (Tokyo: Chikuma Shobo, 1970).

86. For example, Dogen says, “The time being of all beings throughout the world in water and on land just actualizes your complete effort right now. All beings of all kinds in the visible and invisible realms are the time being actualized by your complete effort, flowing due to your complete effort” (The Time Being, chapter 12).

87. Donation Request for Monks’ Hall at the Kannondori Monastery, Enlightenment Unfolds, p. 47.





