10



VALLEY SOUNDS, MOUNTAIN COLORS



IN THE TRANSMISSION of unsurpassable, complete enlightenment by numberless buddha ancestors, various practices have arisen. Study such examples as ancient practitioners crushing their bones and Huike chopping off his arm. Embody in yourself the dedication of a boy spreading his hair on muddy ground for the Buddha to walk on.

Slipping out of your old skin, not constrained by past views, you manifest immediately what has been dormant for boundless eons. As this very moment manifests, “I” don’t know, “who” doesn’t know, “you” have no expectations, and “the buddha eye” sees beyond seeing. This experience is beyond the realm of human thinking.





In Song China there was a man who called himself Layman Dongpo. He was originally named Shi of the Su family, and his initiatory name was Zidan. A literary genius, he studied the way of dragons and elephants in the ocean of awakening. He descended deep chasms and soared freely through clouds.

One night when Dongpo visited Mount Lu, he was enlightened upon hearing the sound of the valley stream. He composed the following verse, which he presented to Changzong:



Valley sounds are the long, broad tongue.



Mountain colors are no other than the unconditioned body.



Eighty-four thousand verses are heard through the night.



What can I say about this in the future?





Seeing this verse, Changzong approved his understanding.

Changzong, also called Zen Master Zhaojiao, was a dharma heir of Huanglong, Zen Master Huinan, who was a dharma heir of Chuyuan, Zen Master Ciming.

Another time when Dongpo met with Liaoyuan, Zen Master Foyin, Liaoyuan transmitted the buddha precepts to him with a dharma robe, which Dongpo later wore when practicing. Dongpo presented Liaoyuan with a jeweled belt. People talked about this exchange as something extraordinary.

The valley sounds of Dongpo would refresh practitioners of later generations. How sad for those who miss the dharma of the manifested buddha body! How are mountain colors seen and valley sounds heard otherwise? Are mountain colors and valley sounds one phrase or half a phrase? Are they eighty-four thousand verses of scripture? You may regret that mountains and waters conceal sounds and colors, but you may also rejoice that the moment of enlightenment emerges through mountains and waters.

The tongue [of the Buddha] does not take a break. The colors are beyond coming and going. Are the sounds and colors intimate when they are apparent, or are they intimate when they are obscured? Are they one whole expression or half an expression? During past springs and autumns, Dongpo had not seen or heard the mountains and waters. He saw and heard them for the first time that night. Bodhisattvas who study the way, open your minds to mountains flowing and to water not flowing.

Dongpo had this awakening soon after he heard Changzong talk about insentient beings speaking dharma. Although Dongpo did not leap when he heard Changzong’s words, towering billows flew into the sky upon his hearing the sounds of the valley. Was it the valley sounds or the tide of awakening that jolted Dongpo?

I suspect that Changzong’s voices of insentient beings speaking dharma are resounding even now, still blended with the sounds of the night’s stream. Who can fathom this water? Is it a bucketful or does it fill whole oceans?

In the end let me ask you: Was it Dongpo who was awakened or the mountains and waters that were awakened? Who today sees right away with a clear eye the long, broad tongue and the unconditioned body [of the Buddha]?





Xiangyan Zhixian studied at the assembly of Guishan Lingyou, Zen Master Dayuan, on Mount Gui.

Guishan said, “You are bright and knowledgeable. Say something about yourself before your parents were born, but don’t use words learned from commentaries.”

Xiangyan tried and tried but could not say anything. He pored through many books he had collected over the years but could not come up with anything. Deeply ashamed, he burned the books and said, “A painting of a rice cake does not satisfy hunger. I will be just a cooking monk, not expecting to understand buddha dharma in this lifetime.”

A cooking monk means one who supports the assembly by cooking rice, an equivalent of a kitchen assistant in our country. He followed this vow for years.

One day Xiangyan said to Guishan, “My mind is undifferentiated; I cannot speak. Can you speak for me, Master?”

Guishan said, “I wouldn’t mind explaining it to you, but if I did, you would resent me in the future.”

Sometime later, Xiangyan went to the memorial site of Nanyang Huizhong, National Teacher Dazheng, at Mount Wudang, and built himself a hut. For company, he planted some bamboo.

One day, while he was sweeping the path, a pebble flew up and struck a bamboo. At the unexpected sound, Xiangyan had thorough awakening. After bathing and cleansing himself, he faced Mount Gui, offered incense, prostrated himself, and said, “Master, if you had spoken for me at that time, this could not have happened. Your kindness is deeper than my parents’.” Then he wrote a poem:



One stroke dissolves knowledge.



Struggle no longer needed.



I will follow the ancient path



not lapsing into quietude.



Noble conduct beyond sound and form—



no trace anywhere.



Those who have mastered the way



may call this an unsurpassable activity.





He presented this poem to Guishan, who said, “This fellow has gone through.”





One spring day, after practicing for thirty years, Lingyun, who would later become Zen Master Zhiqin, walked into the mountains. While resting he saw peach blossoms in full bloom in a distant village and was suddenly awakened. He wrote this poem, which he presented to Guishan:



For thirty years I have looked for a sword master.



Many times leaves fell, new ones sprouted.



One glimpse of peach blossoms—



now no more doubts, just this.





Guishan said, “One who enters with ripened conditions will never leave.” He approved Lingyun in this way.

Who does not enter with ripened causes? Who enters and then goes away? This awakening is not limited to Lingyun. If mountain colors were not the unconditioned body, how could this awakening have occurred? This is how he inherited dharma from Guishan.





Once a monk asked Changsha, Zen Master Jingcen, “How do you turn mountains, rivers, and the great earth into the self?”

Changsha said, “How do you turn the self into mountains, rivers, and the great earth?”

Saying that the self returns to the self is not contradicted by saying that the self is mountains, rivers, and the great earth.





Langye Huijue, Great Master Guangzhao, was a dharma descendant of Nanyue. Once Zhixuan, a lecturer on scriptures, asked Langye, “If originally unconditioned, how do mountains, rivers, and the great earth suddenly emerge?”

Langye responded, “If originally unconditioned, how do mountains, rivers, and the great earth suddenly emerge?”

Now we know. Mountains, rivers, and the great earth, which are originally unconditioned, should not be mistaken for mountains, rivers, and the great earth. The sutra master had never heard this, so he did not understand mountains, rivers, and the great earth as just mountains, rivers, and the great earth.

Know that without mountain colors and valley sounds, [Shakyamuni Buddha’s] taking up the flower and [Huike’s] attaining the marrow would not have taken place. Because of the power of valley sounds and mountain colors, the Buddha with the great earth and sentient beings simultaneously attains the way, and countless buddhas become enlightened upon seeing the morning star. Such skin bags are earlier sages whose aspiration for seeking dharma is profound. People today should be inspired by predecessors like these. Authentic study, free of concern for fame and gain, should be based on such aspiration.

In this remote nation in recent days those who genuinely seek buddha dharma are rare—it is not that there are none. Many people leave their households, appearing free from worldly matters, but in fact they use the buddha way to seek fame and gain. What a pity! How sad that they waste their time in unilluminated trades! When will they break away and attain the way? If they meet a true teacher, how will they recognize the true dragon?

Rujing, my late master, Old Buddha, called such people “pitiful fellows.” Because of unwholesome causes in previous lives, they do not seek dharma for the sake of dharma. In this life, they are suspicious of the true dragon when they see it, and are put off by genuine dharma when they encounter it. As their body, mind, flesh, and bones are not ready to follow dharma, they are unable to receive it. Because the lineage of the ancestral school started long ago, the aspiration for enlightenment has become a distant dream. How pitiful that people do not know about or see treasure even though they were born on a mountain of treasure! Where can they find dharma treasure?





As soon as you arouse the aspiration for enlightenment, even if you transmigrate in the six realms and four forms of birth, transmigration itself will be your vow for enlightenment. Although you may have wasted time so far, you should vow immediately, before this present life ends:



Together with all sentient beings, may I hear the true dharma from this birth throughout future births.



When I hear the true dharma, I will not doubt or distrust it.



When I encounter the true dharma, I will relinquish ordinary affairs and uphold the buddha dharma.



Thus, may I realize the way together with the great earth and all sentient beings.





This vow is the ground for genuine aspiration. Do not slacken in this determination.





Japan is a remote land where people are extremely ignorant. Neither sages nor geniuses have been known to arise here, and genuine students of the way are rare. When we talk about way-seeking mind, those without it become resentful instead of reflecting on themselves.

When you arouse the aspiration for enlightenment, try to keep your practice private. Praising your own practice is out of the question. People nowadays rarely seek the truth. Deficient in practice and realization, they seek recognition for their effort and want others to acknowledge that their practice and understanding are in accord. This is delusion on top of delusion. Abandon such confused thinking.

Among those who study the way, it is rare to find determination for true dharma. Such determination is the buddha radiance, the buddha mind, which has been transmitted from buddha to buddha.

From the time of the Tathagata to this day, there have been many concerned with fame and gain in the study of the way. But if they meet a true master and turn toward true dharma, they will readily attain the way. Know that there is a disease for fame and gain among practitioners of the way. Among beginners as well as longtime practitioners, some have the opportunity to receive the teaching, while others don’t. Some long for the ancient way, but there are also demons who slander the teaching. Do not be attached or upset in either case. When you remember how few realize the three poisons as the three poisons, you no longer have resentment.

Do not forget the joyful aspiration that arises when you first seek the way. When you arouse the aspiration for enlightenment, you do not seek dharma in order to be respected by others. You abandon fame and gain, and without veering off you aspire to attain the way. You do not look for respect or gifts from kings or ministers. Even though these may come to you, it should not be your primary intention to become entangled with humans and devas. But foolish people, even those with way-seeking mind, quickly forget their original aspiration and hope for offerings from humans and devas. Receiving such offerings, they rejoice that the merit of buddha dharma has arrived. When kings and ministers come to take refuge in the buddha, foolish teachers may feel rewarded. This is a hazard of practice. Remember to have compassion for them, but do not rejoice.

Do you recall that the Buddha said these golden words? “Even now, at the time of the Tathagata, there are many who are antagonistic.” Thus, foolish people do not understand the wise; small-minded ones regard great sages as enemies.

Also, the ancestors in India were sometimes overpowered by kings, those outside the way, or practitioners of the Two Lesser Vehicles. It was not that the ancestors lacked deep understanding or that those others excelled.

When Bodhidharma came from India and stayed at Mount Song, neither the Emperor of Liang nor the Emperor of Wei understood him. At that time there were two critics, Scripture Master Bodhiruchi and Precept Master Guangtong. They were afraid they would lose their fame and gain to a true teacher, so they tried to block him. It was as if they were trying to cover the sun. They were worse than Devadatta, who lived at the time of the Buddha. What a pity! The fame and gain they were attached to would have been discarded like excrement by Bodhidharma. This behavior was the result of their lack of understanding buddha dharma. They were like dogs barking at a well-intentioned person.

Do not resent such dogs, but vow to guide them with this blessing: “Dogs, arouse the aspiration for enlightenment.” An old sage said, “There are animals who have human faces.” On the other hand, there are demons who take refuge in the Buddha and make offerings to him.





An earlier buddha said, “Do not get close to kings, princes, ministers, administrators, Brahmans, and laypeople.”

Practitioners should remember this admonition so that, as their practice advances, the merit of their bodhisattva effort with beginner’s mind will accumulate.





There are stories of Indra, who came down to test the aspiration of a practitioner, or of the demon Papiyas, who obstructed people’s practice. Such things happen when practitioners cannot free themselves from desire for fame and gain. But such things do not happen to those who have great compassion and whose vow to guide sentient beings is vast and mature.

Through the merit of practice you may be given the gift of an entire nation, and this may appear to be a great achievement in the world. But do not be blinded; look deeply on such an occasion. Foolish people may rejoice, but they are like dogs licking a dry bone. Wise people and sages reject this just as worldly people are disgusted by excrement.





In general, when you are a beginner you cannot fathom the buddha way. Your assumptions do not hit the mark. The fact that you cannot fathom the buddha way as a beginner does not mean that you lack ultimate understanding, but it does mean that you do not recognize the deepest point.

Endeavor wholeheartedly to follow the path of earlier sages. You may have to climb mountains and cross oceans when you look for a teacher to inquire about the way. Look for a teacher and search for understanding with all-encompassing effort, as if you were coming down from heaven or emerging from the ground. When you encounter a true teacher, you invoke sentient beings as well as insentient beings. You hear with the body, you hear with the mind.

To hear with the ear is an everyday matter, but to hear with the eye is not always so. When you see buddha, you see self-buddha, other-buddha, a large buddha, a small buddha. Do not be frightened by a large buddha. Do not be put off by a small buddha. Just see large and small buddhas as valley sounds and mountain colors, as a broad, long tongue, and as eighty-four thousand verses. This is liberation, this is outstanding seeing.

There is a common saying that expresses this: “Totally superb, totally solid.” An earlier buddha said: “It covers heaven, it encompasses the earth.” This is the purity of a spring pine, the magnificence of an autumn chrysanthemum. Just this.

When you reach this realm, you are a master of humans and devas. If you teach others before arriving in this realm, you will do great harm to them. Without knowing the spring pine or the autumn chrysanthemum, how can you nourish others and how can you cut through their roots of confusion?





When you are lazy or doubtful, repent before the buddhas with a sincere mind. If you do so, the power of repentance will purify and help you. This power will nurture trust and effort free from hindrance. Once pure trust emerges, self and others are simultaneously turned. This benefit reaches both sentient and insentient beings.

Repentance is: “Although my past unwholesome actions have accumulated, causing hindrance in the study of the way, may buddhas and ancestors release me from these actions and liberate me. May the merit of practicing dharma fill inexhaustible worlds of phenomena. May compassion be extended to me.”

Before awakening, buddha ancestors were like you. Upon awakening, you will become buddha ancestors. When you look at buddha ancestors, you are a buddha ancestor. When you look at their aspiration for enlightenment, you have the aspiration. Working with compassion this way and that, you achieve facility and you let facility drop away.

Thus, Longya said:



If you did not attain enlightenment in the past, do so now.



Liberate this body that is the culmination of many lifetimes.



Before enlightenment, ancient buddhas were like us.



When enlightened, we will be like those of old.





This is the understanding of a realized buddha. We should reflect on it. This is the exact point of a realized buddha.

With repentance you will certainly receive invisible help from buddha ancestors. Repent to the buddhas with mind and body. The power of repentance melts the roots of unwholesomeness. This is the single color of true practice, the true heart of trust, the true body of trust.





When you have true practice, then valley sounds and colors, mountain colors and sounds, all reveal the eighty-four thousand verses. When you are free from fame, profit, body, and mind, the valleys and mountains are also free. Through the night the valley sounds and mountain colors do and do not actualize the eighty-four thousand verses. When your capacity to talk about valleys and mountains as valleys and mountains is not yet mature, who can see and hear you as valley sounds and mountain colors?



On the fifth day of the practice period, the second year of the En’o Era [1240], this was presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery.





