14



TRANSMITTING THE ROBE



BODHIDHARMA, THE HIGH Ancestor of Mount Song, alone transmitted the authentic teaching of the robe to China. He is the twenty-eighth-generation ancestor from Shakyamuni Buddha. In India twenty-eight generations of ancestors transmitted this teaching from heir to heir. Then six generations of ancestors clearly transmitted it in China. Altogether, thirty-three generations of ancestors transmitted it in India and China.





Huineng, Zen Master Dajian, the Thirty-third Ancestor, received a robe from Hongren at midnight on Mount Huangmei and maintained it for the rest of his life. This robe is still enshrined at the Baolin Monastery in Mount Caoxi [where he taught].

Over the generations, one emperor after another requested that this robe be brought to the palace. When it was, people made offerings and bowed to it. Thus, the robe has been worshipped as a sacred object. Emperors Zong, Su, and Dai of the Tang Dynasty occasionally invited the robe to be brought to the palace for worship. Each time it was brought and each time it was returned, the emperor issued an edict and ordered an imperial messenger to accompany it. This is how they paid reverence to the robe.

Once, when Emperor Dai sent this buddha robe back to Mount Caoxi, he proclaimed: “We order Liu Chongjing, the Nation’s Chief General, to transport the robe with great respect. We regard this robe as a national treasure. You should place it in the main temple with appropriate procedures. Make sure that the monks are notified of our command and unfailingly protect the robe.”

In this way, some emperors in particular regarded the robe as a national treasure. Indeed, holding the buddha robe in their country is a greater fortune than presiding over the billion worlds. It cannot be compared to the Bian’s giant jewel, which became the national emblem from generation to generation but would not come close to the rare treasure transmitted from buddha to buddha.

Since the time of the Great Tang Dynasty, those in black robes and white robes [home leavers and laypeople] who have bowed to this robe all have great capacity to have trust in the dharma. Without being helped by wholesome actions in the past, how can they personally bow to the buddha robe authentically transmitted from buddha to buddha? Those with skin, flesh, bones, and marrow [of the Buddha] should rejoice. Those who are unable to receive it with trust should deplore that they are not seeds of buddhas, although that is the result of their past actions.

Even laypeople say that to see an action of a person is to see the person. Similarly, to bow to a buddha’s robe now is to see the buddha. You should construct hundreds and thousands of stupas and make offerings to the buddha robe. Those even in the deva realm and in the ocean who have hearts should revere the robe. Those in the human realm who know the sincerity and excellence of the wheel-turning kings should revere this robe.

What a pity that some heads of state didn’t know that there was such a valuable treasure in their country [China]! Some of them, confused by the teaching of Daoist practitioners, abolished buddha dharma. They wore cloth headwear instead of putting on the kashaya, and spoke about attaining longevity. There were such heads of state in the Tang and Song Dynasties. Although they were emperors, they were lowlier than their subjects. Quietly observe this.





Buddha robes are present in our country [Japan]. Ponder if this is a land of wearing a buddha robe.

A buddha robe excels relics. Wheel-turning kings, lions, and humans have relics. Even pratyeka-buddhas have relics. But wheel-turning kings, lions, and humans do not necessarily have kashayas. Only buddhas have kashayas. So, deeply revere the kashaya.

Many foolish people nowadays revere relics but don’t know about a kashaya. They rarely know that a kashaya should be maintained and protected. This is so because they have hardly heard about the value of a kashaya from their predecessors and have not yet learned about the authentic transmission of buddha dharma.

If we ponder the time when Shakyamuni Buddha was alive, this was only two thousand and some years ago. Many national treasures and divine objects that have been transmitted until now are older than that. Buddha dharma and the buddha robe are recent and new. They have unfolded in fields and villages for merely fifty generations. Yet, their benefits are wondrous. Although those national treasures and divine objects still have merit, the buddha robe is beyond comparison. While those national treasures and divine objects have not been authentically transmitted from heir to heir, the buddha robe has been authentically transmitted from heir to heir.

Know that one attains the way upon hearing the four-line verse or upon hearing one phrase. Why does the four-line verse or the one phrase have such miraculous power? Because they are both buddha dharma. Now, the supreme [excrement-cleaning] robe, [often in the form of] the nine-panel robe, has been authentically transmitted with buddha dharma. They should not be inferior to the four-line verse. They should not have less miraculous effect than the one phrase.

This being so, for these two thousand and some years, all those who have trust in and practice dharma, who are student followers of the Buddha, have maintained and protected kashayas as their own bodies and minds. Those who are ignorant of the true dharma of all buddhas do not venerate kashayas. Although Indra and the Dragon King of Anavatapta Lake are both lay kings of deva worlds, they maintain and protect kashayas.

But those who have shaved their heads and call themselves children of the Buddha don’t know that a kashaya is to be received and maintained. How should they know its shape, color, and measurements? Do they know how to put it on? Further, they have not even dreamed of the awesome manner of wearing it.





From ancient times, a kashaya is known as a robe for removing fever or a robe of emancipation. Its merit is immeasurable. The three types of fever a dragon suffers from are removed with the merit of a kashaya. When buddhas attain the way, they always wear the kashaya.

Even if you were born in this remote land and have encountered the decline of dharma, if you compare the difference between having and not having transmission [of a robe], you should receive with trust, maintain, and protect an authentically transmitted robe.

In what other houses have both the robe and dharma of Shakyamuni Buddha been truly transmitted as in our house? They exist only in the buddha way. Encountering the robe and dharma, who can be lax on revering and dedicating to them? Dedicate yourself even if you need to give up lives as many as the sands of the Ganges for one day of revering the robe. Vow to encounter and revere it birth after birth, world after world.

We were born beyond mountains and oceans more than one hundred thousand li away from the land where the Buddha was born. We are uncivilized and foolish. However, if you receive and maintain a kashaya even for a day and night, and study one phrase or one verse of it, you will have the merit of making an offering not only to one or two buddhas but also to countless, one hundred, thousand, billion buddhas. Even if this is done by you, revere, love, and appreciate your action.

Thoroughly express your gratitude for the great kindness of the ancestors who have transmitted the robe and dharma. Even animals repay others’ kindness. How can a human not know others’ kindness? If you didn’t appreciate others’ kindness, you would be worse and more foolish than animals.

The merit of a kashaya is not even dreamed of by those who are not ancestors and do not transmit the Buddha’s true dharma. How then can they clarify the shape, color, and measurements of a kashaya? Those who long for the traces of buddhas should long for their kashayas. If this authentic transmission is authentically transmitted, this is indeed buddha dharma even one hundred, one thousand, and myriad generations later. The proof of this realization is evident.

Even a layperson [Lord Qing] said, “If it were not the late king’s robe, I would not wear it. If it were not the late king’s law, I would not follow it.” The buddha way is just like that. Other than the late buddha’s dharma robe, what would you wear in the practice of the buddha way and serving all buddhas? Those who do not wear this cannot enter the buddhas’ assembly.

Since the tenth year of the Yongping Era [67 C.E.] of the Emperor Xiaoming of the Later Han Dynasty, monks and laypeople often went back and forth between India and China. But none of them said that they had met an ancestor in India who had authentic transmission from buddha ancestors. Thus, there was no lineage of face-to-face transmission from the Tathagata. These seekers only studied with masters of sutras and treatises and brought back only names and aspects of buddha dharma. They did not say they had met ancestors who had authentically inherited buddha dharma. They did not say there were ancestors who had transmitted the buddha kashaya. Therefore, those people did not enter deeply into the chamber of buddha dharma and clarify the meaning of the authentic transmission of the buddha ancestors.

They only think that the kashaya is a robe and don’t know that it is valued in buddha dharma. It is a pity, indeed. A buddha robe is transmitted to and received by an authentic heir of the treasury of the true dharma eye. It is a commonly known fact among humans and devas that there are no ancestors authentically transmitting the dharma treasury who have not seen and heard of the buddha robe. Thus, the authentic transmission and learning of the shape, color, and measurements, and the great merit, as well as the body, mind, bones, and marrow of a buddha kashaya, lie only in the authentically transmitted work of the buddha house. This is not known in the teaching of various Agama schools. What has been independently created by practitioners nowadays is not authentic transmission by authentic heirs.

The Tathagata Shakyamuni, our great teacher, entrusted the treasury of the true dharma eye, the unsurpassable enlightenment, to Mahakashyapa along with the kashaya. The robe was transmitted heir to heir for thirty-three generations to Huineng. The shape, color, and measurements have been intimately transmitted, freshly received, and maintained until now. This is an authentic transmission that each of the high ancestors of the Five Schools received and maintained. For forty or fifty generations, teacher and disciple without exception have sewn and worn the kashaya. This has been transmitted afresh from buddha to buddha in merged realization generation after generation.





According to the authentically transmitted instruction of the Buddha, a kashaya can be made of:



Nine panels, each panel consisting of three long pieces and one short piece of cloth



Nine panels, each panel consisting of four long pieces and one short piece of cloth



Eleven panels, each panel consisting of three long pieces and one short piece of cloth, or of four long pieces and one short piece of cloth



Thirteen panels, each panel consisting of three long pieces and one short piece of cloth, or of four long pieces and one short piece of cloth



Fifteen panels, each panel consisting of four long pieces and one short piece of cloth



Seventeen panels, each panel consisting of four long pieces and one short piece of cloth



Nineteen panels, each panel consisting of four long pieces and one short piece of cloth



Twenty-one panels, each panel consisting of four long pieces and one short piece of cloth



Twenty-three panels, each panel consisting of four long pieces and one short piece of cloth



Twenty-five panels, each panel consisting of four long pieces and one short piece of cloth



Two hundred fifty panels, each panel consisting of four long pieces and one short piece of cloth



Eighty-four thousand panels, each panel consisting of eight long pieces and one short piece of cloth





This is a summary. There are other types of kashayas. All these are outer robes. Both laypeople and monks receive and maintain them. To receive and maintain them means to wear them and not to keep them folded without use.

Those who shave their heads and faces but hate and fear kashayas without receiving and maintaining them are demons or people outside the way.

Baizhang, Zen Master Dazhi, said, “Those who lack wholesome seeds planted in the past avoid and dislike a kashaya. They fear and avoid true dharma.”





The Buddha said:



If a sentient being, after entering my dharma, commits a heavy crime or falls into crooked views, but reveres the outer robe with mindfulness, receiving and maintaining it, other buddhas and I will certainly give a prediction of enlightenment in the Three Vehicles to such a person, who will become a buddha. If a deva, a dragon, a human being, or a demon reveres the merit of even a small piece of kashaya, they will practice unremittingly in the Three Vehicles. If a spirit being or a sentient being acquires even a four-sun piece of a kashaya, the being will have sufficient food and drink. If sentient beings have a fight and are about to fall into a crooked view, but think of the power of a kashaya, they can arouse compassion and return to purity with the power of a kashaya. If someone in a battlefield carries a small piece of a kashaya and reveres it, the person will certainly attain emancipation.



Thus, we know that the power of a kashaya is unsurpassable and wondrous. Where it is accepted and maintained with trust, there is always the receiving of a prediction of enlightenment and attaining of noremittance. Not only Shakyamuni Buddha but all other buddhas teach in this way. Know that the essence and form of all buddhas is the kashaya.

Thus, the Buddha said, “Those who fall into unwholesome paths avoid a monk’s great robe.” So, if you feel like avoiding a kashaya upon hearing and seeing it, you should lament that you are about to fall into an unwholesome path. Repent for this.

When Shakyamuni Buddha was about to leave his palace and enter the mountains for the first time, a tree god held up an outer robe and said, “If you wear this robe with reverence, you will be protected from harm by demons.” It is said that the Buddha revered it and wore it for twelve years without ceasing. This is a story told by scriptures, including the Agama Sutra.

It is also said that a kashaya is an auspicious robe. Those who wear it invariably attain an excellent place. There has never been a time in the world when this robe has not emerged. Its emergence at any moment is a matter of timeless kalpas. A matter of timeless kalpas is its arrival at any moment. To attain a kashaya is to attain the emblem of the Buddha. This being so, among all buddha tathagatas there is no one who has not received and maintained it. There is no one who has received and maintained a kashaya and has not become a buddha.





There are various ways to wear the kashaya. The most common way is to leave the right shoulder uncovered.

There is also a way to cover both shoulders. In this case, you align both edges of the robe to your left shoulder and elbow, with the front edge in front and the back edge underneath it. At times the Buddha wore the kashaya in this way. This is not, however, seen or heard by shravakas or taught by scriptures, including the Agama Sutra.

The method of wearing a kashaya in the buddha way has been invariably received and maintained by ancestors who have received the true dharma that is present. When receiving a kashaya, you should always receive it from such an ancestor. A kashaya transmitted by buddha ancestors is authentically transmitted from buddha to buddha without fail. It is a kashaya of earlier buddhas and later buddhas, old buddhas and new buddhas. It transforms the way and transforms buddhas. In authentically transforming the past, present, and future, a kashaya is transmitted from past to present, from present to future, from present to past, from past to past, from present to present, from future to future, from future to present, from future to past. It is authentic transmission only between buddha and buddha.

This being so, for hundreds of years since Bodhidharma came to China, and from the Tang to Song Dynasties, a number of scholars experienced realization and those in the scriptural and precepts schools entered buddha dharma. They gave up their worn-out robes that had come from the old nests [teachings] and received kashayas authentically transmitted in the buddha way. Such incidents are recorded in books including the [Jingde Record of] Transmission of the Lamp, the Extensive Transmission of the Lamp, the Continuous Transmission of the Lamp, and the Universal Transmission of the Lamp. This marked a departure from the limited views of the scriptural and precepts schools to revering the great way that had been authentically transmitted by buddha ancestors. Such people all became buddha ancestors.

Those who are in the present should also study with ancient ancestors. If you are to receive a kashaya, authentically receive an authentically transmitted kashaya. Receive it with trust. Do not receive a forged kashaya.

Speaking of an authentically transmitted kashaya, the one authentically transmitted from Shaolin [Bodhidharma] through Caoxi [Huineng] has been passed on from heir to heir without missing even one generation. In this way, the work of the way has been exactly passed on, and the buddha robe has been intimately handed down. The buddha way is authentically transmitted to the buddha way. It does not depend on the hearsay of an idle person.

There is a common saying: “One thousand hearings do not match one seeing. One thousand seeings do not match one attainment.” If we reflect on this, even one thousand seeings and ten thousand hearings cannot match one attainment, an authentic receiving of the buddha robe.

Those who doubt authentic transmission have not dreamed of it, but authentic transmission of the buddha robe is more intimate than hearing about a buddha sutra. Even one thousand sutras and ten thousand attainments cannot match one realization. Buddha ancestors are the merging of realization. Do not follow the mediocre schools of scripture and precepts.

The power of the robe in the ancestral gate [school] has actually been transmitted in its original form. It has been received and inherited up until now without a break. Those who authentically receive it are all dharma-transmitted ancestors who have merged with realization. They excel bodhisattvas of the ten stages and three classes. See it, revere it, bow to it, and place it on your head.

That you accept the teaching of authentic transmission of this buddha robe in your body and mind with trust is a sign of encountering the Buddha. Not to be able to receive this dharma is a life to be lamented. Deeply affirm that covering your body with this kashaya even once is an amulet of protection for ensuring enlightenment.

It is said that if you dye your mind with one phrase or one verse of teaching, it will become timelessly radiant without lack. To dye your body and mind with a single dharma is just like this.

Although the mind has no abode and is not possessed by the self, its power is concrete. Although the body has no abode, its power is concrete. A kashaya also neither comes nor goes. It is not possessed by the self or other; it abides where it is maintained and assists the one who maintains it. The power of what is attained by the kashaya must also be like this.

Making a kashaya is not limited to the ordinary or sages. Its meaning cannot be thoroughly understood by bodhisattvas of the ten stages and three classes. Those who don’t have seeds of enlightenment planted in the past do not see, hear about, and know a kashaya even for one lifetime, two lifetimes, or innumerable lifetimes. How then can they receive and maintain it?

There are those who comprehend the merit of a kashaya touching their bodies even once, and there are those who don’t. Those who understand this merit should rejoice, and those who don’t should hope for it. Those who cannot should lament.

Within and outside the billion worlds, both humans and devas widely see, hear, and know that the buddha robe has only been transmitted inside the gate of buddha ancestors. Also, the facts about the buddha robe are known inside the ancestral gate alone, and not inside other gates.

Those who resent themselves for not knowing about the buddha robe are foolish. Even if they are well versed in eighty-four thousand samadhis and dharanis, if they have not authentically received the buddha ancestors’ dharma of the robe and have not clarified the authentic transmission of the kashaya, they are not authentic heirs of buddhas.

How many sentient beings in other realms would wish that the buddha robe had been authentically transmitted in their own lands just as it has been transmitted to China? They may be ashamed or have deep sorrow.

Indeed, we encounter the dharma of the Tathagatha, the World-Honored One’s authentically transmitted way of the robe. It is due to the seeds of great merit planted in the past. Nowadays, in this unwholesome time in the world of declining dharma, there are a number of groups of demons who are not ashamed of not having authentic transmission but are jealous of it. Where they abide and what they possess are not their true self. To authentically receive the true dharma alone is the straight path of studying the Buddha.





Know that a kashaya is the buddha body, buddha mind. It is called a robe of emancipation, a field of benefaction. It is called a robe of patience, a robe beyond form. It is called a robe of compassion, a robe of the Tathagata, a robe of unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. Receive and maintain it accordingly.

Nowadays in Great Song China, those who call themselves students of precepts [practitioners of the Precept School] are not ashamed, resentful, or even aware of receiving incomprehensible teachings in their house, because they are intoxicated with the wine of shravakas. Following their own minor thinking, such people have altered the kashaya that was transmitted from India and used for a long time through Han and Tang China. This is based on their limited views, of which they should be ashamed. If a robe that comes from such minor thinking is worn, much of the buddha form will be missing. Because they did not extensively study the buddha guidelines, they have created such a robe. It is clear that the body-mind of the Tathagata has been authentically transmitted in the ancestral gate alone, and has not flown into the work of their houses. If they had known the buddha guidelines even one out of ten thousand, they would not have destroyed the buddha robe in this way. They do not even clarify scriptural text and the essence of it.





Being confined to coarse cloth as the material for a kashaya grossly contradicts buddha dharma and in particular violates the buddha robe. A disciple of the Buddha should not wear such a violated robe. How so? Those who insist on coarse cloth only emphasize material and forget the spirit of the buddha robe. What a pity! The view of shravakas in the Lesser Vehicles misses the point. Let me say this: when their view on the cloth is crushed, the buddha robe emerges.

More than one or two buddhas have worn a kashaya made of silk that they denounce. According to the buddha guidelines, excrement-cleaning cloth is regarded as excellent pure material for making a kashaya.

Silk, cotton, and other kinds of cloth are listed among the ten types of excrement-cleaning cloth. Then, is it that silk cannot be used as excrement-cleaning cloth? Those who do not accept this go against the buddha way. If they exclude silk, they should exclude common cloth.

Why do they exclude silk? Because they say silk is produced by killing silkworms. This should be greatly ridiculed. Isn’t common cloth related to living beings? Without being liberated from the ordinary view of sentient and insentient, how can they know the buddha kashaya?

Also, there are those who explain silk as the product of incarnated bodies [of a tree god] and confuse others. This should also be ridiculed. What is not a product of transformative birth? Such people may trust their ears to hear about transformation but doubt their eyes that see transformation. It seems they have eyes but don’t have ears, or they have ears but don’t have eyes. Where are their ears and eyes?

Know that among the cloths you pick up, there can be silklike cloths and common cloths among them. When you use them for making a kashaya, you should not call it silk or common cloth, but just call it excrement-cleaning cloth. As it is excrement-cleaning cloth, it is neither silk nor common cloth. Even if a human or a deva turns into discarded cloth, it is not sentient but just discarded cloth. Even if a pine or chrysanthemum turns into discarded cloth, it is not insentient but just discarded cloth.

When you know that excrement-cleaning cloth is beyond silk and common cloth and beyond a jewel, excrement-cleaning cloth emerges and you encounter excrement-cleaning cloth. Those who haven’t given up discrimination between silk and common cloth have never dreamed of excrement-cleaning cloth. If those who make a kashaya of coarse cloth and maintain it for lifetimes are not aware of this way of seeing the material for a kashaya, this is not authentically receiving the buddha robe.

Among various types of kashaya, there are a common-cloth kashaya, a silk kashaya, and a leather kashaya. They are all worn by buddhas—buddha robes with buddha merit.

While there is authentically transmitted teaching on kashaya, those who have not been freed from ordinary views make light of buddha dharma, do not believe in the buddha words, and try to follow ordinary thinking. They must be called people outside the way who have been entrusted with buddha dharma. They are among the group of those who destroy the true dharma.

Some also say that they have altered the buddha robe by following the teaching of devas. Perhaps they want to be a heavenly buddha or have become a type of deva. However, the Buddha’s disciples should expound buddha dharma to devas, instead of inquiring into the way of devas. How pitiful! Those who have not authentically received buddha dharma speak in this way.

Devas and the Buddha’s descendants hold varied views, and devas come down [to the human realm] to inquire of the Buddha’s descendants about dharma. It is because the deva views and the Buddha views are far different from each other.

Discard the minor views of shravakas in the Precept School, and do not accept their views. Know that they are views of the Lesser School.

The Buddha said, “Those who kill their parents repent, but those who slander the dharma do not.” Thus, the path of minor views and doubts are not the original intention of the Buddha. The great road of buddha dharma cannot be reached by the Lesser Vehicles. No one other than those in the ancestral way with the entrusted dharma treasure knows of the authentic transmission of the Buddha’s great precepts.





Long ago, at midnight on Mount Huangmei, the robe dharma of the Buddha was authentically transmitted to the top of Huineng’s head. This is indeed an authentic transmission of transmitting the dharma and the robe. This took place because Hongren knew who the true person was. Had Hongren been one of those of four fruits [arhats], bodhisattvas of three classes or ten stages, or of masters of treatises and scriptures, he would have transmitted the dharma and robe to Shenxiu and not to Huineng. However, because the buddha ancestor selected a buddha ancestor beyond the path of the ordinary or sacred, Huineng became the Sixth Ancestor. Know that the heir-to-heir practice of buddha ancestors knowing a person and knowing the self does not lie in a fathomable place.

Later, a monk asked Huineng, “Is the robe transmitted to you at midnight on Mount Huangmei made of common cloth, silk, or fine cotton? What is it, after all?”

Huineng said, “It is not made of common cloth, silk, or fine cotton.”

Remember these words of the High Ancestor of Caoxi. The buddha robe is beyond silk, common cloth, and cotton. Those who ignore this and groundlessly call it silk, common cloth, or cotton are slandering the buddha dharma. How can they know the buddha robe?

Furthermore, there are those who are told [by the Buddha] to come and receive the precepts. The kashayas they receive go beyond the distinction of silk or common cloth. This is the Buddha’s admonition.

The lay clothes Shanavasin was wearing were transformed into a kashaya when he became a monk. Reflect quietly on this story. Do not ignore it as if you had not heard of it.

There is further teaching on the kashaya authentically transmitted from buddha to buddha, from ancestor to ancestor. Those who count letters are not aware of it and cannot fathom it. Indeed, how can the one thousand varieties and ten thousand transformations of the buddha way be limited to the realm of mediocre schools? There is samadhi and there is dharani. Those who count the sands of the Ganges do not see the pearl sewn inside the robe.

Regard the shape, color, and measurements of the kashaya authentically transmitted by buddha ancestors as the true base of all buddhas’ kashaya. This model has existed for a long time in India and China, from ancient times up to the present day. Those who discern right and wrong have realized it.

Even if there are those outside the ancestral way who call some robes kashayas, there are no true ancestors who allow them to be their branches and leaves [descendants]. How can they nurture the seeds of wholesome roots? How, then, can they attain the fruit?

Now, we do not only see and hear the buddha dharma that has not been encountered for vast kalpas, but we also see, hear, study, and maintain the buddha robe. This is no other than seeing the Buddha. This is to hear the buddha voice, radiate the buddha light, and experience the buddha experience. This is to receive the buddha mind from person to person, attaining the buddha marrow.





The material for making a kashaya should always be pure. Pure material is something that is donated by a donor with pure trust, bought in a marketplace, sent by devas, or given by dragon kings or demon kings. Pure donations or pure leather offered by the king or ministers can also be used.

Also, ten types of excrement-cleaning cloth are regarded as pure. They are: cloth chewed by oxen, cloth chewed by rats, burned cloth, cloth that is stained with menstrual blood, cloth stained in childbirth, cloth picked up at a shrine, cloth picked up at a cemetery, cloth for prayers, cloth given by the king and ministers, and shrouds.

These types of cloth are regarded as pure material for making a kashaya. They are discarded in the lay world but utilized in the buddha way. The values in the lay world and in the buddha way can be measured in this manner.

Thus, if you look for pure material, look for these ten types of cloth. Know what is pure and understand what is impure when acquiring them. Know the mind and understand the body. Acquire the ten types of cloth and think over the purity of silk and common cloth.

It is extremely foolish to assume that a robe made of excrement-cleaning cloth is used merely for shabby appearance. This type of robe has been used in the buddha dharma to dress cleanly and magnificently. In the buddha dharma, to wear a poor-looking robe means to wear an impure robe made of brocade, gold, silver, and rare jewels.

In the buddha way of this and other worlds, to use a clean and magnificent robe means to use a robe made of one of the ten types of cloth. This is not only going beyond purity and impurity but also becoming free from the realm of delusion and no-delusion, going beyond form and consciousness, while not being concerned with gain and loss.

Those who wholeheartedly receive and maintain the authentic transmission are buddha ancestors because when they are buddha ancestors they receive authentic transmission. They receive and maintain this, authentically transmitted, as buddha ancestors not depending on the emergence and no-emergence of body or mind.





It is lamentable that monks and nuns have not worn a kashaya for a long time in Japan. Rejoice that you receive and maintain it now. Lay men and women who receive and maintain the precepts should wear a kashaya of five, seven, or nine panels. How should home leavers not wear it?

It is said that those who are Indra and the Six Deva Kings of the desire realm, up to male prostitutes, female prostitutes, and servants, should receive the buddha precepts and wear a kashaya. How, then, should the Buddha’s descendants not wear the buddha robe? Even animals should receive the buddha precepts and wear a kashaya. Why should buddha children not wear the buddha robe?

In this way, those who are the Buddha’s descendants, regardless of being devas or humans, the king and officials, beyond the boundaries of laity, home leavers, servants, and animals, should receive the buddha precepts and a kashaya. This is indeed a straight way to the buddha place.





When you wash a kashaya, sprinkle powdered incense and flower petals into water. When the kashaya is washed, rinsed, and dried, you should fold it, set it on a high place, and venerate it with incense and flowers: After making three bows, kneel down and place it on your head, put your palms together, and chant this verse:



Great is the robe of liberation,



the robe beyond form, the field of benefaction!



I wear the Tathagata’s teaching



to awaken countless beings.





Chant this three times. Then, stand up and put it on.

Once, when I was in Song China, practicing on a long sitting platform, I observed the monks around me. At the beginning of zazen in the morning, they would hold up their kashayas, place them on their heads, and chant the robe verse quietly with palms together. This was the first time I had seen the putting on of the kashaya in this way and I rejoiced, tears wetting the collar of my robe. Although I had read this verse of venerating the kashaya in the Agama Sutra, I had not known the procedure. At that moment, I saw it with my own eyes. In my joy I also felt sorrow that there had been no master to teach this to me and no good friend to recommend it in Japan. How sad that so much time had been wasted!

But I also rejoiced in my wholesome past actions. If I had stayed in my land, how could I have sat side by side with the monks who had received and were wearing the buddha robe? My sadness and joy brought endless tears.

Then, I made a vow to myself: However unsuited I may be, I will become an authentic holder of the buddha dharma, receiving authentic transmission of the true dharma, and I will compassionately show people in my land the buddha ancestors’ authentically transmitted dharma robe.

The vow I made at that time must not have been in vain, thanks to the invisible assistance of true trust. The buddha children who receive and maintain the kashaya now should endeavor in the practice of revering it day and night. This brings forth genuine merit. The effect of seeing and hearing one line of the kashaya verse may extend to trees and rocks. The power of the authentically transmitted kashaya is rare to encounter in the ten directions.





In the tenth month of the seventeenth year of the Jiading Era of Song China [1224], two Korean monks visited Qingyuan Prefecture. One was named Zixuan, and the other Jingyun. They were men of letters who often discussed the meaning of sutras, but they did not have kashayas or bowls as if they had been laypeople. What a pity! They had shaven heads but did not have the manners of monks. This was perhaps because they had come from a small country in a remote land. When monks from Japan visit other countries, they might be like these monks.





During the twelve years of his practice before attaining the way, Shakyamuni Buddha venerated the kashaya without putting it aside. As his remote descendant, you should keep this in mind. Turn your head away from worshipping heaven, gods, kings, and retainers for the sake of name and gain, and joyfully dedicate yourself to venerating the buddha robe.



This was written at the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery on the first day of winter, the first year of the Ninji Era [1240]. Dogen, Shramana who has transmitted dharma from Song China.





