18



DHARMA BLOSSOMS TURN DHARMA BLOSSOMS



THE BUDDHA LANDS of the ten directions are just dharma blossoms. Here, all buddhas of the ten directions in the past and present who abide in unsurpassed, complete enlightenment turn dharma blossoms and are turned by dharma blossoms. In this way there is the original practice of bodhisattvas, not turning back or veering away; there is the most profound, immeasurable wisdom of buddhas; there is the serene, subtle samadhi difficult to comprehend and difficult to enter.

Manjushri, the awakened one, speaks of dharma blossoms [in the Lotus Sutra] as the ocean of buddha lands where only buddhas are together with buddhas. Shakyamuni Buddha speaks of dharma blossoms thus: “I know form as suchness. So do the buddhas in the ten directions.” He then says, “The buddhas in the ten directions and I know it well,” and “I want sentient beings to open themselves and enter this realization.”

Samantabhadra activates the turning of dharma blossoms of unthinkable power and spreads unsurpassed, complete enlightenment, profound and timeless, in the Jambudvipa world, where grass and trees large and small are equally nourished by moistening rain. The turning of dharma blossoms extends to places where it is not known. As Samantabhadra’s turning of dharma blossoms occurs, a great assembly gathers on Vulture Peak. Seeing the coming of Samantabhadra, Shakyamuni Buddha acknowledges his arrival with illuminating light from the white tuft on his forehead.

During the assembly, Manjushri contemplates and speaks to Maitreya, turning dharma blossoms and immediately predicting his future enlightenment. Samantabhadra, buddhas, Manjushri, and the great assembly, all thoroughly understand the turning of dharma blossoms, which is wholesome at the beginning, middle, and end.

In this way dharma blossoms emerge as: “The One Vehicle alone is the essential teaching.” Because this emergence is the essential teaching, the Buddha says, “Only a buddha together with a buddha can fully experience the reality of all things.”

The dharma is always One Buddha Vehicle. Only buddhas can help buddhas to fully experience this reality. All buddhas, including the Seven Original Buddhas, help other buddhas to fully experience this reality and make it possible for Shakyamuni Buddha to attain the way. This occurs in the buddha lands in the ten directions, encompassing India and China. This is the dharma that reached Huineng, the Thirty-third Ancestor, Zen Master Dajian. It is the One Vehicle dharma of buddhas alone fully experiencing reality. This alone is the one essential matter, One Buddha Vehicle.

At this very moment, buddhas emerge in the world; they emerge right here. The transmission of Qingyuan’s buddha wind until now, the spreading of Nanyue’s dharma gate into the world, is the emergence of the Tathagata’s knowledge of thusness. Truly, the dharma blossoms fully experience only a buddha together with a buddha, unfold, and enter the realization of a buddha heir, an heir buddha.

This is called the Wondrous Lotus Flowers Dharma Sutra. It teaches the dharma to bodhisattvas. As these dharmas are all dharmas, Vulture Peak, empty sky, ocean, and earth are all lotus flowers. This is reality; this is thusness. It is things abiding in their condition. It is the great essential matter. It is buddha knowledge, the continuous abiding in worldly aspects, thusness, the timeless lifespan of tathagatas, immeasurable profundity. It is the impermanence of all things. It is the lotus flower samadhi. It is Shakyamuni Buddha. It is turning dharma blossoms and dharma turning blossoms. It is the treasury of the true dharma eye, the wondrous heart of nirvana. It is manifesting the body and awakening beings. It is giving a prediction of enlightenment and bringing forth a buddha, maintaining and abiding in dharma.





A monk called Fada visited the assembly of Huineng, Zen Master Dajian of the Baolin Monastery, Mount Caoxi, Shao Region, Guangdong, Tang China. He boasted that he had chanted the Lotus Sutra three thousand times.

Huineng said to him, “Even if you have chanted the sutra ten thousand times, if you don’t understand the meaning of it, you won’t even know your own errors.”

Fada said, “Because I am stupid, I have only been able to follow the words and chant. How can I understand the meaning of it?”

Huineng said, “Chant it for me. I will elucidate its meaning for you.”

Fada chanted the sutra.

At chapter 2, “Skillful Means,” Huineng said, “Stop. The essential meaning of this sutra is the cause of the Buddha’s emergence into the world. Many parables are expounded, but there is nothing more than this. This cause is the single essential matter. What is the single essential matter? It is the buddha unfolding knowledge and entering realization. You are originally buddha knowledge. You who have this knowledge are a buddha. You should trust right now that the buddha knowledge is your own mind.”

Then he taught with a verse:



When your mind is deluded, you are turned by the dharma blossoms.



When your mind is enlightened, you turn the dharma blossoms.



If you cannot clarify the meaning after chanting the sutra at great length, you become its enemy.



Thinking beyond thinking is right.



Thinking about thinking is wrong.



If thinking and beyond thinking do not divide the mind



you can steer the white-ox cart endlessly.





Hearing this verse, Fada further asked Huineng, “The sutra says, ‘Great shramanas and bodhisattvas all exhaust their thinking and analyzing, but they cannot fathom the Buddha’s wisdom.’ Leading ordinary people to understand their own mind is called the Buddha’s knowledge. Only those who are of excellent capacity avoid doubting and slandering the Buddha’s teaching. The sutra also talks about three types of carts. How different is the great-ox cart from the white-ox cart? Please, master, would you teach me?”

Huineng said:



The meaning of the sutra is clear. It is you who are deluded. Those in the Three Vehicles cannot fathom the Buddha’s wisdom because they think and analyze. However hard you think and project, you remain far away. The Buddha only expounds for ordinary people, not for buddhas. Those who walk away from the Buddha’s sermons look for the three carts elsewhere. Yet they are already seated on the white-ox cart outside the gate.



The sutra clearly tells you “not two, not three.” Why don’t you understand this? The three carts are expedient means; they were taught in the past. The One Vehicle is reality; it is here now. I want you to leave the expedient means of the past to the past and return to reality. When you return to reality, it is not merely a name. Know that all things are rare treasures that belong to you. Receive and make use of them. Do not regard these treasures as belonging to your parents or your child. Do not feel that you have to use them. This is the meaning of the Lotus Sutra. Chant it every moment from kalpa to kalpa, day and night, without opening a scroll of the sutra.





Rejoicing in these instructions, Fada presented this verse of admiration:



After chanting the sutra three thousand times



I was annihilated by Caoxi’s single verse.



Without clarifying the meaning of birth in life,



how can one end madness throughout lifetimes?



Although there are expedient carts pulled by sheep, deer, or oxen,



wholesomeness is manifest in the beginning, middle, and end.



Who is aware that the King of Dharma



abides in the burning house?





Upon receiving this poem, Huineng said, “From now on, you will be called the Sutra-Chanting Monk.”



This is how Fada studied with Huineng. Since then, the dharma blossoms of the dharma blossoms turning and turning the dharma blossoms have been expounded. This had not been heard of before their dialogue. Indeed, to clarify buddha’s knowledge is itself the treasury of the true dharma eye, it is itself the buddha ancestor. You can see from Fada’s case that those who vainly count letters, as numerous as pebbles and sands [of the Ganges], cannot understand.

In order to fathom the true meaning of the dharma, thoroughly study the ancestor’s teaching as a single great matter. Do not try to learn it through other vehicles. The thusness of reality and the true characteristics, true form, true function, true cause and effect of the dharma blossoms turning, had not existed or been spoken of before Huineng.



What is spoken of as turned by dharma blossoms is your mind is deluded. Your mind is deluded is no other than turned by dharma blossoms. Thus, the deluded mind is turned by dharma blossoms. The meaning is that while the deluded mind is no other than all phenomena, reality is turned by dharma blossoms. To be turned in this way is neither to be rejoiced in nor sought after, neither to attain nor to arrive.

This being so, dharma blossom turning is not two, not three. As there is only One Buddha Vehicle, and the dharma blossoms turning and being turned are, in reality, One Buddha Vehicle, one great matter, these are bits and pieces [of One Vehicle] alone. Thus, do not resent delusion. What you practice is the bodhisattva way, seeing buddhas through the original practice of the bodhisattva. Each unfolding of the teaching, each entering into enlightenment, is dharma blossoms turning.

There is delusion in the burning house, delusion at the gate, delusion away from the gate, delusion in front of the gate, delusion inside the gate. Inside-the-gate, away-from-the-gate, as well as at-the-gate, and the burning house are actualized in delusion. This is the unfolding of the teaching and entering enlightenment on the white-ox cart.

When you enter majestically, riding the white-ox cart, do you regard the ground as the place of entering, or do you see the burning house as the place of departing? Do you fully regard being at the gate as passing the gate?

Know that the cart wheel turns the burning house, unfolds the teaching and enters enlightenment. The ground turns the burning house, unfolds the teaching, and enters enlightenment. At-the-gate turns the entire gate, unfolds the teaching, and enters enlightenment. Innumerable gates turn the one gate, unfold the teaching, and enter enlightenment. Each unfolding of the teaching and each entrance into enlightenment turns the innumerable gates, unfolds the teaching, and enters enlightenment. Turning unfolds the teaching and enters enlightenment inside the gate. Turning unfolds the teaching and enters enlightenment away from the gate. Turning of the ground inside the burning house unfolds the teaching and enters enlightenment.

Thus, the burning house is beyond understanding, and the ground is beyond knowing. Who regards the turning of the three realms as the wheel of the One Vehicle? Who regards unfolding the teaching and entering enlightenment as going in and out of the gate? If you seek the cart wheel instead of the burning house, how many turnings will there be? If you desire the burning house and not the ground, how profound will it be? Do you fully understand the ground as the equanimity of Vulture Peak? Do you practice the evenness of the ground on Vulture Peak? Thoroughly engage in the practice to make “the place where sentient beings rejoice” into “my [the Buddha’s] indestructible Pure Land.”

[The Lotus Sutra says,] “I wholeheartedly wish to see the Buddha.”

Study thoroughly whether this I is you or other. There is attaining the way by sharing the [buddha] body, and there is attaining the way with the entire body.

“Appearing together on Vulture Peak” took place because the Buddha’s body-and-mind was not held back. There is unfolding the teaching and entering enlightenment by “always being present and expounding dharma.” There is unfolding the teaching and entering enlightenment through “manifesting nirvana by skillful means.”

Who has trust in understanding and trust in beyond understanding, when the Buddha says, “They do not see me, although I am close to them.”

“The place filled with celestial beings” is the land of Shakyamuni Buddha and Vairochana Buddha—the land of eternal, serene light. Encompassing the four lands within ourselves, we abide in the buddha land of one thusness.

When you see a speck of dust, it is not that you do not see the world of phenomena. When you realize the world of phenomena, it is not that you do not realize a speck of dust. When buddhas realize the world of phenomena, they do not keep you from realization. Wholesomeness is manifest in the beginning, middle, and end.

Thus, realization is reality right now. Even shocks, doubts, fears, and frights are none other than reality right now. However, with buddha knowledge it is different; seeing a speck of dust is different from sitting within a speck of dust. Even when you sit in the world of phenomena, it is not broad. Even when you sit in a speck of dust, it is not narrow. If you are not fully present, you do not fully sit. If you are fully present, you are free of how large or narrow it is where you are. Thus, you have thoroughly experienced the essential unfolding of dharma blossoms.

Is it that the manifestation and essence of your practice now originates in the world of phenomena or in a speck of dust? Have no shocks and doubts, no fears or frights. Just this turning of dharma blossoms is the original practice, deep and wide. In seeing the speck of dust and seeing the world of phenomena, there is no attempt to create or measure. Even those who attempt to create or measure do so in accordance with dharma blossoms.

When you hear the words “unfold the teaching and enter enlightenment,” understand that the buddhas want sentient beings to do so. “Opening the buddha wisdom” is the dharma blossoms turning; this is “manifesting buddha wisdom.” “Realizing buddha wisdom” is the dharma blossoms turning; this is entering buddha wisdom. “Manifesting buddha wisdom” is the dharma blossoms turning; this is realizing buddha wisdom.

This is the dharma blossoms turning, opening the teaching and entering enlightenment; each is a way of thorough practice. Truly the buddha tathagatas’ realization of wisdom is turning broad and profound dharma blossoms. Giving a prediction of enlightenment is the unfolding of the buddha wisdom by the self. It is not the dharma blossoms turning to be given to others. This is what is meant by the words When your mind is deluded, it is turned by the dharma blossoms.





When your mind is enlightened, you turn the dharma blossoms means that you turn the dharma blossoms. That is to say, when the dharma blossoms fully turn you, you are empowered to turn the dharma blossoms. While the original turning never stops, you return to turn the dharma blossoms. While the donkey [delusion] has not left, the horse [enlightenment] has arrived. This is the single great matter manifesting here and now.

Although bodhisattvas who emerge from the earth into myriad worlds are the great sages of timeless dharma blossoms, still they emerge now turned by themselves and turned by others. Do not regard emerging from the earth alone as turning the dharma blossoms. Regard emerging from the sky also as turning the dharma blossoms. Know with buddha wisdom that bodhisattvas emerge not only from the earth or the sky, but also from the dharma blossoms.

At the moment of dharma blossoming, invariably the parent is young and the child is old. It is not that the child is not a child and the parent is not a parent. Yet, you need to learn that the child [you] is indeed old and the parent [dharma] is truly young. Do not be like those who lack trust and are startled by this statement. What is usually distrusted is that now is a moment of dharma blossoming. Nevertheless, trust and turn the dharma blossoms as “in the time of the Buddha.” Turned by the unfolding of the teaching and by entering enlightenment, bodhisattvas emerge from the earth. Turned by buddha wisdom, bodhisattvas emerge from the earth.

At the moment of turning the dharma blossoms there is the enlightened mind of the dharma blossoms, there are the dharma blossoms of enlightened mind. They are below and above in the air. What is below or above in the air is none other than the turning of the dharma blossoms. This is the Buddha’s timeless life span.

Turn the dharma blossoms [of understanding] that the Buddha’s life span, the dharma blossoms, the world of phenomena, and the mind are actualized below and above in the air. Thus, below and above are nothing but the manifestation of the turning of the dharma blossoms.

Sometimes the dharma blossoms are turned into three types of herbs, and sometimes they are turned into two types of trees. Do not wait to possess enlightenment. Do not wonder about not possessing enlightenment. To turn the self and aspire to enlightenment is to be in the southern buddha land. To attain the way is to join the Vulture Peak assembly of the southern buddha land. To be on Vulture Peak is itself to turn the dharma blossoms. There are assemblies in the air of buddha lands in the ten directions. They are embodiments of the turning of the dharma blossoms. Thus, the dharma blossoms of the buddha lands in the ten directions are turned. There is not a gap for even a speck of dust.

“Form is emptiness” is the turning of dharma blossoms, beyond coming and beyond going. “Emptiness is form” is the turning of dharma blossoms, beyond birth and beyond death. This is not only when the Buddha was in the world and when he has passed away.

That another person is intimate with you is that you are intimate with the person. To express respect is to give a gift like a pearl hidden in the hair or sewn into the robe [as told in the Lotus Sutra]. Thoroughly examine such moments [as dharma blossoms turning].

There is the turning of the dharma blossoms actualizing a jeweled tower five hundred yojana high in front of the Buddha [Shakyamuni]. There is the turning of the dharma blossoms actualizing the Buddha [Prabhutaratna] sitting in a tower two hundred yojana wide. There is the turning of the dharma blossoms actualizing bodhisattvas emerging from the ground and abiding in the air, when mind is without hindrance and form is without hindrance. There is the turning of the dharma blossoms actualizing bodhisattvas emerging from the sky and abiding in the ground, while immersed in the eye and immersed in the body. There is Vulture Peak in the tower, and a jeweled tower in Vulture Peak. The jeweled tower stands in the air. The air is air as the jeweled tower. The ancient buddha [Prabhutaratna] sits side by side with the Vulture Peak Buddha [Shakyamuni] in the tower, and the Vulture Peak Buddha enters realization for the Buddha in the tower.

The Vulture Peak Buddha turns the dharma blossoms with body, mind, and the whole environs. Emerging on Vulture Peak means the buddha in the tower manifests, remaining in the ancient buddha land and timelessly passing away. When you investigate emerging and entering, do not follow commonplace ideas or the interpretations of those in the Two Lesser Vehicles. Just study the turning of the dharma blossoms. Timelessly passing away is magnificient realization embodied by the Buddha. It is not limited to inside the tower, in front of the buddha, the treasure stupa, empty space, the world of phenomena, or Vulture Peak. It is not limited to half a realm or the entire realm. It is not limited to the condition of phenomena. It is just beyond thinking.

There is the turning of dharma blossoms, manifesting a buddha body and expounding dharma, manifesting this body and expounding dharma. There is the turning of dharma blossoms manifesting as Devadatta, and there is the turning of dharma blossoms by saying, “You may leave this assembly if you wish.” Do not assume the time you wait [for the Buddha] with joined hands gazing upward to be sixty short eons. You may call the time of wholehearted waiting innumerable eons, yet you cannot measure buddha wisdom. You cannot equate the duration of wholehearted waiting to the size of buddha wisdom.

Do not assume that this turning of dharma blossoms is limited to the path of a bodhisattva’s original practice. At the assembly of the lotus blossoms, there is the act of turning dharma blossoms—“Today the Tathagata expounds the Great Vehicle.” Dharma blossoms are dharma blossoms right now, beyond perception and knowledge, beyond knowing and understanding. Thus, innumerable eons are one hairbreadth moment of the turning of dharma blossoms. It is a straightforward expression of the Buddha’s incalculable life span.

It has been several hundred years since the Lotus Sutra was transmitted and started turning the dharma blossoms in China. Many people have written commentaries. Some of them have been outstanding teachers. But no one has attained and activated the essence of turning the lotus blossoms like Huineng, Old Buddha, High Ancestor of Caoxi. To hear it now and encounter it now is an ancient buddha meeting an ancient buddha. Are we not in the land of an ancient buddha?

Rejoice! From eon to eon there have been dharma blossoms. From day to night there have been dharma blossoms. As dharma blossoms have been active from eon to eon, from day to night, whether your body and mind are strong or weak, they are dharma blossoms. Such blossoms are a rare treasure, radiant light, a practice place, broad and vast, great and timeless. When your mind is deluded, you are turned by the dharma blossoms. When your mind is enlightened, you turn the dharma blossoms. Indeed, this is dharma blossoms turning dharma blossoms.

[Let me repeat:] When your mind is deluded, you are turned by the dharma blossoms. When your mind is enlightened, you turn the dharma blossoms. When you thoroughly experience this, it is dharma blossoms turning dharma blossoms.

To honor and dedicate yourself to this teaching is no other than dharma blossoms turning dharma blossoms.



This was written and given to Zen person Etatsu to celebrate his home leaving and entry into the practice of the way, during the summer practice period in the second year of the Ninji Era [1241]. Shaving the head is a good thing. To shave the head over and over again makes a true home leaver. Today’s home leaving is the natural fruit of the natural power of dharma blossoms turning in the past. The dharma blossoms of this moment will certainly bear fruit as dharma blossoms in the future. They are not Shakyamuni’s dharma blossoms, nor all buddhas’ dharma blossoms, but the dharma blossoms’ dharma blossoms. Every day the turning of the dharma blossoms is as it is, beyond perception, beyond knowledge. Dharma blossoms emerge at this moment, beyond knowing, beyond understanding. Past moments are your breathing in and breathing out. Present moments are your breathing in and breathing out. Treasure these moments as dharma blossoms, wondrous and inconceivable. Monk Dogen, who has transmitted dharma from China, founder of the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery.





