30



THUSNESS



YUNJU, GREAT MASTER Hongjue of Mount Yunju, an heir of Dongshan, is a thirty-ninth-generation dharma descendant of Shakyamuni Buddha. He is an authentic ancestor of the Dongshan School. One day he said to the assembly, “You are trying to attain thusness, yet you are already a person of thusness. As you are already a person of thusness, why be worried about thusness?”



It means that one who aspires to experience thusness is immediately a person of thusness. If so, why be worried about thusness?

For the time being, we will regard the teaching by Yunju, “immediately getting to unsurpassable enlightenment,” as thusness. Within this unsurpassable manifestation of enlightenment, the entire world of the ten directions is but a small portion; enlightenment exceeds the boundary of the entire world.

You are an accoutrement that exists in the entire world of the ten directions. How do you know it to be thus? You know it because your body and mind are not you; they appear in the entire world of the ten directions.

Your body is not you; your life is transported, moving in time without stopping even for a moment. Where has your youthful face gone? When you search for it, there is no trace. When you ponder deeply, there are many from the past whom you cannot encounter again. The pure mind does not stay; it comes and goes in fragments. Even if there is truth, it does not stay within the boundary of yourself.

Because of thusness, you arouse a boundless aspiration for enlightenment. Once this aspiration arises, you let go of what you have been playing with. You come forward to hear what you have never heard and realize what is not yet realized. This is not at all self-doing. Know that it is so because you are a person of thusness.

How do you know that you are a person of thusness? You know it because you want to attain thusness. As you already have the face and eye of a person of thusness, do not worry about thusness now. Even if you worry, it is thusness not to be worried about.

Also, do not be startled at the thusness of thusness. Even if there is thusness that you are startled at or wonder about, it is thusness. It is thusness not to be startled at.

Do not measure this with the yardstick of buddha or mind. Do not measure it with the yardstick of the world of phenomena or the entire world. It is just If you are already a person of thusness, why be worried about thusness?

This being so, thusness of sound and form is thus; thusness of body and mind is thus; thusness of all buddhas is thus.



For example, when you understand the moment of falling to the ground as thusness, you will not doubt the moment of falling to the ground at the moment of getting up.

Since ancient times, these words have been spoken in both India and the deva world: “One who falls to the ground uses the ground to stand up. One who ignores the ground and tries to stand cannot.” The meaning is that those who fall down on the earth stand up on the earth; it is impossible to get up without using the earth.

Some people interpret this as great enlightenment, which is the desirable way to become free from body and mind. Thus, when being asked how buddhas attain the way, they say that it is like those who fall to the ground and use the ground to stand up.

Thoroughly investigate this and penetrate the views from the past, the future, and this very moment. Great enlightenment, beyond enlightenment, further delusion, and loss of delusion are immersed in enlightenment, immersed in delusion. They all fall to the ground and get up using the ground.

This is an expression above the heavens and below the heavens. It is an expression from India and China, from the past and present. It is an expression of old and new buddhas. It leaves nothing uncovered and lacks nothing.

This being so, those who only understand thus but miss beyond understanding thus have not thoroughly studied this expression. Even though the expression of an old buddha has been passed down as thus, when you hear the expression of an old buddha as an old buddha, you should inquire beyond.

Even if it had not been spoken in India or in the deva world, you should say something further in this way: “If one who falls to the ground uses the ground to stand up, it is not possible even for immeasurable eons.”

Here is one vital path for getting up: “One who falls to the ground uses the sky to stand up. One who falls to the sky uses the ground to stand up.” Without being thus, you can never get up. This has always been the way with all buddhas and ancestors.





Someone may ask, “How far apart are the sky and the ground from each other?” In response to such a question, you might reply, “The sky and the ground are eighteen thousand miles apart. One who falls to the ground uses the sky to stand up. One who ignores the sky and tries to stand cannot. One who falls to the sky uses the ground to stand up. One who ignores the ground and tries to stand cannot.”

Those who are unable to express this have not yet known and seen the measure of the ground and the sky in the buddha way.





Sanghanandi, the Seventeenth Ancestor, acquired his dharma heir, Gayashata, in the following way:

Hearing a wind bell ringing outside the hall, he asked Gayashata, “Is it the wind or the bell that is ringing?”

Gayashata said, “Neither the wind nor the bell. It is the mind ringing.”

Sanghanandi asked, “What is the mind?”

Gayashata said, “Altogether serene.”

Sanghanandi said, “Splendid, splendid. Who other than you will succeed in my path?”

Thus, the treasury of the true dharma eye was transmitted to Gayashata.



This is to study that the mind is ringing while the wind is not ringing. This is to study that the mind is ringing while the bell is not ringing. Even if the mind ringing is thus, it is altogether serene.

This story was transmitted from India to China and has been regarded as a standard for study of the way, but many have misunderstood it as follows: Gayashata’s statement—Neither the wind nor the bell. It is the mind ringing—means that at the very moment of listening, a thought arises. This arising of a thought is called mind. Without this mind-thought, how can one relate to the sound of the bell ringing? Because listening manifests with this thought, it should be regarded as the root of listening. Therefore, Gayashata said, It is the mind ringing.

This is a wrong view. They say this because they have not acquired the power of authentic teachers. This is like an interpretation by commentators in linguistics, but it is not the deep study of the buddha way.

On the other hand, those who have studied with authentic heirs of the buddha way take up unsurpassable enlightenment, the treasury of the true dharma eye, and call it serene, nondoing, samadhi, or dharani. The meaning of this is that when even one single thing is serene, myriad things are serene. If the blowing of the wind is serene, the ringing of the bell is serene. This is why Gayashata said, “Altogether serene.”

You may say the mind that is ringing is not the wind ringing; the mind that is ringing is not the bell ringing; the mind that is ringing is not the mind that is ringing. Investigate thusness intimately and just say, “The wind rings. The bell rings. The blowing rings. The ringing rings.” You realize thusness not because why be worried about thusness? but because “why pursue thusness?”





Huineng, who would later become the Thirty-third Ancestor, Zen Master Dajian, was staying at the Faxing Monastery, in Guang Province, before his head was shaved.

There were two monks from India debating. One of them said, “The banner is flapping.”

The other said, “The wind is flapping.”

They went back and forth and could not settle the question. Then Huineng said, “It is not the banner that is flapping. It is not the wind that is flapping. It is your mind that is flapping.”

Hearing this, the monks immediately agreed with him.

In this way, Huineng expressed that the wind, the banner, and the flapping are altogether the mind. Even if you hear Huineng’s words now, you may not understand them. How, then, do you experience his words? How does this expression of thusness emerge?

Hearing his words, It is your mind that is flapping, you may think that he meant “It is your mind that is flapping.” If so, not seeing Huineng or not knowing Huineng, you are not a dharma descendant of Huineng.

As a descendant, in order to experience Huineng’s words and experience them by receiving his body, hair, and skin, you should thus say: “Let go of the words It is your mind that is flapping, and say, ‘It is you that is flapping.’”

How does this expression of thusness emerge? It is because what flaps is what flaps, and you are you. As he was already a person of thusness, this expression of thusness emerges.

In his early life, Huineng was a woodcutter in Xin Province. He thoroughly understood mountains and rivers. Even as he endeavored and cut to the original source, how could he have contemplated inside a luminous window and studied in stillness the ancient teaching to illuminate the mind? With whom could he have studied to cleanse himself with snow?

One day in a marketplace he heard someone chanting a sutra. It was neither what he was waiting for nor what others had recommended to him. Having lost his father when quite young, he had been the sole support of his mother. He did not know that one bright pearl hidden in the robe could illuminate and break open the entire universe.

As soon as he attained clarity, he left his old mother and looked for a teacher. It is a rare case for people. No one takes the obligation and love toward parents lightly. But since he regarded dharma as weightier than his obligation and love, he left his mother. This is the meaning of the words [in the Lotus Sutra] “If you hear with wisdom, you trust and understand what you hear immediately.”

This kind of wisdom can neither be acquired from someone else nor be aroused by oneself. Wisdom is transmitted to wisdom; wisdom searches for wisdom. Once, wisdom formed the bodies of five hundred bats [who listened to the dharma]; they had no other bodies and minds. At another time, wisdom was intimate within the bodies of ten thousand fish; even without conditions or causes, they could immediately attain understanding upon hearing the dharma.

Wisdom neither comes nor enters. It is just like when the god of spring encounters spring. Wisdom is neither with thought nor without thought. Wisdom is neither with mind nor without mind. How can it be concerned with large or small? How can it be discussed as delusion or enlightenment?

It means that without knowing what buddha dharma is and without having heard it, one does not look for and wish for it. But upon hearing dharma, one regards obligations as less weighty and forgets about oneself. It is because the body-and-mind that has wisdom is no longer the self. This is called you trust and understand what you hear immediately.

We do not know how many rounds of birth and death we go through wastefully in the dusty world, in spite of having this wisdom. It is just like a stone containing jade; the jade does not know that it is inside the stone, and the stone does not know that it contains the jade. A person discovers and removes the jade. This is not what the jade expected or what the stone was waiting for. It does not depend on the stone’s view or the jade’s thought. Likewise, although a person and wisdom are not acquainted with each other, without exception the way is heard by wisdom.

It is said [in the Lotus Sutra] that one with no wisdom who doubts will be lost forever. Although wisdom is neither being nor nonbeing, there is the being of a timeless spring pine and the nonbeing of fallen chrysanthemum blossoms. At the moment of no-wisdom, unsurpassable enlightenment becomes doubt; all things are altogether doubted. At that moment, one is lost forever; the words one hears and the things to realize become no other than doubt.

There is no self—no place to hide in the all-inclusive world. There is no other—just one straight rod of iron for myriad miles. Even as branches grow thus, there is only one vehicle of dharma in the entire world. Even as leaves fall thus, things abide in their conditions, and there is the aspect of the world as permanent. Thus, being wisdom and being no wisdom are like sun face and moon face [day and night of the same day].



As he was a person of thusness, Huineng attained clarity. Later he went to Mount Huangmei and met Hongren, Zen Master Daman. Hongren then assigned him to work as a laborer. Huineng pounded rice day and night for eight months.

Once, in the middle of the night, Hongren slipped into the pounding hut and asked Huineng, “Is the rice hulled now?”

Huineng said, “Hulled but not yet sifted.”

Hongren tapped the mortar with his cane three times. Huineng shuffled the rice three times. This is regarded as the moment when teacher and student merged. Although neither known by the self nor understood by others, the transmission of dharma and the transmission of the robe took place at this very moment of thusness.





Once Shitou, Great Master Wuji of Mount Nanyue, was asked by Yaoshan, “I have a rough idea about the Three Vehicles and the Twelve Divisions of the scriptures. I have heard of the teaching from the south about directly pointing to the human mind, seeing through one’s nature, and becoming a buddha. I beg you, reverend, please give me your compassionate instruction.”



This is a question by Yaoshan, who had previously been a lecturer. He was well versed in the Three Vehicles and the Twelve Divisions of the scriptures. Thus, he was not ignorant of buddha dharma. Long ago, there was no particular school of Buddhism, so studying the Three Vehicles and the Twelve Divisions of the scriptures was the only way. Nowadays, most people are dull and try to analyze buddha dharma by establishing various doctrines. This is not the buddha way of awakening with dharma.

Shitou replied, “Thusness is ungraspable. Beyond thusness is ungraspable. Both thusness and beyond thusness are ungraspable. How about you?”

This is Shitou’s statement for the benefit of Yaoshan. Indeed, as both thusness and beyond thusness are ungraspable, thusness is ungraspable, beyond thusness is ungraspable. Thusness is as it is. The function of this word is neither limited nor not limited.

Study thusness as ungraspable. Inquire about ungraspability in thusness. This thusness, this ungraspability, is not merely concerned with buddha thoughts. Understanding is ungraspable. Enlightenment is ungraspable.





Huineng, Zen Master Dajian of Mount Caoxi, once instructed Nanyue, who would later become Zen Master Dahui: “What is it that thus comes?”



Study thoroughly his statement that all things are invariably what, as what is beyond doubt, beyond understanding, but, just what. Study thoroughly that the one thing is no other than what. What is not to be doubted. What thus comes.



Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery on the twenty-sixth day, the third month, the third year of the Ninji Era [1242].





