31B



CONTINUOUS PRACTICE, PART TWO



BODHIDHARMA CAME FROM India to China at the request of his teacher, Venerable Prajnatara. How severe the wind and snow was throughout his three-year journey! How innumerable the waves of the ocean, under clouds and mist, as he sailed toward an unknown country! This journey is beyond the imagination of those attached to body and life.

This continuous practice is due solely to his great compassionate determination to transmit dharma and to save deluded beings. It is continuous practice because of his dedication to transmitting dharma, because of the all-inclusive world where dharma is to be transmitted, because the entire world of the ten directions is the true path, and because the entire world of the ten directions is the entire world of the ten directions. What place is not Bodhidharma’s palace? What palace could hinder his practice of the way?

Thus, Bodhidharma left India. As his vow was to save deluded beings, he had no doubt or fear. As what he embodied was the all-inclusive practice for saving deluded beings, he had no doubt or fear. Bidding farewell to the country of his father, the king, he sailed on a large ship through the South Sea and entered the Province of Guang. Although there were many people on board, including his attendant monks, no record of the voyage has remained. No one knows what happened to his entourage.

On the twenty-first day, the ninth month, the eighth year of the Putong Era [527 C.E.] of the Kingdom of Liang, Xiaoang, Governor of Guang Province, officially welcomed Bodhidharma. Carrying out his duty, he reported Bodhidharma’s arrival to Emperor Wu. It was the first day of the tenth month. Reviewing the report with delight, Emperor Wu sent a messenger to Bodhidharma to invite him to the palace.

Bodhidharma went to the capital city of Jinling and met with Wu, who said, “Ever since I became Emperor, I have built temples, copied sutras, and approved the ordination of more monks than I can count. What is the merit of having done all this?”

Bodhidharma said, “There is no merit.”

The Emperor said, “Why is that so?”

Bodhidharma said, “These are minor achievements of humans and devas, which become the causes of desire. They are like shadows of forms and not real.”

The Emperor said, “What is real merit?”

Bodhidharma said, “When pure wisdom is complete, the essence is empty and serene. Such merit cannot be attained through worldly actions.”

The Emperor said, “What is the foremost sacred truth?”

Bodhidharma said, “Vast emptiness, nothing sacred.”

The Emperor said, “Who is it that faces me?”

Bodhidharma said, “I don’t know.”

The Emperor did not understand. Bodhidharma knew that there was no merging [between the two] and the time was not ripe. Thus, without a word he left on the nineteenth day of the tenth month and traveled north of the River Yangzi.

He arrived in Luoyang in the Kingdom of Wei on the twenty-third day of the eleventh month of the same year. He stayed at the Shaolin Temple of Mount Song, where he sat facing the wall in silence day after day. But the Emperor [Xiaoming] of Wei was unaware of his presence and was not ashamed of being unaware of it.

Bodhidharma was from the warrior class in southern India, a prince of a major kingdom, where sophisticated customs had been developed. In contrast, the customs of the minor kingdom of Wei must have looked uncivilized in the eyes of Bodhidharma, but it did not affect him. He did not abandon the country or people. Although he was attacked by the monk Bodhiruchi, he did not defend himself, nor did he hate him. He was not resentful of Precept Master Guangtong’s bad intention, but simply ignored him.

Although Bodhidharma did many outstanding things, he was often regarded as an ordinary Tripitaka master or a scholar of sutras and commentaries because of the lack of understanding and small-mindedness of some monks in China. People thought Bodhidharma expounded the dharma gate of the Zen School. They saw no difference between his true teaching and the teachings of scholarly commentators.

Bodhidharma is the twenty-eighth authentic heir of Shakyamuni Buddha. He left the large kingdom of his father to save sentient beings of the eastern country. Who can be compared to him? If he had not come from India, how could sentient beings of China see and hear the Buddha’s true dharma? They would have been stuck with countless names and forms. Now, some barbarians like us, who have hair and horns, are able to hear the true dharma. Today even farmers and village people can see and hear it because of the continuous practice of Bodhidharma who voyaged to China.

China was much less civilized than India. Their customs were not as wholesome as those of India. An outstanding sage like Bodhidharma, who had received and maintained the treasury of dharma, would not have bothered to go, had he not had great patience and vast compassion. There was no established place for practice, and few people in China who would be able to appreciate a true teacher.

Bodhidharma stayed on Mount Song for nine years. People called him a wall-gazing Brahman. Later historians listed him as a practitioner of learning meditation. But that is not the whole truth. The ancestor alone transmitted the treasury of the true dharma eye, buddha to buddha, heir to heir.

The Record within the Forest by Shimen [Rock Gate] says:



Bodhidharma at first visited the Kingdom of Liang and then the Kingdom of Wei. He then went to Mount Song and rested his traveling staff at the Shaolin Temple, where he simply sat at ease facing the wall. It was not a step-by-step practice of learning meditation. For a long time people could not guess why he was doing it, so they regarded Bodhidharma as a practitioner of learning meditation.



Now, meditation is only one of the many activities of Zen. It does not cover the entire practice of the sage. But those who recorded the history of that time classified him among practitioners of learning meditation and lumped him together with those who engaged in the static practice of a decayed tree and dead ash. The sage is not limited to meditation, yet does not contradict meditation. It is like the practice of Ijing [I-ching] not being limited to yin and yang, yet not contradicting yin and yang.



When Emperor Wu of Liang met Bodhidharma, the Emperor asked, “What is the primary meaning of the sacred truth?” Bodhidharma said, “Vast emptiness, nothing sacred.” The Emperor asked further, “Who is facing me?” Bodhidharma said, “I don’t know.” Had he not been so familiar with the local language, he would not have communicated so well.



Thus, it is clear that Bodhidharma moved from Liang to Wei. He walked to Mount Song and stayed at the Shaolin Temple. Although he sat in stillness facing the wall, he was not engaged in so-called learning meditation. Although he had not brought even one volume of sutra, he was a genuine master who transmitted true dharma. However, historians without understanding classified him in the section on teachers of learning meditation. This was the utmost stupidity, which is lamentable.

When Bodhidharma arrived on Mount Song, a doglike monk barked at him. What a pity! How foolish! With what mind could one ignore Bodhidharma’s compassionate gift? How could one fail to repay his kindness? In the worldly realm, there are those who do not forget the kindness of others. People call them worthy beings. The great kindness of Bodhidharma surpasses that of one’s parents. His compassion is beyond filial love.

The lowly birth of Japanese people is amazing, if we think about it. Not having been born in the center of the world, we haven’t seen the flourishing land. We haven’t known sages nor seen the wise. There has been no one who has ascended to heaven from our land, Japan. We are all equally immature. From the time our nation was founded, no one has guided laypeople. We have never heard of anyone purifying the nation, as no one has known what is pure and what is murky. We are not familiar with yin and yang, or with heaven, earth, and humans. How, then, could we understand the undulation of the five types of matter? This ignorance comes from not knowing the sound and form before our very eyes. It is the result of not knowing the sutras, nor having true teachers with whom to study them.

Having no true teachers, we do not know how many score of volumes, how many hundreds of verses, and how many thousands of words the sutras have. We just read the remote aspects of the writing, instead of understanding the essential meaning of the thousands of verses and myriad words. We come to know the ancient sutras and texts as a result of our longing for the authentic teaching. As we long for the ancient teaching, the sutras of old come forth.

The founders of the Han and Wei dynasties in China—Emperors Gao and Tai—understood the verses of heaven and transmitted the expression of the terrestrial forms. When we clarify their words, the fundamentals of heaven, earth, and humans are understood. People who have not encountered the guidance of such virtuous leaders do not know what it is to truly serve the emperor or to truly serve their parents. They are unfortunate subjects of the Emperor and unfortunate children of their parents. As subjects or children, they miss a precious jewel and waste the passage of time. Born into such a family, they have no authority to govern, and cling to petty positions. Thus, the nation is murky, rarely known for its purity. Since we have a lowly life in such a remote land as Japan where the Tathagata’s true dharma is not heard, what is the use of clinging to this bodily life? Why do we cling to this bodily life, and to what do we devote ourselves?

Those who have a worthy and noble life should not cling to it for anything, even for the sake of dharma. This is also true for those with a lowly life. On the other hand, if those with a lowly life dedicate themselves to following the way for the sake of dharma, their life is worthier than the life of the heavenly devas, a wheel-turning king, the gods of heaven and earth, or sentient beings in the three realms.

Now, Bodhidharma, the First Chinese Ancestor, was the third son of the King of Xiangzhi in southern India. As a prince from a royal family, of noble background, he was to be respected. But in the remote land of China, people did not know how to respect him. They had no incense, flowers, royal cushions, or palace for him. Japan is an even more distant steep cliff away, where no one knows how to honor a prince from a great nation. Even if we learn the manners, we may have difficulty in mastering them. The way to honor a lord is different from the way to honor royalty; one way is less formal than the other. But here we can’t tell the difference, as we are unaware of the degrees of nobility even among ourselves. As we don’t understand the difference, we don’t know the degrees of our own nobility.

Bodhidharma was a dharma heir, twenty-eight generations from Shakyamuni Buddha. After he attained the way, his importance increased. A great sage, the most venerable one, he followed his teacher’s request to transmit dharma for saving beings and did not cling to his bodily life. In China they had not seen a buddha child, an authentic heir, nor had anyone received person-to-person transmission of the ancestral face. No one had met a buddha before Bodhidharma appeared. No buddhas other than his descendants emerged in China after that.

It is possible to meet the Buddha when the udumbara blossom is in bloom. People count the years looking forward to this. But the coming of the First Ancestor from India will never happen again. And yet those who call themselves descendants of the ancestors are like the one in the Kingdom of Chu who treasured an ordinary green stone, thinking it was jade. Unable to tell jade from stone, they think that teachers of sutras and treatises are equal to Bodhidharma. It is so because of their limited learning and shallow understanding. Those who do not recognize the authentic seed of prajna do not become descendants of the ancestral path. They wander around in the crooked paths of name and concept. How sad!

Even after the Putong Era of the Kingdom of Liang, there were monks who went to India. For what reason? It is quite stupid. Because of their unwholesome past actions, they wander around in a foreign land. Step by step they go on the crooked paths of slandering dharma. Step by step they go farther away from their parental land. What do they gain by arriving in India? They merely bear hardships traveling through mountains and waters. As they do not know the true meaning of teachings brought from India and buddha dharma transmitted eastward to China, they get lost in India.

Although they are supposed to seek for buddha dharma, they lack the right aspiration for buddha dharma, and so even in India they do not meet a true teacher, but only teachers of treatises and sutras. The reason for this is that although there are true teachers in India, seekers who lack the right mind to search for true dharma cannot find them. We have never heard of people who went to India and met true teachers. If they had done so, they would have spoken about it. But because they didn’t go, they did not speak about it.

Also, in China there have been many monks who have depended upon sutras and treatises without seeking true dharma, even after Bodhidharma came from India. Although they read sutras and treatises, they are ignorant about the meaning of them. This dark activity comes not only from today’s action but also from unwholesome actions of the past. In this lifetime they do not learn the true teaching of the Tathagata, are not illuminated by the face-to-face transmission of the Tathagata, do not actualize the buddha mind of the Tathagata, and do not listen to the wind of the house of all buddhas. It is regrettable.

There were many people like that in the Sui, Tang, and Song dynasties. But even if those who have once nurtured the seeds of prajna enter the gate unintentionally, they are freed from counting sands and become descendants of Bodhidharma. They are persons of excellent roots, the highest of the high, persons of good seeds, while those who are ignorant merely lodge forever in the huts of sutras and treatises.

Therefore, we should look up at the profound teaching that Bodhidharma brought from India without avoiding or abhorring the steep path. For what other purpose should we save our stinky skin bags?

Xiangyan said:



Hundreds of plans, thousands of means,



your body is dust in the tomb.



Don’t say white hair has no words.



It is a message from the yellow springs [realm of death].





Thus, even if you make hundreds of plans and create thousands of means to save yourselves, in the end you will turn to dust in the tomb. Furthermore, driven by a king of a small nation and his retainers, you run around east and west, with thousands of hardships and myriad sufferings of body and mind. You give your life over to loyalty, even to the extent of following your king to the grave. A future driven by worldly obligations is clouds and mists of darkness. Many people since olden times have been occupied by minor pursuits and have given up their lives. Those human lives might have been saved, as they could have become vessels of the way.

Now that you have met the true dharma, study it even if you have to give up the lives of hundreds and thousands of kalpas. Why would you give up your life for worthless petty people instead of devoting yourself to the broad and profound buddha dharma? Neither those who are wise nor those who are not should hesitate in making this decision. Think quietly. When the true dharma is not spread, you cannot meet it even if you want to give up your life for it. Wish right now for the self that meets the true dharma. Be ashamed of the self that would not offer your life for the sake of the true dharma. If there is anything to be ashamed of, it is this.

This being so, to appreciate the great gift of Bodhidharma is the continuous practice of this day. Do not look back on your bodily life. Do not cling to worldly obligations and love that put you lower than birds and beasts. Even if you cling to that love, you cannot maintain it forever. Do not hold on to the house of the family that is like trash. Even if you retreat to that place, it cannot be your ultimate abode.

The wise buddha ancestors in olden times let go of the seven types of treasure and a thousand servants, leaving behind jeweled palaces and vermilion towers. They saw these luxuries as drool and manure. These actions by the ancient buddha ancestors exemplify their kindness.

Even a sick sparrow remembered the beneficence of someone who had cared for it, and presented a jade ring that carried a prediction of an auspicious future. A captured tortoise did not forget the beneficence of someone who helped release it, and exhibited its tortoise figure in all the seals the person commissioned. How sad that some with human faces lack the virtue of these creatures!

Your ability to see buddhas and hear dharma right now is the result of the compassionate continuous practice of each buddha ancestor. Without the one-to-one transmission of buddha ancestors, how could the dharma have reached us today? You should gratefully repay the beneficence of having received one phrase, one dharma. How much more beneficent is the unsurpassed great dharma, the treasury of the true dharma eye? How could you not repay it with gratitude? You should vow to surrender to this day your lifetimes, which could be as immeasurable as the sands of the Ganges.

Your corpse of a body, which is dedicated to dharma, should be revered with bows and offerings, generation after generation. Such a corpse is what devas and dragon kings respect, guard, and admire for the obvious reason. There has been a Brahman custom for a long time in India to sell and buy skulls, because people there revere the merit of the skulls of those who have practiced dharma. If you don’t dedicate your bodily life to the way right now, the power of practicing dharma will not arrive. To fully engage without sparing your bodily life is to mature your practice of dharma. Then your skull will be revered. But who would bow to your skull if you do not dedicate yourself to the way? Who would want to sell or buy such a skull found in a field? You will be regretful when your spirit looks back to this day, if you do not dedicate yourself to the way.

A demon beat the bones of his own corpse for his unwholesome past actions, and a deva bowed to his own skeleton for his wholesome past actions. Thinking upon the time when your body will turn to dust or mud, you should care about the future generations without self-concern. Then, those who see your remains will be moved to tears. Even if you turn to dust or mud, leaving a skull that people might want to avoid, you will be very fortunate if you engage in continuous practice of the true buddha dharma.

Thus, do not fear the suffering from cold. Suffering from cold has never crushed the way. Only be concerned about not practicing. Lack of practice leaves a person divided and hinders the way. Do not be put off by the suffering from heat. Suffering from heat has never crushed the way. Only be concerned about not practicing. Lack of practice leaves a person divided and hinders the way.

The Buddha accepted an offering of barley for horses as food for himself. Sages of olden times lived on bracken in the mountains. These are excellent examples for both buddhas and laity. Do not be like a demon looking for blood or milk. A day of fully engaged activity is the continuous practice of all buddhas.





Huike, who would later become Great Master Zhengzong Pujue, the Second Ancestor of China, was admired even by gods and demons. He was a teacher of high virtue, a broad-minded person, respected equally by monks and laypeople.

He lived long in the capital city of Luoyang and read widely. Such a person is rarely encountered. His understanding was high and his virtue weighty.

One day a spirit appeared in his dream and said to Huike, “This is not a place to stay if you want to harvest the fruit. The great road is not far away. You should go south.”

The next day he had a piercing headache and asked his teacher, Zen Master Baojing of Mount Xiang near Luoyang, to help relieve it. Then a voice from the sky was heard, “This is not a usual headache. Your bones are being replaced.”

Huike told Baojing about his dream. Taking a look at his head, which had the appearance of five peaks sticking out, Baojing said, “You have an auspicious appearance, which shows that you are destined to have realization. The spirit’s message for you to go south must mean that Bodhidharma, the great practitioner of the Shaolin Temple, is your teacher.”

The spirit who had spoken to Huike was the guardian deity for his endless practice of the way.

Following Baojing’s instruction, Huike went to see Bodhidharma at Shaoshi Peak. It was a severely cold winter night, said to be the ninth day of the twelfth month. Even without heavy rain or snow, on such a winter night in the deep mountains it would be impossible for a person to stand outdoors. It was a horrendous season when bamboo cracked. A great snow covered the entire mountain. Huike searched in the snow for a trail. Who knows the extent of his hardship?

Finally Huike reached Bodhidharma’s dwelling, but was not allowed to enter. Bodhidharma did not turn around. Throughout the night Huike did not sleep, sit, or rest. He stood firmly until dawn. The night snow seemed to have no mercy, piling higher and burying him up to his waist. Every drop of his tears froze. Seeing his frozen tears, he shed even more tears. Looking at his own body, he thought to himself, “A seeker in the past crushed his bones, extracted his marrow, and squeezed his blood to feed the starving people. Another seeker laid down his hair on the muddy road to let the Buddha pass. Another threw his body off the cliff to feed a tiger. They were like that. Then who am I?” Thus, his aspiration became stronger.

Those who study nowadays should not forget Huike’s words They were like that. Then who am I? If we forget, we will drown for numberless kalpas. Thus, Huike addressed himself in this way, strengthening his aspiration for dharma. He did not mind being covered by snow. When we imagine the hair-raising ordeal of that long night, we are struck with terror.

At dawn Bodhidharma took notice and asked, “What do you seek? Why have you stood in the snow for so long?”

Shedding more tears, Huike said, “All I wish is that you compassionately open the gate of sweet dew in order to awaken many beings.”

Bodhidharma said, “The unsurpassed, inconceivable way of all buddhas must be practiced hard and consistently for vast kalpas. You must bear what is unbearable. But if you wish with small virtue, small wisdom, and casual, arrogant mind for the true vehicle, you will toil in vain.”

Then Huike was encouraged. Unnoticed by Bodhidharma, he took a sharp knife, cut off his left arm, and offered it to him.

Bodhidharma knew then that Huike was a dharma vessel, and said, “When buddhas first seek the way, they give up bodily form for the sake of dharma. Now that I see your determination, you are invited to pursue the way here.”

Thus, Huike entered Bodhidharma’s inner chamber, attending to him with great diligence for eight years. Huike was indeed an example and a great guide for humans and devas to follow. Such great diligence had not been heard of either in India or China. When it comes to “smiling,” you should study Mahakashyapa. And when it comes to attaining the marrow, you should study Huike.

Reflecting quietly, we know that even if Bodhidharma had come from India thousands of times, without the continuous practice of Huike there would not be a great number of students and practitioners today. Now, as we see and hear the true dharma, we should express our gratitude to Huike. Most ways of expressing gratitude may miss the mark. Giving up the life of your body is not enough. A castle is not solid enough, as it can be taken by others or given away to a family. The life of the body can be given to impermanence, a lord, or a crooked way. Therefore, none of these are suitable offerings. Continuous practice, day after day, is the most appropriate way of expressing gratitude.

This means that you practice continuously, without wasting a single day of your life, without using it for your own sake. Why is it so? Your life is a fortunate outcome of continuous practice from the past. You should express your gratitude immediately. How sad and shameful to waste this body, which has benefited from the continuous practice of buddha ancestors, by becoming a slave of family, and surrendering to their vanities, without noticing the fall! Or, the body may be mistakenly given to that horrendous robber, the demon of fame and gain.

If ever you value fame and gain, then be compassionate to fame and gain. If you are compassionate to fame and gain, you will not allow them to break the body that can become a buddha ancestor. Being compassionate to family and relatives is also like this. Do not think that fame and gain are phantoms and illusions, but regard them as sentient beings. If you are not compassionate to fame and gain, you will accumulate unwholesome actions. The true eye of study should be like this.

Thoughtful people in the world express gratitude for receiving gold, silver, or rare treasures. They also express gratitude for receiving kind words. Who can forget the great gift of seeing and hearing the Tathagata’s unsurpassable true dharma, being aware that this is itself a rare treasure of a lifetime? The bones and skulls of those who did not turn back from this continuous practice are enshrined in seven-treasure pagodas, receiving respect and offerings by humans and devas. When you become aware of such a great gift, you should attentively repay the mountain of benevolence, without allowing your life to disappear like a dewdrop on the grass. This is continuous practice. The power of this practice is that you yourself practice as an ancestral buddha.

The First and Second Chinese Ancestors did not found monasteries, so they were not occupied by grass cutting. Nor did the Third and Fourth Ancestors. Thus they remained free of administrative duties. The Fifth and Sixth Ancestors did not build their own monasteries. Neither did Qingyuan nor Nanyue.





Shitou did zazen on a large rock where he had a thatched hut. He sat continuously without sleeping day and night. Although he did not ignore work, he did not fail to do zazen throughout the day. Nowadays the descendants of his teacher Qingyuan are spread throughout China, benefiting humans and devas. This is due to the great determination and solid, continuous practice of Shitou. The current Yunmen and Fayan lines are also descended from Shitou.





When Daoxin, who would later become Zen Master Dayi, the Fourth Chinese Ancestor, was fourteen, he met Sengcan, the Third Chinese Ancestor, and then labored for nine years. After inheriting the authentic teaching of buddha ancestors, Daoxin kept his mind gathered and did not sleep with his side on the mat for almost sixty years. In his guidance he did not discriminate between enemies and friends, so his virtue prevailed among humans and devas.

In the sixteenth year of the Zhenguan Era [642], Emperor Tai, in admiration of Daoxin’s flavor of the way, invited him to the capital, wishing to test the hue of his dharma. Daoxin respectfully declined three times, claiming ill health. At the fourth summons, the Emperor ordered the messenger to cut off Daoxin’s head if he declined again. The messenger saw Daoxin and relayed the imperial order to him. With complete composure Daoxin stretched out his neck and made ready for the sword. Extremely impressed, the messenger went back to the capital and wrote a report to the Emperor, who admired Daoxin even more. He expressed his appreciation by sending Daoxin a gift of rare silk.

Thus, the continuous practice of Daoxin, who was not attached to his bodily life as bodily life and tried to avoid becoming intimate with kings and ministers, is something rarely encountered in a thousand years. Because Emperor Tai was a just king, Daoxin had nothing against him. The Emperor admired Daoxin because he did not spare his own bodily life and was willing to die. Daoxin focused on his continuous practice, not without reason but with respect for the passage of time. Compared with the current tendency in this declining age when many people try to find favor with the emperors, Daoxin’s refusal of the three imperial requests is remarkable.

On the fourth day, the intercalary ninth month, the second year of the Yonghui Era [651] during the reign of Emperor Gao, Daoxin gave instruction to his students, saying, “All things are liberated. You should guard your mind and teach future generations.”

After saying this, he sat at ease and passed away. He was seventy-two years old. A stupa was built for him on the mountain. On the eighth day of the fourth month of the following year, the door to the stupa opened of itself, and inside it, his body looked as if he were alive. After that his students kept the door open.

Know Daoxin’s words: All things are liberated. It is not merely that all things are empty or all things are all things, but that all things are liberated. Daoxin had continuous practice before and after entering the stupa. To assume that all living beings die is a narrow view. To assume that the dead do not perceive is a limited idea. Do not follow these views when you study the way. There may be those who go beyond death. There may be dead people who perceive.





Xuansha, who would later become Great Master Zongyi, was from Min Prefecture, Fu Region. His family name was Xie and his dharma name was Shibei. He was fond of dropping a fishing line ever since he was little. Later he supported himself by fishing from a tiny boat on the River Nantai. At the beginning of the Xiantong Era [860–874] of the Tang Dynasty, when he was thirty, he had an urge to leave the dusty world. So he gave up his boat, went to see Furong, Zen Master Lingxun, and dropped his hair. He received the monk precepts from Precept Master Daoxuan of the Kaiyuan Monastery in Jiangnan. He wore a simple cotton robe and straw sandals, ate barely enough to sustain life, and sat zazen all day long. People thought him extraordinary.

Xuansha was originally a dharma brother of Xuefeng Yicun, but studied with him closely as a student. Xuefeng called him Ascetic Bei [Shibei] because of his rigorous practice.

One day Xuefeng asked, “Where is Ascetic Bei heading?”

Xuansha said, “He is not misleading anyone.”

Later, Xuefeng called Xuansha and asked, “Why doesn’t Ascetic Bei travel all around to study?”

Xuansha said, “Bodhidharma didn’t come to China. The Second Ancestor didn’t go to India.”

Xuefeng approved his words.

When Xuefeng became abbot on Mount Xianggu, later called Mount Xuefeng, Xuansha accompanied him as his assistant. Because of their collaboration, many excellent students assembled in the monastery. Xuansha continued to enter the abbot’s room to receive guidance from before dawn till late at night. Students who lacked decisive understanding would ask Xuansha to go with them to see Xuefeng. Sometimes Xuefeng would say to them, “Why don’t you ask Ascetic Bei?” As caring as Xuefeng, Xuansha would not hesitate to respond to Xuefeng’s request.

Without Xuansha’s outstanding continuous practice, such dedication would not have been possible. The continuous practice of sitting zazen all day long is rare. While there are many who run around after sound and form, there are few who sit zazen all day long. Those of you who come later should fear wasting your remaining time and endeavor to sit zazen the whole day.





Changqing, Priest Huileng, was a revered teacher under Xuefeng. He visited and practiced with Xuefeng and Xuansha for almost twenty-nine years. During this time he wore out twenty sitting mats. Those who love zazen nowadays regard Changqing as an excellent ancient example. There are many who long for him but few who measure up to him. His three-decade endeavor was not without results; he suddenly had great awakening when he was rolling up a bamboo shade.

He did not go back to his hometown to see his relations or chat with his fellow students for thirty years. He practiced single-mindedly and continuously, questioning over and over without negligence. What a sharp capacity! What a great root! We learn from sutras about those who have solid determination. But those of you who seek what should be sought and are ashamed of what should be ashamed of need to encounter Changqing. Unfortunately, there are many who do not have way-seeking mind, are poor in conduct, and are bound by fame and gain.





Guishan, who would later become Zen Master Dayuan, went to the steep and rocky Mount Gui immediately after receiving a confirmation of enlightenment from Baizhang. He mingled with birds and beasts, assembled a thatched hut, and tempered his practice. While living on acorns and chestnuts, he was not intimidated by storms or snow. Without temple or property, he actualized continuous practice for forty years. Later this place became a monastery renowned throughout China, where excellent practitioners like dragons and elephants came to follow in his footsteps.

If you vow to establish a temple, do not be swayed by human concerns, but maintain the strict continuous practice of buddha dharma. Where the practice is tempered, even without a [monks’] hall, is a place of enlightenment of old buddhas. The teaching given outdoors under a tree may be heard afar. Such a place can be a sacred domain for a long time. Indeed, the continuous practice of one person will merge with the place of the way of all buddhas.

Foolish people in this declining age are consumed with erecting magnificent temple buildings. Buddha ancestors have never wished for such temple buildings. You uselessly decorate the halls before you clarify your own eye. Rather than making offerings to buddhas, you are turning the house of all buddhas into a pitfall of fame and gain. Quietly ponder the continuous practice of the ancient Guishan. In order to do this, identify yourself with Guishan.

The sobbing rain of deep night pierces moss and pierces rock. On a snowy night of winter when even animals are rarely seen, how could the aromas from people’s houses reach you? This kind of search is impossible without the continuous practice of taking your own life lightly and regarding dharma as precious. Without cutting grass or moving earth and lumber, Guishan was fully engaged in tempering practice of the way.

What a deep feeling we have for him! With what great determination the hardship was endured by the authentic heir transmitting the true dharma on the steep mountain! It is said about Mount Gui that there is a pond and a brook where ice accumulates and fog becomes dense. It is not an inviting place for retreat, but it is where Guishan’s practice of the buddha way and the depth of the mountains were merged and renewed.

Continuous practice is not something we should take casually. If we do not repay the gift of the hardship of Guishan’s continuous practice, how can we, who aspire to study, identify with him as if he were sitting in front of us? Due to the power and the guiding merit of his continuous practice, the wheel of air [a layer upon which the world is settled] is not upset, the world is not broken, the palace of devas is calm, and human lands are maintained.

Although we are not direct descendants of Guishan, he is an ancestor of the teaching. Later, Yangshan went to study and attend him. Yangshan, who had studied with Baizhang, was like Shariputra, who gave one hundred answers to ten questions. Attending Guishan, he spent three years watching over a buffalo. This kind of continuous practice has been cut off and not seen in recent years. Such a statement by Yangshan as “spending three years watching over a buffalo” cannot otherwise be heard.





Ancestor Daokai of Mount Furong is a true source of actualizing continuous practice. Offered a purple robe and the title of Zen Master Dingzhao by the Emperor, he did not accept them. His letter declining them upset the Emperor, but Daokai persisted in refusing these honors. When he had a hut on Mount Furong, hundreds of monks and laypeople gathered there. The flavor of his one daily bowl of watery gruel, which drove most of them away, is still talked about.

Once, Daokai vowed never to go to a feast and said to the assembly:



Home leavers should not avoid hardship. Seeking freedom from birth and death, rest your mind, stop worrying, and cut off dependence on relations. That’s why you are called home leavers. How can you receive luxurious offerings and be immersed in ordinary life? You should cast off this, that, and everything in between. Regard whatever you see and hear as a flower planted on a rock. When you encounter fame and gain, regard them as a dust mote in your eye.



It is not that fame and gain haven’t been experienced or known from beginningless time; rather they are like the head that cannot help seeing the tail. Why should you struggle and long for them? If you don’t stop longing now, when will you? Thus, the ancient sages teach you to let go right at this very moment. If you do so, what will remain? If you attain calmness of mind, buddha ancestors will be like something extra and all the things in the world will be inevitably flameless and plain. Only then can you merge with the place of suchness.



Don’t you see? Yinshan [Longshan] did not see anyone throughout his life. Zhaozhou did not speak one phrase throughout his life. Biandan picked acorns for his meals. Fachang made a robe of lotus leaves. Ascetic Zhiyi only wore paper. Senior Monk Xuantai only wore cotton. Shishuang Qingzhu built a hall and practiced with the assembly of those who sat like dead trees [without lying down]. What you need to do is let your mind perish.



Touzi Datong asked his students to wash the rice that he cooked together with them. Thus, what you need to do is to minimize your concerns. This is how the ancient sages encouraged themselves. Had they not thought their practices worthwhile, they would not have simplified their daily activities. Practitioners, if you have realization with your whole body, you will be a person of no lack. If you don’t hit the mark, you will waste your effort.





Daokai continued:





I have become head of this monastery in spite of having achieved nothing worth mentioning. How can I sit on this seat and neglect the trust of the ancient sages? I want to follow the example of the teachers of old who were abbots of monasteries. After consulting with all of you, I have decided not to go out of the monastery, attend feasts, or ask for donations. We will divide one year’s harvest from our fields into three-hundred-sixty-day portions and use them accordingly. But we will not reduce the number of monks in the assembly. When there is enough rice, we will cook rice. When there is not enough, we will make gruel by adding water. When there is less rice, we will make watery gruel. When we accept new monks, we will serve tea that is nothing special. Tea will be made ready in the tea room for all to serve themselves. We will do only what is essential, eliminating all the rest, in order to concentrate on the endeavor of the way.



Here, the livelihood is complete and the landscape is not dull. Flowers smile and birds sing. Wooden horses whine and stone oxen run. Green mountains far away are faint and spring water nearby is soundless. Monkeys on the mountain ridges chatter and dewdrops wet the midnight moon. Cranes caw in the forests and the winds swirl around the dawn pines. When spring wind rises, a dead tree roars like a dragon. At the time of falling leaves, the shivering forest scatters blossoms. The jewel steps delineate moss patterns. Human faces take on shades of mist. Sounds are serene. Remote from worldly affairs, this one taste is subtle—nothing in particular.



Today I am supposed to present the gate of the house to all of you. This is already off the track. Even so, I go on lecturing and giving instructions in the abbot’s room. I take up a mallet and swing a whisk. I shout to the east and strike the west. My face grimaces as if I were having a seizure. I feel as if I were belittling you students and betraying the ancient sages.



Don’t you see? Bodhidharma came from India, got to the foot of Shaoshi Peak, and faced the wall for nine years. Huike stood in the snow and cut off his arm. What hardship! Bodhidharma did not say a word and Huike did not ask a question. But can you call Bodhidharma a person of not doing? Can you regard Huike as not seeking a master? Whenever I speak about examples of ancient sages, I feel there is no place to hide. I am ashamed that we who come later are so soft and weak.



These days, people make offerings of a hundred flavors to others and say, “As I have fulfilled the four types of offerings to monks, I feel ready to arouse the aspiration for enlightenment.” But I fear that such people do not know how to move their hands and legs, and will be separated from the reality of birth and death of the world. Time flies like an arrow and their regret may be deep.



There are times when others have awakened me with their merit. But I am not forcing you to follow my advice. Have you seen this verse by a teacher of old?





Rice without millet from fields in the mountains,



yellow pickled vegetables—



eat as you like.



Otherwise, leave it to east and west.



Please, fellow travelers, each of you make an effort.



Take care.





These words of Daokai are the bones and marrow of the ancestral school, transmitted person to person. Although there are many examples of Daokai’s continuous practice, I am only presenting this talk. Those of us who come after Daokai should long for and study the continuous practice he tempered on Mount Furong. It was the genuine form and spirit of Shakyamuni Buddha at Jeta Grove.





Mazu, who would later become Zen Master Daji of the Kaiyuan Monastery, Hong Region, Jiangxi, was from Shifang Prefecture, Han Region. His priest name is Daoyi. He studied with Nanyue and was his attendant for over ten years. Once he was about to visit his hometown and got halfway there but turned around and went back to the monastery. When he returned, he offered incense and bowed to Nanyue, who wrote a verse for him:



Let me advise you not to go home.



At home the way is not practiced.



Old women in the neighborhood



would call you by your childhood name.



Respectfully receiving these dharma words, Mazu made a vow not to go in the direction of Han Region in this or any other lifetime. Not taking one step closer to his old home, Mazu stayed in Jiangxi and traveled all over the region. Other than speaking of “Mind itself is buddha,” he did not give any words of guidance. However, he was an authentic heir of Nanyue, a life vein for humans and devas.

What is the meaning of not to go home? How does one not go home? Returning to east, west, south, or north is no more than the falling and rising of the self. Indeed, the way is not practiced by going home. Practice continuously, examining whether the way is practiced or not, either by going home or not going home. Why is the way not practiced by going home? Is the way hindered by not practicing? Is it hindered by the self?

Nanyue did not say, “Old women in the neighborhood might call you by your childhood name.” But he did say, Old women in the neighborhood would call you by your childhood name. Why did he say so? Why did Mazu accept these dharma words? Because when you go south, the earth goes south. Other directions are also like this. It is a narrow view to deny this point by seeing Mount Sumeru or the great ocean as merely large and separate from you, or to miss this point by using the sun, the moon, and stars as a measure for comparison.





Hongren, who would later become the Fifth Chinese Ancestor, Zen Master Daman, was a man from Huangmei. His lay name was Zhou, after his mother’s family. Like Laozi [Lao-tzu], he was born without a father. From age seven, when he received transmission of dharma, until age seventy-four, he maintained the treasury of the true dharma eye of buddha ancestors. During this time he discreetly entrusted the robe of dharma to Laborer Huineng [the Sixth Ancestor]. Hongren’s was an incomparable continuous practice. Because he did not bring forth the robe of dharma for [his most learned student] Senior Monk Shenxiu but entrusted it to Laborer Huineng, the life of the true dharma has not been cut off.





Rujing, my late master, Priest Tiantong, was from Yue. At age nineteen he abandoned scriptural studies and engaged in practice, and he did not turn around even at age seventy. When offered a purple robe with the title of master from the Emperor Ning in the Jiading Era [1208–1224], he sent a letter politely declining it. Monks in the ten directions respected him for his action and those, both near and far, who were knowledgeable rejoiced over it. The Emperor was extremely impressed and sent him an offering of tea. Those who heard of this admired it as something rare at the time. Rujing’s action is indeed a genuine continuous practice.

I say this because loving fame is worse than breaking a precept. Breaking a precept is a transgression at a particular time. Loving fame is like an ailment of a lifetime. Do not foolishly hold on to fame, or do not ignorantly accept it. Not to accept fame is continuous practice. To abandon it is continuous practice.

The titles of master for the first six ancestors were all given posthumously by emperors. These ancestors did not receive their titles out of love of fame. Likewise, you should give up love of fame within birth and death, and simply wish for the continuous practice of buddha ancestors. Do not be like devouring creatures. To greedily love the self, which is of slight significance, doesn’t take you above the level of creatures and beasts. To abandon fame and gain is rare for humans and devas, but all buddha ancestors have done so.

Some say, “I seek fame and love gain for the benefit of sentient beings.” This is a greatly mistaken view held by heretics within the buddha dharma, as well as by a troop of demons who slander the true dharma. Does this view mean that the buddha ancestors who do not seek fame and gain are unable to benefit sentient beings? What a laugh! What a laugh! Not-seeking can benefit beings. How is it so? Those who, without understanding this, promote what is not beneficial as beneficial are a troop of demons. Sentient beings helped by such demons are bound for hell. Such demons should deplore that their lives are in darkness. Do not regard such ignorant ones as beneficent beings.

Thus, declining the offer of a title of master has been an excellent custom since olden times. This is something that those of us in later generations should fully understand. To see Rujing in person was to meet that person.

Leaving home at nineteen, looking for a teacher, Rujing engaged in the endeavor of the way, without retreating or turning around. Until the age of sixty-five he still had not become close to or even seen an emperor, nor become intimate with ministers or government officials. Not only did he not accept a purple robe, he did not wear any brocade throughout his life. He only wore a black kashaya and a combined robe for formal talks and for giving instruction in the abbot’s room.

Instructing the monks, Rujing said:



For the practice of Zen in pursuit of the way, maintaining the mind of the way is primary. It is deplorable that the ancestral way has declined in the last two hundred years. There have been few skin bags who have expressed a phrase of understanding.



At the time when I hung my walking staff at Mount Jing, Fuzhao Deguang was abbot. He said in his dharma talk, “Studying buddha dharma, the path of Zen, you should not look for phrases by others. Each of you should have your own understanding.” Thus, he did not oversee the monks’ hall and did not guide the many monks who were studying there. Instead, he spent his time entertaining visiting dignitaries. Not understanding the working of buddha dharma, he was simply greedy for name and loved gain.



If it were enough to merely have our own understanding of buddha dharma, why have there always been determined old gimlets who traveled around looking for teachers? Indeed, Deguang had not yet mastered Zen. Nowadays, the elders of monasteries in various places are just like Deguang with their lack of way-seeking mind. How can they hold buddha dharma in their hands? It is regrettable, indeed!



Although Rujing said this to the assembly that included many of Deguang’s students, none of them were resentful.

Rujing also said, “To practice Zen is to drop away body and mind. You can actualize it by just sitting, without relying on burning incense, bowing, chanting Buddha’s name, repentance, or reading sutras.”

In Song China, there are a great many skin bags, not merely hundreds, who regard themselves as Zen practitioners, calling themselves descendants of the ancestral school. But those who encourage just sitting as just sitting are rarely heard of. Within the country of Four Seas and Five Lakes [China], Rujing was the only one. Elders all over admired him, even though he did not admire them. But there are also leaders of large temples who do not know of him. Although born in China, they are like a herd of beasts. They have not studied what they should have studied, while merely wasting the passage of time. What a pity! Those who do not know about Rujing mistakenly regard idle chatter and confused talk as the teaching style of buddha ancestors.

Rujing sometimes said in his talk in the dharma hall:



Since I was nineteen, I have visited monasteries all over but have not met teachers to guide humans. Since then, I have not spent even one day or night without covering a zazen cushion. Since I became abbot, I have not chatted with people from my hometown. This is because I feel urgent about the passing of time. I have always stayed in the building where I hung my walking stick, without going to visit other huts or dormitories of the monastery. How could I spend time enjoying the mountainside or admiring waterscapes?



I have been doing zazen not only in the monks’ hall and other communal places, but also alone in quiet towers and screened-in places. I always carry a cushion so I can sit at the foot of a rock. My hope has been to thoroughly penetrate the diamond seat. Sometimes my buttocks get raw, but still I sit harder.



I am now sixty-five. Although my bones are aged and my head is dull, I don’t yet understand zazen. But, because I care about my fellow practitioners in the ten directions, I live in this monastery and transmit the way to the assembly, beginning with dawn instruction. I do this because I wonder, where is the buddha dharma among the elders of other places?



He spoke in this way on a teaching seat. Also, Rujing would not accept gifts from monks who arrived from other places.

Superintendent Zhao, a grandson of Emperor Ning, who was a commanding military officer and agricultural administrator of Ming Region, invited Rujing to the capital to give a dharma talk. At that time Zhao presented ten thousand silver coins to him. Rujing thanked him and said, “I have come to give a customary lecture on the treasury of the true dharma eye, wondrous heart of nirvana. I am dedicating the merit to the well-being of your late father. But I will not accept the silver coins. Monks have no need of these things. I greatly appreciate your kindness, but as usual I must decline your offer.”

Zhao said, “Master, as a relative of His Imperial Majesty, I am respected everywhere and I have wealth. On this memorial day of my late father I would like to give him support in another world. Why can’t you accept my offering? I feel greatly fortunate to have you here today. With your great compassion and great kindness, please accept my humble gift.”

Rujing said, “Your Excellency, your request cannot be refused. But I have a question. When I expounded dharma, did you understand it?”

Zhao said, “I was simply delighted to hear it.”

Rujing said, “You are brilliantly illuminating my words. I am honored. I just wish for the happiness of your late father, who was invoked today. Please explain to me what I said in my discourse. If you can, I will accept the silver. If you cannot, then please keep it for yourself.”

Zhao said, “When I think about it, your composure and movement were excellent.”

Rujing said, “That’s what I did. How about what you heard?”

Zhao hesitated.

Rujing said, “Your late father’s happiness is already fulfilled. Your gift should be left to his decision.” Thus he bade farewell.

Zhao said, “I regret that you did not accept my offering. But I rejoice in seeing you.” So saying, Zhao saw Rujing off.

Monks and laity on both sides of the Zhe River [Zhejiang Province] admired Rujing. This was recorded in the journal of Attendant Monk Ping, who said, “An old master like this is hard to meet. Where else could we possibly find someone so accomplished?”

Who in any direction would decline the offering of ten thousand blocks of silver? A teacher of old said, “Gold, silver, and jewels should be regarded as excrement. Even if you see them as gold and silver, it is customary for monks not to accept them.” Rujing followed this teaching; others did not. He would often say, “In the past three hundred years there have been few teachers like myself. Therefore, it is imperative that you practice diligently with me in the endeavor of the way.”

In his assembly there was someone called Daosheng from Mian Region in Shu, who was a Daoist. A party of five practitioners including him made a vow: “We will master the great way of buddha ancestors in our lifetime. We will not go back to our hometowns until we do.”

Rujing was delighted with their vow and allowed them to join walking and sitting meditation with the assembly. In the order of seating, he placed them right after the nuns [presumably a low-status position]. It was rare for Daoists to practice in a Zen monastery like this.

Also, a monk called Shanru from Fu Region made a vow: “I will not take a step toward my home in the south, but will single-mindedly study the great way of buddha ancestors.” I personally witnessed many students like this in Rujing’s assembly. There are few like them in the assemblies of other masters. The continuous practice at Rujing’s assembly was outstanding amongst monks of Great Song China. Those who do not aspire to practice as they did should be sorrowful. Even when we meet the buddha dharma, we don’t necessarily respond to it. How much less fortunate is our body and mind if we don’t meet the buddha dharma at all!

Think quietly. Life does not last long. To realize even a few lines of the buddha ancestors’ words is to realize the buddha ancestors. How is this so? Since buddha ancestors are body and mind as one, one phrase or two are the buddha ancestors’ warm body-mind. Their body-mind comes forth and realizes your body-mind. At the very moment of realization, this realization comes forth and realizes your body-mind. This life realizes the life of many lifetimes. By becoming a buddha and becoming an ancestor, you go beyond buddha and go beyond ancestor.





Accounts of continuous practice are like this. Do not run around after fame and gain in the realm of sound and form. Not to run around is the continuous practice that has been transmitted person to person by buddha ancestors. Mature hermits, beginning hermits, one person, or half a person, I ask you to throw away myriad matters and conditions, and to continuously practice the continuous practice of buddha ancestors.



Written at the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery, on the fifth day, the fourth month, the third year of the Ninji Era [1243].





