33



CONFIRMATION



THE GREAT WAY uniquely transmitted by buddhas and ancestors is confirmation. Those who have not studied buddhas and ancestors have never dreamed of it.

At the time of confirmation, even those who have not aroused the aspiration for enlightenment are confirmed. Those with no buddha nature are confirmed; those with buddha nature are confirmed. Body is confirmed, no-body is confirmed. All buddhas are confirmed. All buddhas maintain the confirmation of all buddhas.

Do not assume that you become a buddha after attaining confirmation; do not suppose that you attain confirmation after becoming a buddha. At the time of confirmation there is becoming a buddha; at the time of confirmation there is practice.

Accordingly, all buddhas have confirmation; buddhas going beyond buddhas have confirmation. The self is confirmed. Body and mind are confirmed. When you complete study and fully understand confirmation, you fulfill your study and fully understand the buddha way.

Before having the body, there is confirmation. After having the body, there is confirmation. There is confirmation that is recognized by the self, and there is confirmation that is not recognized by the self. There is confirmation recognized by others, and there is confirmation not recognized by others.

Know that confirmation actualizes the self. Confirmation is the self of actualization. Thus, what has been directly transmitted between buddha and buddha, between ancestor and ancestor, is none other than confirmation. There is not a single thing that is not confirmation. How can it be otherwise for mountains, rivers, earth, Mount Sumeru, or great oceans? There is not one, or a half of the third child of Zhang, or the fourth child of Li [an ordinary person] who is without confirmation.

Confirmation studied thoroughly in this way is speaking one phrase, hearing one phrase; beyond understanding of one phrase, understanding of one phrase; practicing and discoursing. Confirmation causes walking backward, walking forward. Sitting and wearing a robe at this moment could not be actualized without authentic confirmation. Because actualizing is putting the robe on your head and joining your palms together, actualizing is confirmation.





The Buddha said:



There are many kinds of confirmation. Briefly speaking, there are eight kinds: confirmation known to oneself but not to others; confirmation known to everyone but not to oneself; confirmation known to oneself and everyone; confirmation not known to oneself or to anyone else; confirmation recognized by those who are nearby but not by those who are distant; confirmation recognized by those distant but not by those nearby; confirmation recognized by both those nearby and those distant; and confirmation recognized by neither those nearby nor those distant.



Thus, do not think that confirmation is only known to the spirit of this present skin-bag body. Do not say that a person who is not enlightened should not be easily confirmed. It is usually thought in the world that a person is confirmed when the merit of the practice is complete and becoming a buddha is determined; but it is not so in the buddha way. Following a master and hearing one phrase, or following a sutra and learning one phrase, is itself attaining confirmation, because it is the original practice of all buddhas and because it is a wholesome root of a hundred grasses.

When confirmation is expressed, those who attain confirmation are all people in the ultimate realm. Know that even one particle of dust is unsurpassable; even one particle of dust is going beyond itself. How could confirmation not be one particle of dust? How could confirmation not be one thing? How could confirmation not be myriad things? How could confirmation not be practice and enlightenment? How could confirmation not be buddhas and ancestors? How could confirmation not be pursuit and endeavor of the way? How could confirmation not be great enlightenment and great delusion?

Confirmation is “When my essential teaching reaches you, it will vigorously rise in the world.” Confirmation is “You are like this; I am like this.” Confirmation is a guidepost. Confirmation is beyond your knowledge. Confirmation is the face breaking into a smile. Confirmation is the coming and going of birth and death.

Confirmation is the entire world of the ten directions. Confirmation is “The whole world is not hidden.”





Xuansha, who would later be Great Master Zongyi, once accompanied Xuefeng. Xuefeng pointed to the ground in front of him and said, “This piece of rice field would be a good spot for a seamless tower.”

Xuansha said, “How high would it be?”

Xuefeng just looked up and down.

Xuansha said, “You do not lack the meritorious reward of human and heavenly beings. However, master, you have not dreamed of the confirmation on Vulture Peak.”

Xuefeng said, “How about you?”

Xuansha said, “Seven or eight feet.”

Xuansha’s words However, master, you have not dreamed of the confirmation on Vulture Peak do not mean that Xuefeng was not confirmed on Vulture Peak, nor do they mean that Xuefeng was confirmed on Vulture Peak. It means that Xuefeng has not dreamed of the confirmation on Vulture Peak.

The confirmation on Vulture Peak is said from a lofty perspective. It is “I have the treasury of the true dharma eye, the wondrous heart of nirvana. I now entrust it to Mahakashyapa.”





Know that in the simultaneous practice of the moment when Qingyuan confirms Shitou, Mahakashyapa is also comfirmed by Qingyuan. Qingyuan also gives Shakyamuni confirmation. So, it is clear that for each buddha and ancestor there is entrustment of the treasury of the true dharma eye.

In this way Huineng confirmed Qingyuan. When Qingyuan is confirmed by Huineng, Qingyuan becomes Qingyuan by this confirmation. At this moment, the practice of Huineng and other ancestors is directly actualized and realized by Qingyuan’s confirmation. This is called “One hundred grasses are bright and clear, buddha ancestors’ minds are bright and clear.” This being so, how can buddha ancestors not be one hundred grasses? How can one hundred grasses not be you or myself?

Do not stupidly assume that what you have is always known to you, or seen by you. It is not so. Things you know are not necessarily your possessions. Your possessions are not necessarily what you see or what you know. Therefore, do not consider that whatever diverges from your knowledge or thought is not your possession. In particular, confirmation on Vulture Peak means Shakyamuni Buddha’s confirmation. This confirmation has been confirmed to Shakyamuni Buddha by Shakyamuni Buddha. Someone who is not in accord with this way is not confirmed.

There is no hindrance in confirming someone who is already confirmed, and nothing extra is added in confirming someone who has not been confirmed. Having nothing lacking or extra is the way all buddha ancestors are confirmed by all buddha ancestors.





In this regard, an ancient buddha said:



From olden times to now, raising the whisk clarifies east and west.



The great meaning is subtle and not easy to grasp.



Without a teacher transmitting it,



what profound words can you see?



In studying Xuansha’s asking the height of the seamless tower, there needs to be an answer to, How high would it be? It was not five hundred or eighty thousand yojana. Nor did it exclude looking up and down.

Xuansha said, You do not lack the meritorious reward of human and heavenly beings. But showing the height of the seamless tower by looking up and down is not Shakyamuni Buddha’s confirmation. To attain Shakyamuni Buddha’s confirmation is to say, Seven or eight feet. To examine Shakyamuni Buddha’s true confirmation is accomplished by the words Seven or eight feet.

Whether the words Seven or eight feet are right or not, confirmation was accomplished by Xuefeng, and confirmation was accomplished by Xuansha. Still further, you should bring up the confirmation and speak of the height of the seamless tower. To speak about buddha dharma by bringing up what is not confirmation is not true expression.

When the self understands, hears, and speaks the true self, invariably the fundamental point is actualized by confirmation. Confirmation itself brings forth the effort that is manifested simultaneously with confirmation. In order to fully actualize confirmation, countless buddhas and ancestors have realized authentic awakening. The power realized by confirmation brings forth all buddhas. For this reason it is said, “Only because of one great matter [all buddhas] appear.” The meaning is that, while going beyond, no-self never fails to attain confirmation of no-self. In this way, all buddhas attain confirmation of all buddhas.

Now, confirmation is given and accepted by raising one hand, raising two hands, raising one thousand hands and eyes. Confirmation is actualized by taking up an udumbara blossom or a brocade robe. These are not forced but are natural activities of confirmation. There is confirmation attained from inside, confirmation attained from outside. For thoroughly studying the meaning of inside and outside, study about confirmation. Study of the way of confirmation is one rod of iron ten thousand miles long. Sitting like a rock in confirmation is one moment that is myriad years.





An ancient buddha said, “Successively attaining buddhahood, [buddhas] continuing to confirm.”

Attaining buddhahood spoken of here is always successively. As part of successively you attain buddhahood. Confirmation turns this attaining buddhahood. This turning keeps on continuously, moving on to the next turning. It continues happening. This happening is making. This making is not the making of a limited body, a limited situation, a limited thought, or a limited mind.

Thoroughly investigate making or not making a situation in terms of turning. Thoroughly investigate making or not making in terms of turning.

All buddhas and ancestors who appear now are turned by making. The coming of the five buddhas and six ancestors from India has been turned by making.

Furthermore, drawing water and carrying firewood have been turned. The appearance of “mind itself is buddha” has been turned. The pari-nirvana of “mind itself is buddha” is not just one or two rare pari-nirvanas. Make countless pari-nirvanas countless pari-nirvanas. Make countless attainings of the way countless attainings of the way. Make countless forms of the Buddha countless forms of the Buddha. This is successively attaining buddhahood and successively attaining pari-nirvana. It is successively attaining confirmation, successively attaining turning.

Turning is not originally existent, but just seven penetrations and eight masteries. To see and meet each face of the buddhas and ancestors is successively. Even if you try to escape, there is no gap in the turning of buddhas and ancestors’ confirmation.





An ancient buddha said, “I now hear from the Buddha about the magnificent confirmation and about receiving it continuously; my body and mind fully rejoice.”

Magnificent confirmation is always I now hear from the Buddha. Receiving it continuously is my body and mind fully rejoice. Continuously means I now. It is not concerned with self and other in the past, present, and future. It is just hearing from the Buddha and not hearing from others. It is not delusion or enlightenment, not sentient beings, not grass, trees, or countries, but it is hearing from the Buddha. It is magnificent confirmation. It is continuously receiving.

Continuously means not to stay in one spot even for a moment, but to have body and mind fully rejoicing. Receiving it continuously and rejoice are no other than studying simultaneously and all-inclusively with the body, studying simultaneously and all-inclusively with the mind. Furthermore, body is inclusive of mind, and mind is inclusive of body. Therefore, it is called inclusive body and mind. This is all-inclusive world, all-inclusive direction, all-inclusive body, all-inclusive mind. This is extraordinary oneness of rejoicing. When this rejoicing lets people clearly rejoice in sleeping and waking, or in delusion and enlightenment, this rejoicing is intimate with each of them but not separate from any of them. For this reason, this is the magnificent confirmation that is received continuously.





Shakyamuni Buddha said to eighty-thousand mahasattvas through Bhaishajyaraja Bodhisattva:



Bhaishajyaraja, if you look at countless devas, dragon kings, yakshas, gandharvas, asuras, garudas, kinnaras, mahoragas, humans, nonhumans, monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen in this great assembly, there are those who seek to be shravakas, pratyeka-buddhas, or buddhas. Among such beings, if there are those who come in front of the Buddha who hear one verse or phrase of the Sutra of Wondrous Dharma Blossoms, and are delighted even for a moment, I will confirm them all equally, and they will attain unsurpassable, complete enlightenment.



Thus, even though those who are assembled—deva kings, dragon kings, four or eight types of beings—have different pursuits and understanding, who hears a line of verse that is not the inconceivable dharma? How can your thought, even for a moment delight in other teachings? Such beings means dharma-blossom beings. Those who come in front of the Buddha means all of those who abide in the Buddha. Even if there are those who appear in myriad forms as humans or nonhumans, and even if they are scattered like hundreds of grasses, they are such beings. Such beings are I will confirm them all equally. I will confirm them all equally is, from beginning to end, They will attain unsurpassable, complete enlightenment.

Shakyamuni Buddha said to Bhaishajyaraja Bodhisattva, if there are those who come in front of the Buddha who hear one verse or phrase of the Sutra of Wondrous Dharma Blossoms, and are delighted even for a moment . . . they will attain unsurpassable, complete enlightenment.

When is after the pari-nirvana of the Tathagata? Is it after forty-nine years, after eighty years? For now let us say eighty years. If there are those who hear one verse or phrase of the Sutra of Wondrous Dharma Blossoms, and are delighted even for a moment—is this to hear it with wisdom or without wisdom? Is it to hear it by mistake or not by mistake?

If you explain to others, it is heard by if there are those . . . Do not be concerned whether they are those with wisdom or without wisdom. Say that when they hear the Sutra of Wondrous Dharma Blossoms, even with the immeasurably profound wisdom of all buddhas, to hear is one phrase, to hear is one verse, to hear is to be delighted for one moment.

At this moment, they will attain unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. There is confirmation—I will confirm them all equally. Do not leave it to the ignorant third son of Zhang [ordinary person]. Devote yourself to a detailed study of this matter.

Being delighted even for a moment is those who hear. At this moment, there is no room to set skin, flesh, bones, or marrow on your head. Being given this confirmation of unsurpassable, complete enlightenment means, “My wish is already fulfilled.” Be a skin bag like this. Thus, all wishes are fulfilled. In this way, there are people who are called those who hear.

There is confirmation by taking up a pine branch; there is confirmation by taking up an udumbara blossom. There is confirmation by blinking. There is confirmation by breaking into a smile. There is an example of transmitting straw sandals. This is not what can be easily thought about or understood.

There is confirmation of, “My body is thus.” There is confirmation of, “Your body is thus.” It means that the past, present, and future are confirmation. Because it is the past, present, and future within confirmation, it is actualized by confirming the self and by confirming others.





Vimalakirti said to Maitreya:





Maitreya, the World-Honored One has confirmed that you attain unsurpassable, complete enlightenment in your lifetime. In which life—past, present, or future birth—do you receive it?



If you say past birth, past birth has already perished. If you say future birth, future birth has not come yet. If you say present birth, present birth does not abide. The Buddha says, “Bhikshus, the present moment is birth, old age, and death.”



If you say that you receive confirmation in beyond birth, beyond birth is the true stage. In the true stage, there is no receiving confirmation; there is no attaining unsurpassable, complete enlightenment.



Maitreya, how do you receive confirmation in your lifetime? Do you say you receive it in thusness-birth, or do you say you receive it in thusness-death? If you say you receive it in thusness-birth, thusness does not have birth. If you say you receive it in thusness-death, thusness does not have death.



All sentient beings are like this. All things are like this. All sages and wise ones are like this. You are also like this. If you receive confirmation, all sentient beings receive confirmation. The reason is that thusness is not two, not many. If you attain unsurpassable, complete enlightenment, all sentient beings also attain it. The reason is that all sentient beings are aspects of enlightenment.



The Tathagata did not deny Vimalakirti’s statement. Accordingly, Maitreya’s attaining confirmation is already determined. In this way, all sentient beings’ attaining confirmation is also determined. Without sentient beings receiving confirmation, there is no confirmation of Maitreya. All sentient beings are aspects of enlightenment. Enlightenment receives confirmation from enlightenment.

Receiving confirmation is the life of today. Since all sentient beings arouse the aspiration for enlightenment simultaneously with Maitreya, this is receiving confirmation together, and attaining the way together.

However, Vimalakirti’s words, In the true stage there is no receiving confirmation, show that he did not know that the true stage is itself confirmation, and he did not say that the true stage is itself enlightenment.

Vimalakirti also says, “Past birth has already perished . . . future birth has not come yet . . . present birth does not abide.” But past has not necessarily already perished, future has not necessarily not come yet, and present does not necessarily not abide. Even when you regard having already-perished, not-yet-come, and not-abiding, as the past, future, and present, you should clarify that not-yet-come is itself the past, present, and future. Accordingly, confirmation is attained in both birth and death. Enlightenment is attained in both birth and death.

When all sentient beings receive confirmation, Maitreya also receives confirmation. Now I ask you, Vimalakirti: Is Maitreya the same as sentient beings or different from them? Answer! You said, “If Maitreya received confirmation, all sentient beings receive confirmation.” If you say Maitreya is not a sentient being, sentient beings are not sentient beings, and Maitreya is not Maitreya. How is it so? Then, Vimalakirti is not Vimalakirti. If you are not Vimalakirti, you cannot make this statement.

Therefore, you should say: When confirmation causes all sentient beings to exist, all sentient beings and Maitreya exist. Confirmation causes all things to be as they are.



Written at the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery on the twenty-fifth day, the fourth month in summer, the third year of the Ninji Era [1242].





