35



ARHAT



[IT IS SAID IN the Lotus Sutra:] “An arhat is one who has transformed all afflictions, has no more delusion, has driven away self-interest, has removed all forms of bondage, and has achieved freedom of mind.”

This is a great arhat, who has obtained the fourth and final fruit in practicing with the Buddha. This is a buddha arhat.

Afflictions are a broken dipper with a missing handle, used a great many times. Has transformed all afflictions means that the entire body of the dipper has made a leap. Has driven away self-interest means coming in and out of the top of the head. Has removed all forms of bondage means nothing is hidden in the world of the ten directions. Freedom of mind can be understood as “flat in a high place and flat in a low place.” In this way, there are walls, tiles, and pebbles. Freedom means the undivided activity of mind that is actualized. Has no more delusion is not giving rise to delusions—delusion is obstructed by delusion.

The miraculous powers, wisdom, meditation, dharma expounding, guidance, and radiating light of an arhat are not the same as those of people outside the way or heavenly demons. An arhat’s vision of one hundred buddha worlds is not similar to that of an ordinary person’s. One says that barbarians’ hair is red, while the other says that there are barbarians with red hair.

Entering nirvana is an arhat’s practice of entering a fist. Thus, it is the wondrous heart of nirvana—there is no place to avoid. One who enters a nostril is a true arhat. One who has not entered a nostril is not an arhat.





It is said [in the Lotus Sutra], “Today we are true arhats. We will let the Buddha’s enlightened voice be heard by all.”

We will let the Buddha’s enlightened voice be heard by all means to let all beings hear the Buddha’s teaching. Why should this be limited to buddhas and disciples? To let all those who have knowledge, wisdom, skin, flesh, bones, and marrow hear it is to let it be heard by all beings. Those who have knowledge and wisdom are the land, grass, trees, walls, tiles, and pebbles. Those who sway, fall, prosper, and decline, and those who come and go in birth and death, all hear it. We will let the Buddha’s enlightened voice be heard by all should not be understood to mean merely that the entire world has ears.





Shakyamuni Buddha said [in the Lotus Sutra], “If some of my disciples call themselves arhats or pratyeka-buddhas and do not understand that all tathagatas only teach bodhisattva works, they are not the Buddha’s disciples. Neither are they arhats nor pratyeka-buddhas.”

The Buddha’s statement only teach bodhisattva works means that “I and buddhas in the ten directions know this very well.” It means, “Only buddha and buddha thoroughly understand the reality of all things.” It is unsurpassable, complete enlightenment.

Thus, the way bodhisattvas and buddhas call themselves, and the way arhats and pratyeka-buddhas call themselves, should be the same. Why so? Because they both understand that all tathagatas only teach bodhisattva works.





A teacher of old said, “In the shravaka [Hinayana] sutras, an arhat is regarded as the buddha ground.”

This statement is a clarification of the buddha way. It is not only a theory memorized by teachers of treatises, but also a common understanding in the buddha way. Study the teaching that regards an arhat as the buddha ground. Study the teaching that regards the buddha ground as an arhat.

There is not a single extra particle or thing other than the arhat fruit. How can there be extra complete enlightenment other than this? There is not a single extra particle or thing other than unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. How can there be four extra paths and fruits other than this?

At this very moment, when an arhat brings up all things, there is no eight lian or half a jin in all things. What an arhat brings up is mind beyond this, buddha beyond this, and thing beyond this. It is buddha eye beyond seeing. It cannot be discussed as before or after eighty thousand kalpas. Study an arhat’s power of plucking the eyeball. Extra things are entirely extra things.





Shakyamuni Buddha said [in the Lotus Sutra], “These monks and nuns think they have become arhats, attained their final bodies, and thoroughly experienced nirvana, so they do not seek unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. Such people are arrogant. It is groundless to be truly an arhat and not believe in unsurpassable, complete enlightenment.”

To believe in unsurpassable, complete enlightenment is proof of being an arhat. To believe in unsurpassable, complete enlightenment is to be entrusted with it, to receive transmission of it person to person, and to practice and realize it.

To be truly an arhat is not to attain the final body, or thoroughly experience nirvana, for an arhat does seek unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. To seek unsurpassable, complete enlightenment is to fool with an eyeball, to sit facing the wall, and to open the eye facing the wall. Although abiding in the all-inclusive realm, an arhat appears like a spirit and disappears like a demon. Although abiding in all time, there is a constant tossing back and forth of an insightful flash.

This is called seeking unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. Thus, it is seeking to be an arhat. Seeking to be an arhat is to be satisfied with gruel, to be satisfied with cooked rice.





Keqin, Zen Master Yuanwu of Mount Jia, said:



After realization, people of old would go deeply into a mountain, a weed grove, or a stone cave, and cook meals in a broken pot for ten or twenty years. They would forget all about the human world and reject its dusty treasures. But today you may not want to do that.



Just hide your name, obscure your traces, and remain an old gimlet. Merge with realization and experience receptive samadhi according to your capacity. Remove the effects of your past actions and become free from old habits. If your capacity is greater, help others, create wisdom relationships, polish the tips of your feet, and mature. Just as if you were picking one or even half a blade of grass from a thick patch of weeds, join those who have wisdom and help them to get away from the chain of birth and death. In this way, you can benefit future generations and repay the deep kindness of buddha ancestors.



Or, if it so happens that the fruit that has lived through frost and dew ripens, take this fruit into the world to transform humans and devas, responding to situations and following circumstances, but without ever having a seeking mind.



Why depend on influential people and follow worldly trends while confusing common people and ignoring sages, grasping for benefit and looking for fame? This would only cause you to fall into an unceasing hell.



Even if you do not have an opportunity to be active in the world, if you simply do not create causes that lead you to hell, you will be an arhat truly free from the dusty world.



Thus, a patch-robed monk of genuine form is a true arhat free from the dusty world. If you want to know the characteristics of an arhat, it is just this. Do not be confused by words of treatises in India. Jiashan of China is a buddha ancestor who has received authentic transmission person to person.





Baizhang, Zen Master Dazhi of Mount Baizhang, Hong Region, said, “Eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind are not stained by greed for things that do or do not exist. This is called receiving and maintaining the four-line verse. It is called the four fruits.”

These eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind, that are not confined by self or other, cannot be measured or thoroughly experienced from beginning to end. Thus, the entire body is unstained by greed. It is unstained by things that do or do not exist. The entirety of receiving and maintaining the four-line verse is called not stained. It is also called the four fruits. One who has attained the four fruits is an arhat.

This being so, the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind that are actualized right now are an arhat, free and transparent from root to twig. To arrive at a barrier is receiving and maintaining the four-line verse. This is the four fruits. Transparent top, transparent bottom, the whole body is actualized. Not a hairbreadth slips away.

In the end, how should we say what it is? It is thus:



Within the ordinary, the arhat is immersed in all things.



Within the sacred, the arhat is liberated.



The arhat and all things practice together.



Realizing arhat is being immersed in arhat—



an old fist before the King of the Empty Eon.





Abiding at the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery, Uji County, Yamashiro Province, this is presented to the assembly on the fifteenth day, the fifth month, the third year of the Ninji Era [1242].





