42



UNDIVIDED ACTIVITY



THE GREAT WAY of all buddhas, thoroughly practiced, is emancipation and realization.

“Emancipation” means that in birth [life] you are emancipated from birth [life], and in death you are emancipated from death. Thus, there is detachment from birth-and-death and penetration of birth-and-death. Such is the complete practice of the great way. There is letting go of birth-and-death and vitalizing birth-and-death. Such is the thorough practice of the great way.

“Realization” is birth; birth is realization. At the time of realization there is nothing but birth totally actualized, nothing but death totally actualized.

Such activity makes birth wholly birth and death wholly death. Actualized just so at this moment, this activity is neither large nor small, neither immeasurable nor measurable, neither remote nor near. Birth right now is undivided activity. Undivided activity is birth right now.

Birth neither comes nor goes. Birth neither appears nor is already existing. Thus, birth is totally manifested and death is totally manifested.

Know that there are innumerable beings in yourself, where there is birth and there is death.

Quietly think over whether birth and all things that arise together with birth are inseparable or not. There is neither a moment nor a thing that is apart from birth. There is neither an object nor a mind that is apart from birth.

Birth is just like riding in a boat. You raise the sails and you steer. Although you maneuver the sail and the pole, the boat gives you a ride, and without the boat you couldn’t ride. But you ride in the boat, and your riding makes the boat what it is. Investigate a moment such as this. At just such a moment, there is nothing but the world of the boat. The sky, the water, and the shore are all the boat’s world, which is not the same as a world that is not the boat’s. Thus, you make birth what it is, you make birth your birth.

When you ride in a boat, your body, mind, and environs together are the undivided activity of the boat. The entire earth and the entire sky are both the undivided activity of the boat. Thus, birth is nothing but you; you are nothing but birth.





Keqin, Zen Master Yuanwu of Mount Jia, said, “Birth is undivided activity. Death is undivided activity.”

Clarify and investigate these words. What you should investigate is: While the undivided activity of birth has no beginning or end, and covers the entire earth and the entire sky, it hinders neither birth’s undivided activity nor death’s undivided activity. At the moment of death’s undivided activity, while it covers the entire earth and the entire sky, it hinders neither death’s undivided activity nor birth’s undivided activity. This being so, birth does not hinder death; death does not hinder birth.





Both the entire earth and the entire sky appear in birth as well as in death. However, it is not that one and the same entire earth and sky are fully manifested in birth and in death: although not one, not different; although not different, not the same; although not the same, not many.

Similarly, in birth there is the undivided activity of all things, and in death there is the undivided activity of all things. There is undivided activity in what is not birth and not death. There is birth and there is death in undivided activity.

This being so, the undivided activity of birth and death is like a young person bending and stretching, or it is like someone asleep at night searching for the pillow. This is realization in vast, wondrous light.

At just such a moment you may suppose that because realization is manifested in undivided activity, there was no realization prior to this. However, prior to this realization, undivided activity was manifested. The undivided activity manifested previously does not hinder the present realization of undivided activity. Thus, your understanding can be manifested moment after moment.



Presented to the assembly at the residence of the former governor of Izumo Province, next to the Rokuharamitsu Temple, Kyoto, on the seventeenth day, the twelfth month, the third year of the Ninji Era [1242].





