45



OLD BUDDHA MIND



THE ANCESTRAL TEACHING was transmitted by forty ancestors from the Seven Original Buddhas to Huineng of Caoxi. There were forty ancestors from Huineng to the Seven Original Buddhas.

Because the Seven Original Buddhas had the power of going upward and going downward, the dharma reached Huineng and it reached the Seven Original Buddhas. Because Huineng had the power of going upward and going downward, the dharma has been authentically transmitted from the Seven Original Buddhas and from Huineng to buddhas of later times.

Buddhas are not only before and after. At the time of Shakyamuni Buddha, there were buddhas in the ten directions. At the time of Qingyuan, there was Nanyue. At the time of Nanyue, there was Qingyuan. Or, at the time of Shitou, there was Mazu of Jianxi. They did not obstruct each other, although it is not that they did not interact with each other. Study thoroughly that there has been such manifestations as these.

As these forty buddha ancestors are old buddhas, they have bodies and minds. They have illumination and land with a timeless past and something that never existed in the past. Having something that never existed in the past and having a timeless past are equally the manifestation of old buddhas.

To study the way of old buddhas is to realize the way of old buddhas—generations and generations of old buddhas. What we call old buddhas are old of new and old, but they leap beyond old and new. They are directly old and new.





Rujing, my late master, said, “I have encountered Old Buddha Hongzhi.”

From this I guess that there is an old buddha in the house of Tiantong, and there is Tiantong in the house of an old buddha.

Keqin, Zen Master Yuanwu, said, “I bow to Caoxi [Huineng], true Old Buddha.”

Know that we should bow to the thirty-third-generation ancestor from Shakyamuni Buddha [Huineng], as Old Buddha. Because Keqin had an old buddha’s splendid illumination, he made such a bow upon encountering the old buddha. Thus, chew on the head and tail of Huineng and grab hold of the nose of an old buddha. One who grabs hold of this is an old buddha.

Sushan said, “On top of Dayu Peak there is an old buddha shining light that reaches here.”

Know that Sushan had already encountered the old buddha. Do not look anywhere else. Where the old buddha can be found is on top of Dayu Peak. One who is not an old buddha does not know where the old buddha is. One who knows where the old buddha can be found is an old buddha.

Xuefeng said, “Zhaozhou, Old Buddha.”

Know that although Zhaozhou was an old buddha, if Xuefeng had not been given the ability to be an old buddha, he would not have mastered the craft of meeting the old buddha. The practice right now is to study with an old buddha, which is benefited by the old buddha who practices silence responding to questions.

Old Man Xuefeng is still well. The teaching style of an old buddha and the awesome presence of an old buddha cannot be imitated and equaled by one who is not an old buddha. This being so, study the wholesomeness of the beginning, middle, and end of Zhaozhou and experience the timelessness of the old buddha.





Huizhong, National Teacher Dazheng of the Guangzhai Monastery in Xijing, was a dharma heir of Huineng. He was equally revered by emperors of humans and devas. It was rare to see or hear of a master like him in China. Not only was he the dharma teacher to four emperors, but one of them pulled his cart into the imperial court. Further, he was invited to Indra’s palace and went up to heaven to expound the dharma to Indra in the assembly of devas.

Huizhong was once asked by a monk, “What is the mind of an old buddha?”

He replied, “Walls, tiles, and pebbles.”

The monk’s question was no different from asking, “What is this?” or “What is that?” This was expressed by the question, which became an expression of realization throughout the past and present.

Thus, myriad trees and a hundred grasses with blooming flowers are an expression of an old buddha. This is an old buddha’s expression, an old buddha’s question. The Nine Mountains and Eight Seas that emerge in the world are the moon face and sun face of an old buddha—the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow of an old buddha.

Further, there must be an active buddha with old mind, a realizing buddha with old mind, becoming buddha of old mind, becoming mind of buddha oldness, as old mind is the mind of oldness. Because mind buddha is always old, old mind is a chair, bamboo, and wood.

[It is as Xuansha said,] “Even if we look in the entire world for a single person who understands buddha dharma, it is impossible to find one.” “Reverend, what do you call it?”

At this very moment of causation and in the empty space of the dusty world there is nothing other than old mind. To maintain old mind and to maintain an old buddha are like maintaining two heads on one face or painting two heads on one body.

Huizhong said, Walls, tiles, and pebbles. This statement shows that there is an expression stepping toward walls, tiles, and pebbles. This is walls, tiles, and pebbles. It is a straight way of expression. There is also an expression by walls, tiles, and pebbles that steps backward within walls, tiles, and pebbles. Where these expressions emerge and complete, a cliff of one thousand rocks and myriad rocks stands; walls all over the earth and all over heaven stand; there is one or half a piece of tile; or there is a large or small tip of a pebble. This is not only mind, but a body, as well as their environs.

This being so, ask, “What are walls, tiles, and pebbles?”

In response, say, “Old buddha mind.”

Then, investigate further: What are so-called walls? What are called walls? What shape are they? Study thoroughly in this way.

Does making cause walls to appear? Do walls cause making to appear? Are walls made or not? Are they sentient or insentient? Do they or do they not emerge right here?

Even if they appear in the deva realm or human realm, in this or another world, while you investigate thoroughly, old buddha mind is walls, tiles, and pebbles. Old buddha mind and walls, tiles, and pebbles have not been separated even by a particle.





Jianyuan, Zen Master Zhongxing, was asked by a monk, “What is the mind of old buddha?”

Jianyuan said, “The entire world falls apart.”

The monk asked further, “What happens when the entire world falls apart?”

Jianyuan said, “I would rather not have my body.”

The so-called worlds are all buddha worlds of the ten directions. There is not a world that is not a buddha world. Study the entire world and how it falls apart. Do not study it in the self. Because you don’t study it in the self, the very moment of falling apart is one path, two, three, four, or five paths—thus, inexhaustible paths.

Each path is I would rather not have my body. My body is I would rather not have. Value the now, and don’t let yourself fail to be old buddha mind.

Indeed, old buddha mind stands like a wall before the Seven Original Buddhas. It sprouted after the Seven Original Buddhas. Old buddha mind blossoms before all buddhas. It bears fruit after all buddhas. Old buddha mind drops away before old buddha mind.



Presented to the assembly at the Rokuharamitsu Temple [in Kyoto] on the twenty-ninth day, the fourth month of the Kangen Era [1243].





