51



THE REALITY OF ALL THINGS



ACTUALIZING BUDDHA ANCESTORS is reality thoroughly experienced. Reality is all things. All things are reality thusness; original nature thusness; body thusness; mind thusness; world thusness; cloud and rain thusness; walking, standing, sitting, and lying down thusness; sadness, joy, motion, and stillness thusness; staff and whisk thusness; taking up the flower and smiling thusness; inheriting dharma and giving predictions thusness; studying and endeavor of the way thusness; pine purity and bamboo joints thusness.





Shakyamuni Buddha said [in the Lotus Sutra]:





Only a buddha and a buddha can thoroughly experience the reality of all things. What is called all things is reality thusness, original nature thusness, body thusness, capacity thusness, activity thusness, cause thusness, condition thusness, effect thusness, reward thusness, root-branch-and-beyond thusness.





The Tathagata’s words root-branch-and-beyond thusness is the self-expression of the reality of all things, the self-expression of all teachers. It is studying together as one, because studying is no other than studying together as one.

Only a buddha and a buddha is the reality of all things. The Reality of all things is only a buddha and a buddha. Only a buddha is all things. And a buddha is all things. When you hear the words all things, do not assume it is one or many. When you hear the word reality, do not study it as void or original nature. Reality is only a buddha; reality is and a buddha.

Can experience is only a buddha; thoroughly is and a buddha. All things are all things that are only a buddha. Reality is and a buddha. When all things are truly all things, they are called only a buddha. When all things are reality, they are called and a buddha.

Thus, when all things are all things, there is reality thusness, original nature thusness. When reality is reality, there is reality thusness, original nature thusness. That only a buddha and a buddha appear in the world is speaking, practice, and realization of the reality of all things. Speaking is can thoroughly experience. Although thoroughly, it is can experience, because it is beyond beginning, middle, and end; it is reality thusness, original nature thusness. Thus, it is described as “wholesome in the beginning, middle, and end.”

Can thoroughly experience is the reality of all things. The Reality of all things is reality thusness. Reality thusness is can thoroughly experience original nature thusness. Original nature thusness is can thoroughly experience body thusness. Body thusness is can thoroughly experience capacity thusness. Capacity thusness is can thoroughly experience activity thusness. Activity thusness is can thoroughly experience cause thusness. Cause thusness is can thoroughly experience condition thusness. Condition thusness is can thoroughly experience effect thusness. Effect thusness is can thoroughly experience reward thusness. Reward thusness is can thoroughly experience root-branch-and-beyond thusness.

The words root-branch-and-beyond thusness are indeed thusness actualized. This being so, the effect in the buddha stage is beyond an effect in cause and effect. Thus, the effect in cause and effect is no other than the effect in the buddha stage. Because this effect is immersed in form, original nature, body, and capacity, then form, original nature, body, and capacity of all things are immeasurably and boundlessly reality. Because this effect is beyond form, original nature, body, and capacity, then form, original nature, body, and capacity of all things are all together reality. When you become one with reality, then such words as original nature, body, and capacity—immersed in effect, reward, cause, and condition—hit the mark eight or nine out of ten. When you become one with reality, then original nature, body, and capacity—immersed in effect, reward, cause, and condition—hit the mark ten out of ten.

Reality thusness is not one reality, nor is it one thusness. It is thusness immeasurable, boundless, unspeakable, and unfathomable. Do not make one hundred or one thousand as a measure. Make all things a measure. Make the measure of reality the measure.

It means that only a buddha and a buddha can thoroughly experience the reality of all things; only a buddha and a buddha can thoroughly experience the true nature of all things; only a buddha and a buddha can thoroughly experience the true body of all things; only a buddha and a buddha can thoroughly experience the true capacity of all things; only a buddha and a buddha can thoroughly experience the true activity of all things; only a buddha and a buddha can thoroughly experience the true cause of all things; only a buddha and a buddha can thoroughly experience the true condition of all things; only a buddha and a buddha can thoroughly experience the true effect of all things; only a buddha and a buddha can thoroughly experience the true reward of all things; only a buddha and a buddha can thoroughly experience the true root-branch-and-beyond of all things.





In this way, the buddha land in the ten directions is just only a buddha and a buddha. There is no one or half only a buddha and a buddha other than this. Only and and are to possess body in body and to realize reality in reality. It is like having original nature as body and letting it be original nature.

In this way, Shakyamuni Buddha said [in the Lotus Sutra], “I and buddhas in the ten directions can understand this.”

Thus, the very moment of can understand and the very moment of can understand this are equally each and every [experience of] time being. If I were different from buddhas in the ten directions, how could the Buddha have actualized the words I and buddhas in the ten directions? Because this place is beyond the ten directions, the ten directions are in this place.

This being so, to encounter all things that are reality means that spring enters blossoms and a person encounters spring. The moon illuminates the moon and a person meets the self. Or, a person sees fire. These are equally the true meaning of encountering.

In this way, reality studying reality is called a buddha ancestor receiving transmission of dharma from a buddha ancestor. This is all things confirming the enlightenment of all things. It is only a buddha transmits dharma to only a buddha; and a buddha receives transmission of dharma from and a buddha.

Thus, there is the coming and going of birth and death. Thus, there is aspiration, practice, enlightenment, and nirvana. In taking up aspiration, practice, enlightenment, and nirvana, you thoroughly study and guide the coming and going of birth and death and the true human body; you grab hold of them and you let go of them. Making this the life vein, blossoms open and fruit is born. Making this bones and marrow, there is Mahakashyapa and there is Ananda.

The reality thusness of wind, rain, water, and fire can thoroughly experience. The original nature thusness of blue, yellow, red, and white can thoroughly experience. With this body and capacity, you transform the ordinary and enter the sacred. With this effect and reward, you go beyond buddha and beyond ancestor. Through this cause and condition, you pick up dirt and turn it into gold. Through this effect and reward, there is transmission of dharma and entrustment of the robe.

The Tathagata said [in the Lotus Sutra], “Thus, I expound the mudra of reality.”

It means: Thus, I practice the mudra [definite expression] of reality. Thus, I listen to the mudra of reality. Thus, I realize the mudra of reality. Study thoroughly and experience thoroughly in this way. The meaning of this is like “A pearl rolls on a board and a board rolls on a pearl” [the dynamic interaction of subject and object, practice and enlightenment].

The Chandra Surya Pradipa Buddha said [in the Lotus Sutra], “I have expounded the meaning of the reality of all things to you.”

Study this statement and know that buddha ancestors unfailingly make expounding the meaning of reality a single great matter. Buddha ancestors, together with the eighteen realms, unfold the meaning of reality. Before body and mind, after body and mind, at the very moment of body and mind [in the past, present, and future], they expound reality, original nature, body, capacity, and so on. Those who do not thoroughly experience, expound, understand, and beyond-understand reality are not buddha ancestors; they are demons and animals.





Shakyamuni Buddha said [in the Lotus Sutra], “The entire unsurpassable, complete enlightenment of all bodhisattvas belongs to this sutra. This sutra opens the gate of skillful means and demonstrates reality.”

What are called all bodhisattvas are all buddhas. Buddhas and bodhisattvas are not different types of beings. It is not that one is older and the other is younger, or that one is superior and the other is inferior. This bodhisattva and that bodhisattva are not two beings, not self and other. They are not limited to the past, future, and present, but there is a dharma procedure of practicing the bodhisattva path for becoming a buddha.

Bodhisattvas become buddhas at the first moment of arousing the aspiration for enlightenment, and they become buddhas at the place of wondrous enlightenment. There are bodhisattvas who have become buddhas uncountable times—one hundred, one thousand, ten thousand billion times. Those who speak of abolishing practice and doing nothing after becoming buddhas are ordinary people who do not know the path of buddha ancestors.

What are called all bodhisattvas are the original ancestors of all buddhas. All buddhas are the original teachers of all bodhisattvas. Even if unsurpassable enlightenment is practiced and realized in the past, present, or future, before the body and after the mind, it is altogether this sutra in the beginning, middle, and end. Belongs and being made to belong are altogether this sutra. At this very moment, you realize all bodhisattvas mentioned in this sutra.

The sutra is neither sentient nor insentient, neither created nor uncreated. Yet, upon realizing a bodhisattva, realizing a person, realizing reality, and realizing the sutra, the gate of skillful means opens. The gate of skillful means is an unsurpassable merit of the buddha fruit, things abiding in the world of phenomena, and the everlasting reality of the world.

The gate of skillful means is not a temporary art. It is the study of the entire world of the ten directions. It is taking up the reality of all things and studying it. Even if this gate of skillful means covers the world of the ten directions in the entire world of the ten directions, without being all bodhisattvas, this cannot be experienced.





Xuefeng said, “The entire great earth is a gate of emancipation. Even if I invite people, they would not get through it.”

Thus, know that although the entire great earth is a gate of emancipation, going in and out of it is not easy; there are not many who go in and out. Even if they are invited, they would not go in and out. Even if they are not invited, they would not go in and out. Those who step forward may miss it. Those who step backward may stand still. How so? If you try to have others go in and out of the gate, it moves farther away. If you have a gate that accepts others, it is possible for them to go in and out.





Shakyamuni Buddha’s words opens the gate of skillful means demonstrate reality. Demonstrates reality is all through time in the beginning, middle, and end, independent from one another. When the gate of skillful means truly opens, it opens in the entire world of the ten directions. If you see the entire world of the ten directions at this very moment, you see a sight that has never been seen. That brings forth the entire world of the ten directions onefold, twofold, in three pieces, or in four pieces, and lets the gate of skillful means open. Thus, although the gate of skillful means is seen as opening equally, a number of entire worlds of the ten directions are seen as being actualized as a small part of opening the gate of skillful means. Such activities are due to the power of the sutra.

Demonstrating reality is having the entire world hear the phrase the reality of all things and having the entire world attain the way. It is to let the entire person understand the meaning of the reality of all things and let the entire dharma emerge.

This being so, the unsurpassable enlightenment of the Forty Buddhas, Forty Ancestors [from the Seven Original Buddhas to Huineng, the Sixth Chinese Ancestor], all belongs to this sutra. Enlightenment belongs to this sutra, and this sutra belongs to enlightenment. Both the sitting mat and the sounding board that are no other than unsurpassable enlightenment belong to this sutra. Taking up a flower and smiling, as well as bowing and attaining the marrow, belong to this sutra. This sutra belongs to these activities. This is opening the gate of skillful means and demonstrating reality.





However, coarse people in recent Song China expound reality falsely without knowing the settling place and without seeing the treasure place. They further study the words of Laozi [Lao-tzu] and Zhuangzi [Chuang-tzu]. They say that these teachings are identical to the great road of buddha ancestors. They also insist that the Three Teachings are in accord, explaining that they are like the tripod of a worshipping bowl, which would tip over if it were without one of the legs. It is extreme stupidity, not worth examining.

Do not accept that those who say such things have learned buddha dharma. The reasons for not doing so are as follows: We regard buddha dharma as having originated in India. The Buddha lived for eighty years and expounded dharma for fifty years, when he taught humans and devas. He transformed all sentient beings who entered the buddha way. After that, the twenty-eight ancestors authentically transmitted his teaching. This is the peak, the most wondrous and venerable. Various people outside the way and heavenly demons were all subdued by the Buddha. Humans and devas who have become buddhas and ancestors are countless.

Although Confucianism and Daoism have not entered India, no one speaks of the buddha way as incomplete. If the Three Teachings had been one, when buddha dharma appeared in India, Confucianism and Daoism would have appeared. However, buddha dharma is “I alone am venerable above and under heaven.” Reflect on that time. Do not forget it.

The phrase “accord of the Three Teachings” does not even come close to a child’s mumbling. Those who insist on this are those who destroy buddha dharma. There are so many of them. They take the appearance of guiding masters of humans and devas. Some of them have even become emperors’ teachers. Great Song China has been in the time of the decline of buddha dharma. Rujing, my late master, warned of this.

Such people [who advocate the accord of the Three Teachings] are seeds of those in the Lesser Vehicles or those outside the way. For a couple of hundred years there have been such people who don’t know even the existence of reality. When they study authentic buddha dharma, they only speak of becoming free from birth and death. Also, there have been those who don’t know how to study the authentic dharma of buddha ancestors. They only understand imitating the ancients while living in a monastery. What a pity that the ancestral way is in decline! This is what venerable masters who have mastered the way deplore. Do not pay attention to the theories of such people. Just pity them.





Keqin, Zen Master Yuanwu, said, “The coming and going of birth and death are the true human body.”

Take up this statement, know yourself, and investigate buddha dharma.





Changsha said, “The entire world of the ten directions is the true human body. The entire world of the ten directions is within the radiant light of the self.”

This statement is not known by the elders of many monasteries in Great Song China today as something to study, not to speak of being studied by them. If you take this up and ask about it, they may blush and remain silent.

Rujing, my late master Old Buddha, said, “The elders of many monasteries lack illuminating the past and illuminating the present. They haven’t mastered the meaning of buddha dharma. Being asked about the entire world of the ten directions and so forth, they don’t know the answer. It looks as though some of them had never heard of such a question.”

After hearing this, I asked elders of monasteries such a question; few of them had heard about it. What a pity that they occupy their positions while uttering vain speeches!





Once, Ying’an Tanhua said to monk Dehui:



If you want to make understanding easy, get to the place of arousing the mind and moving thoughts during the twelve hours [all day]. If you have contact with these moving thoughts, you immediately understand what is ungraspable. It is like a great void that has no trace of void. Front and back are one. Both the knower and the known are invisible. Both implicit and explicit perish. Past, present, and future are equal. Upon arriving at this state, you are called a leisurely person of no more studying and no more doing.



This is a phrase of Old Man Ying’an’s fully concerted expression. It appears that he chased a shadow and did not know the real meaning of ceasing.

Is there not buddha dharma when the front and back are not one? What are the front and back? Also, he regards the void with no form as a statement of buddha ancestors. What does he regard as the void? In my opinion, he did not know or see the void. He did not take up or strike the void.

Ying’an spoke of arousing the mind and moving thoughts. However, it is possible to say that the mind does not move. Then, how can you arouse the mind during the twelve hours of the day? Mind does not move and enter into the twelve hours of the day. The twelve hours do not move in twelve [separate] minds. If they did, how could you arouse the mind?

What are moving thoughts? Do thoughts move or not-move? Do thoughts not-move or not not-move? What is movement? And what is not-movement? What do you call thoughts? Are thoughts in twelve hours? Is twelve hours in thoughts? Is there a moment when neither of them exists?

Ying’an said, Get to the place . . . during the twelve hours, and you can make understanding easy. What do you call easy understanding? Do you say that it is easy to understand the way of buddha ancestors? However, as buddha dharma is beyond easy or difficult to understand, Nanyue and Mazu both practiced thoroughly with their teacher [Huineng].

Ying’an said, you immediately understand what is ungraspable. This reveals that he had not even dreamed of the buddha ancestors’ way. With his ability, how can he speak of understanding easily or not? It is clear that he had not yet thoroughly studied the great way of buddha ancestors. If buddha dharma were like this, how could it have reached this day?

Even Ying’an was like this. Yet, if we look for someone like him among the elders of monasteries nowadays, it is impossible to meet one even for long eons. Even if we look piercingly hard, we cannot find anyone like Ying’an. Therefore, many people in recent times approve of him. However, it is hard to acknowledge that buddha dharma had reached him. He was still a latecomer on the monastic seats—an ordinary person. At least he had a spirit for knowing a true person. But, as they do not know a true person, elders nowadays do not know themselves,

Although Ying’an had not mastered buddha dharma, he had studied the way. On the other hand, the elders of monasteries nowadays have not studied the way. While Ying’an heard good words, the words did not enter his ears and were not seen by his ears; they did not enter his eyes and were not heard by his eyes.

Ying’an was like this in the past, but he must be self-enlightened by now. The seniors of monasteries in Great Song China today don’t look into the inside and outside of Ying’an, thus, sounds and forms are all outside of their realm. Such people do not know whether the reality of buddha dharma expressed by buddha ancestors is the words of buddha ancestors or not. This being so, none of the elders or other clumsy fellows in these two or three hundred years have seen and explained reality.





Rujing gave a dharma talk in the abbot’s room one evening:



I, Tiantong, have a calf tonight.



The golden-faced Gautama takes up reality.



Even if you want to buy it, it has no price.



The chirp of a cuckoo is heard from above a solitary cloud.



In this way, a venerable master who excels in the buddha way speaks of reality. Those who do not know and have not studied the buddha way do not speak of reality.

This verse was presented around the third month, the second year of the Baoqing Era [1226] of Great Song China. It was close to the fourth time period late at night; I heard a drum hit three times in the north. I took up my [folded] bowing cloth, wore a kashaya, and went out of the cloud [monks’] hall. A plaque signaling permission to enter the abbot’s room was hanging.

I followed other monks and went in the direction of the dharma hall. Passing the west wall of the dharma hall, I climbed up the west stairway of the Serene Light Hall [abbot’s quarters west]. I climbed up the west stairway of the Great Light Treasury Hall [abbot’s quarters east]. From the southern part of the standing screen, I approached the table with an incense burner, burned incense, and bowed. I thought that those who wished to enter the abbot’s room must be standing in line, but no other monk was there.

A reed screen was hanging at the entrance of the Wondrous Plateau [abbot’s main quarters]. I heard the faint dharma voice of the great abbot priest. At that time Zukun, the practice coordinator from Xichuan, arrived and burned incense after me. When we quietly looked up at the Wondrous Plateau, we saw a crowd of monks standing from the east end to the west end of the hall. Then the dharma talk started, which I listened to while standing in the back of the crowd.

Rujing told a story about Zen Master Fachang of Damei, living in the monastery. Many monks shed tears when they heard about Fachang’s assembly wearing lotus leaves and eating pine nuts. Rujing also told a detailed story about Shakyamuni Buddha’s practice period. Many listeners shed tears.

Rujing then said, “A practice period here at Mount Tiantong is approaching. It is spring now, not cold and not hot. This is the time favorable for zazen. Fellow practitioners, why not do zazen?”

Thus, he spoke and presented the above verse. After reading this verse, he struck the right side of his Zen chair with his right hand and said, “Now enter the room.”

When some of the monks were inside the abbot’s room, Rujing said, “A nightingale chirps. Bamboo on the mountain cracks.” He spoke in this way but did not say anything more. Although many monks entered the room, they remained in silent awe.

This way of inviting monks to enter the abbot’s room is not practiced in other monasteries. Rujing alone practiced in this way. At the time of his giving a dharma talk, the assembly of monks would stand around chairs and screens. As they kept standing, monks near the entrance would enter the room, and those who had finished visiting would go out of the gate of the abbot’s quarters as usual. The rest of the monks would keep standing, so they could see and hear the formal movement of those who entered the room as well as the dignified bearing of the abbot priest as he spoke. This format has not been found in other monasteries, where the seniors do not practice in this way.

In the usual manner of entering the abbot’s room, monks try to get ahead of others, but in this way of entering the room, monks want to follow. Be aware of the difference in people’s minds.

It is the first year of the Kangen Era [1243] now. The passage of time is swift, and it has been eighteen years since then. I don’t remember how many mountains and rivers I have crossed from Mount Tiantong to here, but I have been engraving in my body, mind, bones, and marrow his magnificent words and stunning phrases as reality. I believe Rujing’s dharma talk and the monks entering his room at that time have been memorable for many monks. It was a serene night while the faint light of the moon was leaking through the pavilion and nightingales were chirping continuously.





Xuansha, Great Master Zongyi, was on his way to the dharma hall when he heard the swallow’s voice.

He said [in his dharma talk], “The swallow’s voice deeply speaks of reality and well expounds the heart of the dharma.”

Then, he descended from the teaching seat.

Later, a monk asked him for teaching by saying, “I don’t understand it.”

Xuansha said, “Go away. No one believes you.”

You may think that Xuansha’s statement, The swallow’s voice deeply speaks of reality means that swallows alone deeply speak of reality. But it is not so. He did hear the chirping of swallows on his way. It is not that swallows were speaking of reality. It is not that Xuansha was speaking of reality. They were not divided into two, but at that very moment there was speaking of reality.

Study this story thoroughly for now. There was Xuansha’s walking on his way there. There was hearing the chirping of swallows. There was a statement, The swallow’s voice deeply speaks of reality and well expounds the heart of the dharma. There was descending from his teaching seat. There was a monk asking him by saying, I don’t understand it. There was Xuansha saying, Go away. No one believes you. The monk’s statement, I don’t understand it, was not necessarily asking about reality, but was a life vein of buddha ancestors—bones and marrow of the treasury of the true dharma eye.

Know that whether this monk had asked for instruction by saying, “I understand it,” or by saying, “I speak it,” Xuansha would invariably have said, Go away. No one believes you. It is not that Xuansha said, Go away. No one believes you because the monk understood it but said he did not understand it.

Indeed, even if you are an ordinary person and not like this monk, you experience the reality of all things. When reality is actualized in this way at this time and place, you are directly connected to the life vein of buddha ancestors. In the lineage of Qingyuan, this was actualized [by Xuansha].

Know that reality is an authentic vein that has been transmitted from heir to heir. All things are only a buddha and a buddha thoroughly investigated. Only a buddha and a buddha are splendid just as they are.



Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, Echizen Province, Japan, in the ninth month, the first year of the Kangen Era [1243].





