54



INSENTIENT BEINGS SPEAK DHARMA



SPEAKING DHARMA BY means of speaking dharma actualizes the fundamental point that buddha ancestors entrust to buddha ancestors. This speaking dharma is spoken by dharma.

Speaking dharma is neither sentient nor insentient. It is neither creating nor not creating. It is not caused by creating or not creating. It doesn’t depend on conditions. This being so, just as birds fly in the air, speaking dharma leaves no trace. It is just given to Buddhist practitioners.

When the great road is complete, speaking dharma is complete. When the dharma treasury is entrusted, speaking dharma is entrusted. When a flower is held up, speaking dharma is held up. When a robe is transmitted, speaking dharma is transmitted. In this way, all buddhas, all ancestors, have maintained speaking dharma since before the King of the Empty Eon. Expounding dharma has been their fundamental practice since the time before all buddhas.

Do not think that buddha ancestors alone have brought forth speaking dharma. Speaking dharma has brought forth buddha ancestors. This speaking dharma is not limited to the teachings of eighty-four thousand dharma gates, but opens up the teachings of immeasurable, boundless gates.

Do not think that dharma spoken by earlier buddhas was spoken by later buddhas. Just as earlier buddhas don’t become later buddhas, earlier speaking dharma does not become later speaking dharma. Thus, Shakyamuni Buddha said, “Just as all buddhas in the three worlds spoke dharma, I now speak indiscernible dharma.”

In this way, just as each buddha employs speaking dharma, all buddhas employ speaking dharma. Just as each buddha transmits speaking dharma, all buddhas transmit speaking dharma.

Insentient beings’ speaking dharma was transmitted from the ancient buddhas to the Seven Original Buddhas, and it has been transmitted from the Seven Original Buddhas to the present day. In this speaking dharma by insentient beings there are all buddhas, all ancestors. Do not think that the dharma I am speaking now is something new that has not been transmitted. Do not think that what has been transmitted since ancient times is an old pit of demons.





Huizhong, National Teacher Dazheng of the Guangzhai Monastery in the city of Xijing, in Great Tang, was asked by a monk, “Do insentient beings understand dharma when it’s spoken?”

Huizhong replied, “Obviously, insentient beings always speak dharma. The speaking never stops.”

The monk asked, “Why don’t I hear it?”

Huizhong said, “You don’t hear it, but that doesn’t mean others don’t hear it.”

The monk said, “Tell me, who hears it?”

Huizhong responded, “All the sages do.”

The monk asked, “Do you hear it, sir?”

“No, I don’t hear it.”

The monk persisted, “If you don’t hear it, how do you know that insentient beings understand this dharma?”

Huizhong responded, “This fortunate person doesn’t hear it. If I did, I would be equal to all sages. Then you could not hear me expound dharma.”

The monk said, “If so, human beings would be left out.”

Huizhong said, “But I speak to humans, not to sages.”

The monk asked, “What happens to sentient beings after they hear you?”

Huizhong responded, “They are no longer sentient beings.”

Beginners and latecomers who look into insentient beings speaking dharma should directly study this story of Huizhong.

Huizhong said, Obviously, insentient beings always speak dharma. The speaking never stops. Always is a part of all time. The speaking never stops means there is no break in speaking dharma. Just because insentient beings do not use the voice or the manner of sentient beings in speaking dharma, you should not suppose that the way insentient beings speak dharma is different from the way sentient beings speak dharma.

The buddha way does not appropriate the voice of sentient beings and apply it to the voice of insentient beings. Insentient beings do not necessarily speak dharma with a voice heard by the ears. Similarly, sentient beings do not speak dharma with the voice heard by the ears. Now ask yourself, ask others, and inquire, “What are sentient beings? What are insentient beings?”

In this way, concentrate and study closely what insentient beings always speak dharma is. Foolish people may think that the sound of trees, or the opening and falling of leaves and flowers, is insentient beings speaking dharma. Such people are not studying buddha dharma. If it were so, who would know and hear insentient beings speaking dharma? Reflect now: are there grass, trees, and forests in the world of insentient beings? Is the world of insentient beings mixed with the world of sentient beings? Furthermore, to regard grass and trees as insentient beings is not thoroughgoing. To regard insentient beings as grass, trees, tiles, and pebbles is not enough.

Even if you hold a human view that regards grass, trees, and so on as insentient, you cannot grasp them by ordinary thinking. The reason is that there is a distinct difference between trees in heaven and trees in the human world. Those that grow in China and those that grow elsewhere are not the same. Plants in the ocean and those on mountains are completely different. Furthermore, there are trees that spread in space and trees that spread in clouds. Among hundreds of grasses and myriad trees that grow in air or in fire, there are those that should be understood as sentient, and those that should not be seen as insentient. There are grasses and trees that are like humans and beasts. They cannot be classified as either sentient or insentient. In sorcery, the trees, stones, flowers, fruits, and water are difficult to speak of even if you believe what you see. It is impossible to generalize about things in all corners of the world only by seeing and knowing about grass and trees in Japan.

Huizhong said, All the sages do. It means that in the assembly where insentient beings speak dharma, all sages stand and listen. All sages and insentient beings actualize listening and actualize speaking. Insentient beings speak dharma for all sages. Is this sacred or ordinary? If you experience with your body the way insentient beings speak dharma, you will grasp with your body how all sages hear. As soon as you grasp this with your body, you can comprehend the realm of sages. In this way, you should practice the celestial path of going beyond ordinary and going beyond sacred.

Huizhong said, I don’t hear it. Do not suppose that these words are easy to understand. Does he “not hear” as he goes beyond ordinary and sacred? Or does he “not hear” because he tears apart the old convention of ordinary and sacred? Investigate this and let the words come through.

Huizhong said, This fortunate person doesn’t hear it. If I did, I would be equal to all sages. This presentation is not one or two phrases. The fortunate person is neither ordinary nor sacred. Is this a buddha ancestor? Because buddha ancestors go beyond ordinary and sacred, what all sages hear is not the same.

Huizhong said, Then you could not hear me expound dharma. Work on these words and prepare the enlightenment of all buddhas and sages. The essence is that insentient beings speak dharma, and all sages hear it; Huizhong speaks dharma, and this monk hears it. Day by day and month by month, make this matter the focus of your study. Now, ask Huizhong, “I am not asking you what happens when sentient beings hear it. But what happens at the precise moment when sentient beings hear the dharma expounded?”





Dongshan, who would later become High Ancestor Great Master Wuben, studied with his teacher Yunyan, Great Priest, Early Ancestor. Dongshan asked Yunyan, “Who can hear insentient beings speak dharma?”

Yunyan said, “Insentient beings hear insentient beings speak dharma.”

Dongshan asked, “Do you hear it, sir?”

Yunyan said, “If I heard it, you could not hear me speak dharma.”

Dongshan responded: “Being so, I don’t hear you speak dharma.”

Yunyan replied, “You haven’t been hearing me speak dharma. How could you hear insentient beings speak dharma?”

Dongshan responded by presenting this poem:



How splendid! How wondrous!



Inconceivable! Insentient beings speak dharma.



The ears never hear it.



Only the eyes do.



Dongshan asked, Who can hear insentient beings speak dharma? Investigate this question in detail throughout your life, throughout many lives. The question also can work as a statement. This statement is the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow. It is not merely transmitting mind with mind. This “transmitting mind with mind” is a common notion of beginning and advanced students. However, the key to practice is taking up the robe and transmitting it, taking up dharma and transmitting it. How can people nowadays master this matter in three or four months?

Dongshan had heard about the words of Huizhong, Insentient beings speak dharma. . . . All sages can hear it. But he inquired further: Who can hear insentient beings speak dharma? Is Dongshan agreeing or not agreeing with Huizhong? Is this a question or a statement? If Dongshan was not agreeing with Huizhong, why did he speak this way? If he was agreeing with Huizhong, why did he speak this way?

Yunyan said, Insentient beings hear insentient beings speak dharma. Transmit this blood vein and experience body and mind dropping away. Insentient beings hearing insentient beings speak dharma is essentially all buddhas hearing all buddhas speak dharma. In the assembly of beings, those who hear insentient beings speak dharma are insentient, whether they are sentient beings or insentient beings, ordinary or sacred.

With these essentials you should determine if past or present teachings are true or false. Even if a teaching was brought from India, if it has not been authentically transmitted by genuine masters, do not adopt it. Even if the lineage of teaching has lasted for thousands of years, if there is not an authentic succession from heir to heir, it’s not worth inheriting. Today, authentically transmitted teaching has already spread across the eastern lands. You can easily distinguish what is genuine or false.

When you hear, Sentient beings hear sentient beings speak dharma, accept this as the bones and marrow of all buddhas and ancestors. When you hear the words of Yunyan and Huizhong and wrestle with them, the sages who speak what all sages hear are insentient. Insentient beings who speak what insentient beings hear are sages. Since insentient beings speaking dharma are insentient, what they speak is insentient. This is how insentient beings speak dharma. This is how speaking dharma is insentient.

Dongshan responded: Being so, I don’t hear you speak dharma. Being so here refers to Yunyan’s words, Insentient beings hear insentient beings speak dharma. Because insentient beings hear insentient beings speak dharma, Dongshan said, I don’t hear you speak dharma. At this moment, Dongshan not only became part of the audience, but also revealed his towering determination to speak dharma for insentient beings. He not only experienced insentient beings speaking dharma, but he thoroughly took hold of hearing and not hearing insentient beings speak dharma. From there he experienced sentient beings speaking, not speaking, already having spoken, now speaking, and just speaking dharma. Furthermore, he clarified the hearing and the not-hearing of the dharma spoken by sentient beings and insentient beings.

Actually, hearing dharma is not limited to ear sense and ear consciousness. You hear dharma with complete power, complete mind, complete body, and complete way from before your parents were born, before the Empty Eon, through the entire future, the unlimited future. You can hear dharma with body first and mind last.

Such ways of hearing the dharma are all effective. Don’t think that you are not benefited by hearing the dharma if it does not reach your mind consciousness. Effacing mind, dropping body, you hear the dharma and see the result. With no mind and no body, you should hear dharma and benefit from it. Experiencing such moments is how all buddha ancestors become buddhas and attain ancestorhood.

Ordinary people cannot understand that dharma power transforms body and mind. The boundary of body and mind cannot be encompassed. When the effect of hearing dharma is planted in the field of body and mind, it never decays. It is bound to grow and bear fruit.

Foolish people may think that when we hear dharma, if we do not advance in understanding and cannot remember the teaching, there will be no benefit from it. They say it is essential to learn broadly and memorize extensively with our entire body and mind. They think that forgetting the teaching, absentmindedly leaving the place of instruction, creates no benefit and no accomplishment. They think in this way because they have not met a genuine teacher and encountered themselves. One who has not received authentic transmission face to face cannot be a genuine teacher. A genuine teacher is one who has received transmission authentically from buddha to buddha.

Indeed, to memorize in mind consciousness and not to forget is exactly how the power of hearing the dharma encompasses the mind and encompasses consciousness. At the very moment when this is done, you realize the power of encompassing body; encompassing past body, encompassing mind; encompassing past mind, encompassing future mind; encompassing cause and condition, action and result; encompassing form, essence, body, and activity; encompassing buddha; encompassing ancestor; encompassing self and other; and encompassing skin, flesh, bones, and marrow. The power of encompassing speech and encompassing sitting and lying down is manifest throughout the entire earth and sky.

The power of hearing dharma is not easy to know. But when we join the great assembly of buddha ancestors, and study their skin, flesh, bones, and marrow, there is no instant when the power of speaking dharma does not work, and there is no place where the power of hearing dharma does not extend. The tides of timelessness bring forth sudden or gradual effects. Thus, learning broadly and memorizing extensively are not to be abandoned. However, they are not the only key. Students should know about this. Dongshan understood it.

Yunyan replied: You haven’t been hearing me speak dharma. How could you hear insentient beings speak dharma? This is how Yunyan pulled open the lapels of his own robe and with the bones and marrow of the ancestors certified that Dongshan had actualized enlightenment on top of enlightenment. You haven’t been hearing me speak dharma. Ordinary people can’t say this. He was assuring Dongshan that however variously insentient beings speak dharma, Dongshan should not be lost in thought about it. The transmission at this moment was truly subtle and pivotal. Ordinary sages cannot easily understand it.

Dongshan responded by presenting this poem: How splendid! How wondrous! Inconceivable! Insentient beings speak dharma. Thus, insentient beings and their speaking dharma are both difficult to think about. What are the so-called insentient beings? Study that they are neither ordinary nor sacred, neither sentient nor insentient. Ordinary and sacred, sentient and insentient [in a usual sense], may be reached by thinking whether they are speaking or not speaking. Now it is inconceivable, splendid, and wondrous. What is splendid and wondrous cannot be reached by the wisdom and consciousness of the ordinary or the sacred. Heavenly beings and ordinary humans cannot assess it.

The ears never hear it. Even with heavenly ears or with dharma ears of all realms and all times, it cannot be understood through what is heard. Even with an ear on the wall or an ear on a stick, insentient beings speaking dharma cannot be heard, because it is not a sound that is the object of the ear. It is not that hearing with ears does not happen, but that it is impossible to hear even if we try for hundreds and thousands of eons. Insentient beings speaking dharma is the awesome manifestation of the single way beyond sound and form. Insentient beings speaking dharma is beyond the pit that ordinary beings and sages fall into.

Only the eyes do. Some people may think that this statement means that the coming and going of grass, trees, flowers, and birds viewed by humans are what eyes hear. This view is mistaken. It is not at all buddha dharma. There is no such understanding in the buddha dharma.

When we study Dongshan’s words Only the eyes do, it means we hear the voice of insentient beings speaking dharma with the eyes. We manifest the voice of insentient beings speaking dharma with the eyes. Investigate the eyes extensively. Because the voice heard by the eyes should be the same as the voice heard by the ears, the voice heard by the eyes is not the same as the voice heard by the ears. Do not think that eyes have ear organs. Do not think that eyes are ears. Do not think that voice appears in the eyes.





An ancient teacher [Xuansha] said, “The entire world of the ten directions is no other than a monk’s single eye.”

Don’t suppose that you can understand Dongshan’s words, Only the eyes do, by hearing it with a monk’s single eye. When you study the ancient teacher’s words, The entire world of the ten directions is no other than a monk’s single eye, the entire world of the ten directions is no other than a monk’s single eye. Furthermore, there are eyes on one thousand hands, one thousand true dharma eyes, one thousand ear eyes, one thousand tongue eyes, one thousand mind eyes, one thousand eyes throughout the mind, one thousand eyes throughout the body, one thousand eyes on top of a stick, one thousand eyes on the extremities of the body, one thousand eyes on the extremities of the mind, one thousand dead eyes in the midst of death, one thousand living eyes in the midst of life, one thousand eyes of self, one thousand eyes of other, one thousand eyes on top of eyes, one thousand eyes of study, one thousand vertical eyes, and one thousand horizontal eyes.

This being so, even if you study these entire eyes as the entire world, still it is not the embodiment of eyes. Urgently investigate hearing with the eyes insentient beings speaking dharma.

The meaning of Dongshan’s words is that insentient beings speaking dharma cannot be understood by ears. The eyes can hear the voice. Furthermore, there is hearing voice throughout the body and there is hearing voice wherever the body can reach. Even if you do not embody hearing the voice with the eyes, you should master with your body insentient beings hear insentient beings speaking dharma, and let go of insentient beings hear insentient beings speaking dharma.





As this teaching has been transmitted, Rujing, my late teacher, Old Buddha Tiantong, said, “Gourd with its tendrils is entwined with gourd.”

This is the speaking dharma of insentient beings, which transmits Yunyan’s true eye, his bones and marrow. Because all speaking dharma is insentient, insentient beings speak dharma. This is a venerable example. Insentient beings are those who speak dharma for insentient beings.

What do you call insentient beings? Know, those who hear insentient beings speak dharma are thus. What do you call speaking dharma? Know, those who do not know insentient beings are thus.





Touzi, Great Master Ciji of Shu Province, whose priest name was Datong, was an heir of Cuiwei, Zen Master Wuxue. Touzi was called Old Buddha Touzi by Mingjiao [Xuedou Zhongxian]. He was once asked by a monk, “What is insentient beings speaking dharma?”

Touzi replied, “Don’t bad-mouth them.”

What Touzi says here is indeed the dharma standard of the old buddha, a settling point of the ancestral teaching. Insentient beings speaking dharma and the speaking dharma of insentient beings are equally beyond bad-mouthing. Know that insentient beings speaking dharma is the totality of buddha ancestors. It is not known by followers of Linji or Deshan. Only buddha ancestors penetrate this.



Presented to the assembly of the ancient Yoshimine Temple, Yoshida County, Echizen Province, on the second day, the tenth month, the first year of the Kan gen Era [1243].





