61



SEEING THE BUDDHA



SHAKYAMUNI BUDDHA SAID [in the Diamond Sutra] to the assembly, “When you see forms and beyond forms, you see the Tathagata.”

You see forms and beyond forms is seeing through [forms and beyond] with the body. Thus, you see the Tathagata. When the practice of opening the eye to see the Tathagata is actualized, you see the Buddha. The vital path of seeing the Buddha is the practice of seeing the Buddha.

When you see buddha-as-self elsewhere and buddha-as-self outside of buddha, they may be seen [as indistinguishable] as branches and vines. However, when you study seeing the Buddha, understand seeing the Buddha, drop away seeing the Buddha, vitally grasp seeing the Buddha, and utilize seeing the Buddha, it is [varied] like seeing the Sun-Face Buddha and seeing the Moon-Face Buddha.

These ways of seeing the Buddha are equally seeing the Buddha with inexhaustible faces, with inexhaustible bodies, with inexhaustible minds, and with inexhaustible hands and eyes.

From the moment of arousing the aspiration for enlightenment, you take steps on the journey in the endeavor of the way. Merging with realization and thorough understanding are all the vital eye, bones, and marrow that run into seeing the Buddha. This being so, the total world of self, the total direction of other, this and that, are all the practice of seeing the Buddha.

In investigating the Tathagata’s statement, When you see forms and beyond forms, those who lack the eye of study assume that to see forms as beyond forms is itself seeing the Tathagata. They think that since forms are beyond forms, they are the Tathagata. Although a part of their small view is like this, the meaning of the Buddha’s statement is not so.

Know that to see through forms and to see through beyond forms is actually seeing the Tathagata. There is Tathagata, and there is beyond Tathagata.





Fayan, Great Zen Master of the Qingliang Monastery, said, “If you see that all forms are beyond forms, you don’t see the Tathagata.”

These words by Fayan are words of seeing the Buddha. When we examine these words, they stand out and extend their hands. Listen to his words with your ears. Listen to his words of seeing the Buddha with your eyes.

Those who studied the meaning of his words in the past say:



All forms are Tathagata forms. There is never a single form that merges with what is not the Tathagata forms. Never regard forms as beyond forms. To do so is to escape from your own parents. Because these forms are nothing but the Tathagata forms, Fayan said that all forms are all forms.



However, these words by Fayan are the utmost statement of the Mahayana, confirmed by masters in various places. Accept his words with trust and practice, and do not take them lightly like feathers flying in the east or west wind. See thoroughly that all forms are Tathagata forms and not beyond forms. See the Buddha in this way, make up your mind, realize trust, and maintain these words. Chant these words and become familiar with them.

Thus, keep seeing and hearing these words with your ears and eyes. Have the words drop away in your body, mind, bones, and marrow. Have the words seen through your mountains, rivers, and entire world. This is the practice of studying with buddha ancestors.

Do not think that your own words and actions cannot awaken your own eye. Turned by your own turning words, you see and drop away your own turning of buddha ancestors. This is the everyday activity of buddha ancestors.

In this way, there is a single path to study. No forms are beyond forms, beyond forms are all forms. Because beyond forms are all forms, beyond forms are indeed beyond forms. Study that forms that are called beyond forms, and forms that are called all forms, are both Tathagata forms.

Inside the house of study, there are two types of commentaries—those made by seeing the scriptures and those made without seeing the scriptures. This is what a vital eye studies. If you have not penetrated the scriptures by seeing with the eye, it is not studying thoroughly with the eye. Without studying thoroughly with the eye, you do not see the Buddha.

In seeing the Buddha, there is seeing where forms are and seeing where beyond forms are. It is [as Huineng said] “I don’t understand buddha dharma.”

In not seeing the Buddha, there is seeing where forms are and seeing where beyond forms are. It is [as Huineng said] “There is someone who understands buddha dharma.” This is understanding Fayan’s words eight or nine out of ten.

This being so, say further on this matter of grave importance: “If you see the reality of all things, that is to see the Tathagata.”

All of these words have been caused by the teaching of Shakyamuni Buddha, and are not the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow of any others.





When Shakyamuni Buddha taught at Vulture Peak, Bhaishajyaraja Bodhisattva said to the assembly, “If you get close to a dharma teacher, you will directly attain the bodhisattva way. If you follow the teacher and practice, you will see buddhas as many as the sands of the Ganges.”

To get close to a dharma teacher is like Huike attending Bodhidharma for eight years. Consequently, he grasped Bodhidharma’s marrow with his whole arms. It is also like Nanyue practicing for fifteen years. To attain the teacher’s marrow is called to get close to.

The bodhisattva way is [as Huineng said]:”I am like this. You are like this.” It is to directly attain activities of a twining vine on a branch [intimate practice with the teacher]. To directly attain is not drawing something from the past or initiating something new for the future. It is not grasping what is prevailing at present. But it is to drop away from getting close to the teacher. Thus, all attaining is directly attaining.

To follow the teacher and practice is to enliven the ancient precedent of being an attendant monk to the teacher. Study this thoroughly. At the very moment of practicing this, there is hitting the mark of seeing. That is where you see buddhas as the sands of the Ganges. Buddhas as many as the sands of the Ganges are vital and active—each and every one of them. However, do not get busy trying to see buddhas as many as the sands of the Ganges. First of all, endeavor to follow the teacher and practice. If you follow the teacher and practice, you will see buddhas.





Shakyamuni Buddha said to all the realized beings, “Enter deep into samadhi and see buddhas in the ten directions.”

The entire world is deep, because it is in the buddha land of the ten directions. It is neither broad nor narrow, neither large nor small. When you take up one side, the other side comes with it. This is called total inclusion.

The entire world is not seven feet, eight feet, or ten feet. It is total inclusion without outside. It is just enter.

To enter deep is samadhi. To enter deep is to see buddhas in the ten directions. Because of “entering so deep inside that no one can guide the person,” to enter deep is to see buddhas in the ten directions. Because “Even if you brought it, the person would not accept it” [as Dongshan said], buddhas are in the ten directions.

To enter deep is for a long, long time not to leave. To see buddhas in the ten directions is just to see the Tathagata lying down.

Samadhi is to enter but not to come out. If you are not suspicious and fearful of a true dragon, you have no doubts to let go of at the very moment of seeing the Buddha.

Because you see the Buddha by seeing the Buddha, you enter deep in samadhi from samadhi. It is not that the experience of samadhi, seeing the Buddha, and entering deep was created by a person of leisurely practice in the past and has been transmitted to another person in the present. Although it is not a newly sprouted bud, it is as it is. All transmission of the way, succeeding in the work, is like this. Practicing cause and receiving effect is like this.





Shakyamuni Buddha said to Samantabhadra Bodhisattva, “Know that those who receive, chant, memorize, study, and copy this Lotus Sutra immediately see Shakyamuni Buddha, just like hearing the sutra from the Buddha’s own mouth.”

That all buddhas see Shakyamuni Buddha and become Shakyamuni Buddha is called attaining the way and becoming buddhas. Such buddha activity is unfailingly attained through all seven types of practice. Those who engage in these know the very person as the very person. Because they are in the place of seeing Shakyamuni Buddha, they see Shakyamuni Buddha, just like hearing the sutra from the Buddha’s own mouth.

Shakyamuni Buddha has been Shakyamuni Buddha since he saw Shakyamuni Buddha. This being so, the voices from his tongue cover the billion worlds. What place in mountains and oceans is not buddha scripture? Thus, only those who copy the sutra see Shakyamuni Buddha.

The buddha mouth is always open throughout myriad years. What moments are not sutras? Thus, only those who accept the sutra see Shakyamuni Buddha.

The function of the eyes, ears, nose, and so on [in seeing the Buddha], must also be like this. The everyday activity of taking and discarding, before and after, right and left, is also like this.

How could we not rejoice to be born in the presence of the sutra and see Shakyamuni Buddha? You have been born to encounter Shakyamuni Buddha. When you encourage your body and mind, and receive, chant, memorize, practice, and copy the Lotus Sutra, you immediately see Shakyamuni Buddha.

Just like hearing the sutra from the Buddha’s own mouth—who would not rush to hear it? Those who do not immediately practice it are sentient beings who lack benefaction and wisdom. Know that those who study and practice it immediately see Shakyamuni Buddha.





Shakyamuni Buddha said to the assembly, “Good men and women, listen to my teaching that the life span of the Buddha is timeless, and understand it with trust in your deep heart. Then, you will immediately see the Buddha, who always abides and teaches on Vulture Peak surrounded by great bodhisattvas and shravakas. You will also see that the surface of this Saha World is vast and flat, made of lapis lazuli.”

Deep heart means the Saha World. Understand it with trust means not avoiding. Who would not understand with trust the forthright and truthful words of the Buddha?

To encounter this sutra is a condition that ought to be understood with trust. The Buddha vowed to be born in this Saha World in order to understand the Lotus Sutra and his timeless life with trust in his deep heart.

The Tathagata’s extraordinary power, compassionate power, timeless life power takes up your heart to lead you to understand with trust [his teaching that the life span of the Buddha is timeless]. The Tathagata’s power takes up your body, the entire world, buddha ancestors, all things, reality, skin, flesh, bones, and marrow, and the coming and going of birth and death, to lead you to understand with trust. This understanding with trust is to see the Buddha.

Thus, know that you have the eye on top of the mind and see the Buddha; you attain the eye of understanding with trust and see the Buddha.

Not only do you see the Buddha, but you see the Buddha, who always abides and teaches on Vulture Peak. Always abiding on Vulture Peak is no other than the Tathagata’s life span. Thus, see the Buddha, who always abides on Vulture Peak means that the Tathagata and Vulture Peak from the past always abide; the Tathagata and Vulture Peak from now on always abide. It is that the bodhisattvas and shravakas [who surround the Tathagata] also always abide. It is that his teaching always abides.

You see that the Saha World with its lapis lazuli ground is vast and flat. Don’t sway in seeing the Saha World. A high place is vast and flat in the high place, and a low place is vast and flat in the low place. Where we are is a lapis lazuli ground. Do not look down on it as merely vast and flat.

The surface of this Saha World is vast and flat, made of lapis lazuli is like this. If you don’t see where we are as a lapis lazuli ground, Vulture Peak would not be Vulture Peak, Shakyamuni Buddha would not be Shakyamuni Buddha. Understanding that where we are is a lapis lazuli ground is no other than understanding it with trust in your deep heart. It is to see the Buddha.





Shakyamuni Buddha said to the assembly, “When you single-mindedly want to see the Buddha and do not spare your life, I appear on Vulture Peak together with the assembly of monks.”

The single-mindedness spoken of now is not that of ordinary people or those in the Two Vehicles. It is the single-minded pursuit to see the Buddha. The single-minded pursuit to see the Buddha is Vulture Peak. It is together with the assembly of monks. When each of you at this very moment aspires to see the Buddha, you do so with Vulture Peak mind.

Thus, a single mind is no other than Vulture Peak. How can a single body not come forth together with the single mind? How can a single body and mind come forth together?

The body and mind are like this. Those who live timeless life, as well as those who live transient life, are also like this. In this way, you leave your self-sparing mind to the mind of only sparing the unsurpassable way. Thus, I appear on Vulture Peak together with the assembly of monks is the single mind aspiring to see the Buddha.





Shakyamuni Buddha said to the assembly, “If you expound this sutra, you see me as Prabhutaratna [Many Jewels] Tathagata, and all other incarnated buddhas.”

Expound this sutra means “Although I abide here permanently, with my miraculous power I keep confused sentient beings from seeing me, however near they may be.”

On the front and back of the Tathagata of miraculous power, there is the power of you see me.

Shakyamuni Buddha said to the assembly, “Those who maintain this sutra see me. They also see Prabhutaratna Buddha and all buddhas who share the same body.”

Because the Tathagata is determined to maintain this sutra, he always recommends this sutra to you. When there are those who maintain this sutra, they invariably see Shakyamuni Buddha. Thus, we know that if you see the Buddha, you maintain the sutra. Those who maintain the sutra see the Buddha.

Thus, those of you who maintain one verse or one phrase [of this sutra] see Shakyamuni Buddha, Prabhutaratna Buddha, and the incarnated buddhas. You receive the transmission of the treasury of the dharma, the true eye of the Buddha, and you see the life of the Buddha. You receive the eye going beyond, the eye on top of the head, and the nostril of the Buddha.





[According to the Lotus Sutra:]

Jaradhara Garjita Ghosha Susvara Nakshatra Raja Sankusumitabhijna Buddha said to King Subhavyuha, “Great King, know that a good teacher is a great cause and condition. Guided by a good teacher, you get to see the Buddha by arousing the aspiration for unsurpassable, complete enlightenment.”

The great dharma assembly [of Jaradhara Garjita Ghosha Susvara Nakshatra Raja Sankusumitabhijna Buddha] is not yet over. Although we say buddhas of the past, present, and future, their past, present, and future are not the same as those of ordinary people’s view. Past is the top of your mind; present is your fist; future is the back of your brain.

Thus, Jaradhara Garjita Ghosha Susvara Nakshatra Raja Sankusumitabhijna Buddha actualizes the top of his mind, sees the Buddha. The words see the Buddha mean this. Guided by a good teacher is to see the Buddha. To see the Buddha is to arouse the aspiration for unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. Arousing the aspiration for unsurpassable, complete enlightenment is, from head to tail, seeing the Buddha.





Shakyamuni Buddha said, “Those who practice virtue with gentleness and openness see me expounding dharma here.”

Virtue means splattering mud and getting wet in water, or following waves to chase waves. To practice this is called the gentleness and openness of “You are like this. I am like this.” This is to see the Buddha in the mud, to see the Buddha with the heart of the waves. This is to encounter the Buddha who is expounding dharma here.





Recently in Great Song China there are a great number of fellows with little seeing and hearing who call themselves Zen masters but don’t know the vertical and horizontal of buddha dharma. They merely memorize two or three phrases by Linji or Yunmen, regard these words as the entire path of buddha dharma.

If buddha dharma were encompassed by a couple of phrases by Linji or Yunmen, it would not have reached this day. It is not possible to call Linji or Yunmen the most venerable in buddha dharma. Furthermore, those fellows nowadays who are short of phrases have not come close to Linji or Yunmen.

Because they are dull, they slander buddha scriptures without studying and clarifying the meaning of them. They are not descendants of buddha ancestors and should be regarded as part of the flock outside the way. How can they reach the realm of seeing the Buddha? They cannot even reach the teachings of Confucius and Laozi. Those of you who are inside the house of buddha ancestors should not pay attention to those fellows who call themselves Zen masters. Instead, practice thoroughly and penetrate with your body the eye of seeing the Buddha.





Rujing, my late master, Old Buddha Tiantong, said, “King Prasenajit asked Pindola, ‘Venerable Master, I hear that you personally have seen the Buddha. Is it true?’ Pindola responded by brushing up his eyebrows with his hand.”

Then, Rujing taught in a verse:



Pindola raised his eyebrows and answered the king’s question.



No doubt he had personally seen the Buddha.



Until now he has been worthy of offerings from the four quarters of the world.



Spring is within a plum twig, bearing the snow—cold.



Seeing the Buddha here does not mean seeing the Buddha as self or seeing the Buddha as other, but it means seeing the Buddha [Shakyamuni]. Because one branch of plum blossoms sees one branch of plum blossoms, blossoms are open, bright and clear.

The king’s question was whether Pindola had seen the Buddha and become a buddha. Pindola clearly raised his eyebrows. This was the proof that he had seen the Buddha. This should not be confused. This fact has not ceased until now, revealing that Pindola is worthy of offerings. Thus, the fact that Pindola had personally seen the Buddha cannot be doubted.

The question Have you personally seen the Buddha? asked by the king of three hundred million people [Prasenajit] meant whether Pindola had seen the Buddha in this way. It is not seeing the thirty-two marks of the Buddha. Seeing the thirty-two marks of the Buddha can be done by anybody.

There are a number of humans, devas, shravakas, and pratyeka-buddhas who do not know the meaning of truly seeing the Buddha [and say that they haven’t seen the Buddha]. It is just like saying that they have hardly seen a whisk being raised [teaching being given], although they see a whisk being raised quite often.

To see the Buddha is to be seen by the Buddha. However hard you may try to hide it, your seeing the Buddha comes forth and lets itself leak out [be revealed]. This is how seeing the Buddha works. Endeavor with your bodies and minds as numerous as the sands of the Ganges and investigate thoroughly the meaning of Pindola raising his eyebrows.

Even if you lived together with Shakyamuni Buddha day and night for one hundred, one thousand, or ten thousand eons, if you did not have the ability to raise your eyebrows, this would not be seeing the Buddha. On the other hand, even if you are far away from the Buddha by hundreds of thousands of li and by over two thousand years, if you personally actualize the ability of raising your eyebrows, you have seen Shakyamuni Buddha since the time before the King of the Empty Eon. It is seeing one branch of plum blossoms, seeing spring in a branch of plum blossoms.

Thus, personally seeing the Buddha is formally bowing three times, greeting with hands joined together, smiling, a fist striking thunder, sitting on the cushion in meditation posture.





Venerable Pindola went to King Ashoka’s palace to receive a meal offering. After the king distributed incense to the monks, he bowed to Pindola and asked, “I heard that you have personally seen the Buddha. Is it true?”

Pindola brushed up his eyebrows with his hand and asked, “Do you understand it?”

The king said, “No, I don’t.”

Pindola said, “When the Dragon King of Anavatapta Lake invited all buddhas and offered a feast, I was one of those who were present.”

When King Ashoka asked Pindola if he had personally seen the Buddha, he was trying to see if the venerable teacher was actually venerable. Responding to this question, Pindola immediately brushed up his eyebrows. This is to actualize seeing the Buddha in this world. This is to personally show having become a buddha.

Pindola said, When the Dragon King of Anavatapta Lake invited all buddhas and offered a feast, I was one of those who were present. Know that in the assembly of invited buddhas, the attendees of “only a buddha and a buddha” are as numerous as stalks of straw, flax, bamboo, and reeds. This is beyond the reach of arhats who have attained the four fruits, or pratyeka-buddhas. Even if such practitioners come, don’t regard them as members of invited buddhas.

However, Pindola proclaimed that he was one of those who were present when all buddhas were invited. This is a boundless self-expression. It is clear that he did see the Buddha. When the Dragon King invited all buddhas, not only Shakyamuni Buddha but also countless and endless buddhas of the ten directions in the past, present, and future were invited. The buddhas who were invited personally saw Shakyamuni Buddha without separation. The point of seeing the Buddha, seeing the teacher, seeing the self, seeing yourself, is also like this.

Anavatapta Lake is also called Annoktapta Lake, the lake of no suffering from heat.





Baoning, Zen Master Renyong, said in a verse:



Our Buddha personally sees Pindola,



whose eyebrows are long, whose hair is short, and whose eyes look vulgar.



King Ashoka was still suspicious.



OM MANI SHRI SURYA [Homage to the jewel that shines like the sun].



This verse does not present a complete expression, but I am quoting it for your further study.





Zhaozhou, Great Master Zhenji, was once asked by a monk, “I heard that you personally saw Nanquan. Is it true?”

Zhaozhou said, “A giant radish was here in Zhen Region.”

The manifestation of this expression is proof that Zhaozhou had personally seen Nanquan. It is not having words or having no-words, not having teaching words or having conversational words. It is not raising the eyebrows or brushing up the eyebrows, but it is directly seeing the eyebrows. Even if Zhaozhou was a genius standing alone, he could not have said this without personally seeing Nanquan.

Zhaozhou said, A giant radish was here in Zhen Region, when he was abbot of the Zhenji Monastery in Doujia Garden, Zhen Region. He was later given the title Great Master Zhenji. In this way, from the time when he practiced opening the eye of seeing the Buddha, he held the authentic transmission of the buddha ancestors’ treasury of the true dharma eye. When the treasury of the true dharma eye is authentically transmitted, the gentle and awesome presence of seeing the Buddha is actualized. Right here, see the Buddha enormously and magnificently.



Presented to the assembly at Yamashi Peak on the nineteenth day, the eleventh month, the first year of the Kangen Era [1243].





