66



SPRING AND AUTUMN



DONGSHAN, GREAT MASTER Wuben, was once asked by a monk, “When cold or heat comes, how can we avoid it?”

Dongshan said, “Why don’t you go where there is no cold or heat?”

The monk said, “What do you mean by ‘where there is no cold or heat’?”

Dongshan said, “When it is cold, cold finishes the monk. When it is hot, heat demolishes the monk.”

This story has often been examined in the past. Many of you should also pursue it now. Buddha ancestors have never failed to master this matter, and those who have mastered it are buddha ancestors. Buddha ancestors in India and China, both past and present, often made this issue the face and eye of their realization. To bring forth this face and eye is the fundamental point of buddha ancestors.

This being so, examine in detail the monk’s question When cold or heat comes, how can we avoid it? This is to study the very moment when cold comes or the moment when heat comes. This cold or heat—complete cold or complete heat—is itself cold or heat. Accordingly, when either comes, it comes from the summit of cold or the summit of heat, and manifests from the eyeball of cold itself or heat itself. This summit is where there is no cold or heat. This eyeball is where there is no cold or heat.

Dongshan’s words When it is cold, cold finishes the monk. When it is hot, heat demolishes the monk show how it is when the moment arrives. Even if there is the expression When it is cold, cold finishes, it is not necessary that when it is hot, heat demolishes the expression. Cold penetrates the root of cold, heat penetrates the root of heat. Even if you try millions of times to avoid cold or heat, it is like trying to put a tail where the head is. Cold is the vital eyeball of the ancestral school. Heat is the warm skin and flesh of my late master.





Jingyin Kumu, is an heir of Furong. His priest name is Facheng. He said:



Many of you examine this dialogue and say, “This monk’s question already falls into differentiation. Dongshan’s answer brings the matter to oneness. The monk understood the meaning of Dongshan’s words and entered oneness. Dongshan then entered differentiation.”



To analyze in such a way is to denigrate the ancient sage and lower yourself. Can’t you understand these words? When I hear your interpretations, the meaning is decorated and seems beautiful, but if your interpretations accumulate over time, they become a disease. If you, advanced wanderers, want to master this matter, you should understand the treasury of the true dharma eye of this ancient ancestor Dongshan. Other buddha ancestors’ words are just the play of hot water in a bowl. Now, let me ask you: in the end, what is the place of no cold or heat? Do you understand?





In the jade pavilion, a kingfisher builds a nest.



In the gold palace, ducks are enclosed.





Kumu is a descendant of Dongshan and a distinguished person in the ancestral seat. Here he warns many of those who pay homage to Dongshan, High Ancestor, Great Master, in the caved house of differentiation and oneness. If buddha dharma had been transmitted merely through the investigation of differentiation and oneness, how could it have reached this day?

Peasants or stray cats who have never understood the inner chamber of Dongshan, and who have not passed the threshold of the buddha dharma, mistakenly say that Dongshan guided students with his theory of Five Ranks of differentiation and oneness. This is a confused view. Do not pay attention to it, but just study thoroughly that the ancient ancestor has the treasury of the true dharma eye.





Hongzhi, Zen Master of Mount Tiantong, Qingyuan Prefecture, is an heir of Danxia. (His priest name is Zhenjiao.) He said:



When you take up this dialogue, it is like you and me playing a game of go. If you do not respond to my move, I’ll swallow you up. Only when you penetrate this, will you understand the meaning of Dongshan’s words. I, Tiantong, cannot help adding this note:





I see no cold or heat whatsoever.



The great ocean has just dried up.



Let me tell you, a giant tortoise is lying in front of you.



It’s funny you are setting up a fishing pole on the sand.





Suppose there is a game of go; who are the two players? If you say that you and I are playing go, it means you have a handicap of eight stones. If you have a handicap of eight stones, it is no longer a game.

What is the meaning of this? When you answer, answer this way: You play go with yourself; the opponents become one. Thus, steadying your mind and turning your body, examine Hongzhi’s words, If you do not respond to my move. That means you are not yet you. Do not neglect the words, I’ll swallow you up. Mud is within mud. Wash your feet, wash the tassel on your hat. A jewel is within a jewel, illuminating other, illuminating the self.





Keqin, Zen Master Yuanwu of Mount Jia, is an heir of Fayan, of Mount Wuzu. About this case he said:



A board rolls on a pearl and a pearl rolls on a board.



Differentiation within oneness; oneness within differentiation.



A mountain goat hangs by its horns on a branch, leaving no trace.



A hunting dog runs in the forest, taking empty steps.



The words A board rolls on a pearl appear before the light and cut off the future—rarely heard in the past and present. Until now it has only been said that things do not abide, like pearls rolling on a board. However, now a mountain goat hangs by its horns in emptiness. The forest runs around the hunting dog.





Xuedou, Zen Master Mingjiao of the Zisheng Monastery on Mount Xuedou, Qingyuan Prefecture, is an heir of Beita Guangzuo. (His priest name is Zhongxian.) Once, he said:



Reaching out your arms is climbing the ten-thousand-foot cliff.



Oneness and differentiation are not necessarily fixed.



The old lapis lazuli hall brightly illuminates the moon.



A fierce dog tiptoes up the stairs of emptiness.



Xuedou is a third-generation dharma descendant of Yunmen. He should be called a mature skin bag. By saying Reaching out your arms is climbing the ten-thousand-foot cliff, he seems to show an extraordinary mark, but it is not necessarily so. The matter discussed between the monk and Dongshan is not necessarily limited to extending the arms, not extending the arms, going into the world, or not going into the world. Furthermore, why did he emphasize the words differentiation and oneness? It seems that Xuedou could not deal with this matter without the view of differentiation and oneness. The reason he does not grasp this study by the nose is that he has not reached the neighborhood of Dongshan and does not see the great house of buddha dharma. He should take up his sandals and inquire further. Do not mistakenly say that Dongshan’s buddha dharma is the Five Ranks of oneness and differentiation.





Tianning, Zen Master Changling, Shouzhuo of the Tianning Monastery in Dongjing, wrote a poem on this case:



Within differentiation there is oneness.



Within oneness there is differentiation.



Drifting in the human world hundreds and thousands of years,



again and again we want to depart but cannot.



In front of the gate just as before, weeds abound.



Although he talks about differentiation and oneness, somehow he has touched it. Indeed there is something he has touched. What is within differentiation?





Fuxing of Mount Gui, Tan Region, is an heir of Yuanwu.(His priest name is Fatai.) He said:



The place where there is no cold or heat leads to you.



A decayed tree brings forth blossoms once again.



It’s like looking at the mark on the boat for the sword dropped into the water.



Even now you are in the midst of cold ash.



These words have some power of crushing the fundamental point underfoot while raising it overhead.





Letan Zhantang, Zen Master Wenzhun, said:



When it is hot, heat prevails; in cold, cold prevails.



From the beginning, cold and heat do not interfere with each other.



Moving through the heavens, you become well versed in worldly affairs.



On your honorable head you wear a wild boar hat.



Now, I [Dogen] ask you, “What is not-interfering?” Answer quick, quick!





Heshan, Zen Master Fudeng of Mount He, Hu Region (whose priest name is priest Shouxun), is an heir of Taiping Huiqin, Zen Master Fujian. He said:



“Where there is no cold or heat” is Dongshan’s phrase.



This place is where a number of Zen persons get lost.



Go for fire when it is cold, and cool yourself when it is hot.



All your life you can avoid cold and heat.



Although Heshan is a dharma descendant of Wuzu Fayan, his words appear to be child’s talk. However, All your life you can avoid cold and heat hints at his later maturity as a great old master. All your life is your entire life; avoid cold and heat is nothing other than dropping away body and mind.





Various masters of different generations smacked their lips in presenting their capping verses, but they did not even come close to Dongshan. The reason is that they mistakenly talked about cooling off and warming up without understanding cold or heat in the everyday activities of buddha ancestors. This is most pitiful. What did they learn about cold or heat from their old masters? How sad that the ancestral way has declined!

Only after you understand the meaning of cold and heat, permeate the moment of cold and heat, and activate cold and heat, should you add a capping verse to explain the words of Dongshan. Otherwise, you are not as good as those who know nothing. Even in the secular world the understanding of sun and moon, and how to abide with all things, varies according to sages, learned people, virtuous people, and ignorant people. Don’t think that cold and heat in the buddha way are the same as the cold and heat that ignorant people talk about. Investigate this directly.



Presented twice to the assembly in a deep mountain of Echizen in the second year of the Kangen Era [1244]. At the moment of meeting Buddha, the Unicorn Sutra is expounded. An ancestor [Qingyuan commenting on Shitou] said, “Although there are many horns, a single horn is sufficient.”





