68



UDUMBARA BLOSSOM



AT THE ASSEMBLY of a million beings on Vulture Peak, the World-Honored One held up an udumbara blossom and blinked. Then, Mahakashyapa smiled. The World-Honored One said, “I have the treasury of the true dharma eye, the wondrous heart of nirvana. I entrust it to Mahakashyapa.”



The Seven Original Buddhas and all buddhas equally hold up this flower. They realize and manifest holding up the flower of going beyond. They break open and clarify holding up the flower right at this moment. This being so, going beyond and going within, self and other, and the going forward and going back of holding up the flower are altogether holding up the entire flower. This is flower dimension, buddha dimension, mind dimension, and body dimension.

No matter how many times a flower is held up, it is transmission and entrusting [of the dharma] face to face, heir to heir. The World-Honored One’s holding up the flower has not been abandoned. Your holding up the flower that the World-Honored One held up is your inheriting the World-Honored One. As the moment of holding up the flower is throughout time, you are with the World-Honored One, holding up the flower.

Holding up a flower means a flower holding up a flower. The flower can be a plum blossom, spring blossom, snow blossom, or lotus. The five petals of a plum blossom are three hundred sixty or more assemblies, five thousand forty-eight fascicles [of sutras], Three Vehicles and Twelve Divisions [of the Buddha’s teaching], as well as three types and ten stages of bodhisattvas. And yet, it is beyond the understanding of three types and ten stages of bodhisattvas.

In this flower, there is a great basket [of scriptures], there is something extraordinary. This is called “the world of blossoming flowers arises.”

“One flower opens five petals. The fruit matures of itself” [from a verse by Bodhidharma] means the entire body upholds the entire body. Seeing peach blossoms and smashing the eyeball, or hearing the sound of green bamboo and obscuring the ear consciousness, is the right now of holding up the flower. Cutting the arm in deep snow, or bowing and attaining the marrow, is the unfolding of the blossom of itself. Husking rice in the stone mortar and having a robe transmitted deep in the night is the flower holding up itself. All these are the life root in the hand of the World-Honored One.

Now, holding up a flower existed before the World-Honored One attained enlightenment. It took place at the same time that the World-Honored One attained enlightenment. It has taken place after he attained enlightenment. In this way the flower attains enlightenment. Holding up the flower goes beyond these times. Arousing the aspiration for enlightenment and receiving initiation, as well as practice, realization, and continuation, all stir up the spring wind of holding up the flower.

Thus, Gautama, the World-Honored One, entered the flower and hid in emptiness. He must have held up the nostrils. He did hold up the void and called it holding up the flower. Holding up the flower is holding it up with the eyeball, with mind consciousness, with the nostrils, and with holding up the flower.

Mountains, rivers, sun, moon, wind, and rain, as well as humans, animals, grass, and trees—each and all has been held up. This is holding up the flower. The coming and going of birth and death is a variety of blossoms and their colors. For us to study in this way is holding up the blossom.





The Buddha said [in the Lotus Sutra], “It is like an udumbara blossom. All beings love and enjoy it.”

All beings here means buddha ancestors who manifest or hide their bodies. Grass, trees, and insects all have radiant light. Love and enjoy it means that the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow of each one of them is vital now. Thus, all are the udumbara blossom. That is why it is so extraordinary.





Blinking takes place when the Tathagata sits through under the tree and replaces his eyeball with the morning star. At that moment Mahakashyapa smiles. His face immediately changes and is replaced with the face of taking up the flower.

When the Tathagata blinks, our eyeball is immediately smashed. This blinking of the Tathagata is itself taking up the flower. It is the udumbara flower opening of itself.

At the very moment of taking up the flower, all Gautamas, all Mahakashyapas, all sentient beings, all of us hold up a single hand and together take up the flower. This has never ceased till now. Within this hand is the samadhi of hiding the body, which is called the four great elements and the five skandhas.

I have is entrusting. Entrusting is I have. Entrusting is always immersed in I have. I have is the head top. You study I have by grasping the measurement of the head top. When you take up I have and replace it with entrusting, you uphold the treasury of the true dharma eye.





Bodhidharma’s coming from India is holding up a flower. Holding up a flower is called playing with the spirit. Playing with the spirit is just sitting, dropping away body and mind. To become a buddha and to become an ancestor is called playing with the spirit. To put on a robe and to eat a meal is called playing with the spirit. Buddhas and ancestors mastering cases [of study] is no other than playing with the spirit. You are encountered by the buddha hall and you encounter the monks’ hall. That is for the flower to deepen its color and for the color to add the brightness.

Further, you take up the han in the monks’ hall and strike it in the cloud, or you hold the flute in the buddha hall and play it at the bottom of water. This is when you happen to make a tune of plum blossoms.





Thus, Rujing, my late master, Old Buddha, said:



When Gautama’s eyeball is smashed,



plum blossoms in snow, just one branch,



become thorn bushes, here, everywhere, right now.



Laughing, spring wind blows madly.





Now, the Tathagata’s eyeball happened to be a plum blossom. The plum blossom forms thorns that spread all over. The Tathagata hides his body inside this eyeball, inside the plum blossom. The plum blossom hides itself in the thorns, then it blows spring wind. Thus it rejoices in plum blossom music.



Rujing said:



What Lingyun saw are open peach blossoms.



What I see is fallen peach blossoms.





Know that Lingyun had realization upon seeing the open peach blossoms. His direct experience should not be doubted. The fallen peach blossoms are what Rujing saw. The opening of peach blossoms is stimulated by the spring wind. The falling of peach blossoms is regretted by the spring wind. However deeply regretted by the spring wind, the peach blossoms fall and drop away one’s body and mind.



Presented to the assembly, while residing at the Yoshimine Temple, Echizen Province, on the twelfth day, the second month, the second year of the Kangen Era [1244]





