74



TURNING THE DHARMA WHEEL



RUJING, MY LATE master, Old Buddha Tiantong, ascended the teaching seat and declared:



The World-Honored One said, “When one person opens up reality and returns to the source, all the space in the ten directions disappears.”



My teacher [Xuedou Zhijian] said, “Since this is a statement by the World-Honored One, it cannot help being an extraordinary formulation.” I, Rujing, would say it otherwise: when one person opens up reality and returns to the source, a mendicant smashes his rice bowl.





Wuzu Fayan said, “When one person opens up reality and returns to the source, pounding and crackling resounds throughout the space in the ten directions.”

Fuxing Fatai said, “When one person opens up reality and returns to the source, the space in the ten directions is just the space in the ten directions.”

Keqin, Zen Master Yuanwu of Mount Jia, said, “When one person opens up reality and returns to the source, in the space throughout the ten directions flowers are added on brocade.”

I, Daibutsu, say, “When one person opens up reality and returns to the source, the space throughout the ten directions opens up reality and returns to the source.”



The words When one person opens up reality and returns to the source, all the space in the ten directions disappears come from the Shurangama Sutra. This saying has been commented on by these several buddha ancestors. It is indeed the bones, marrow, and eyeballs of buddha ancestors.

There is a debate whether the Shurangama Sutra, which is composed of ten scrolls, is apocryphal or not. The argument has lasted until now. Among the existing translations, the newest one from the Xinlong Era [705–707] is particularly suspect.

However, Fayan, Fatai, and Rujing have all commented on this saying. Thus, these words have already been turned by the dharma wheel of buddha ancestors. The buddha ancestors are turning this dharma wheel. In this way, these words turn the buddha ancestors, and these words have already expounded the buddha ancestors. Because these words have been turned by buddha ancestors and have turned buddha ancestors, even if this sutra is spurious, it has become a genuine buddha sutra and ancestor sutra, an intimate and familiar dharma wheel. Even a tile or a pebble, a fallen leaf, an udumbara blossom, or even a brocade robe, when taken up and turned by buddha ancestors, is the buddha dharma wheel and the buddha treasury of the true dharma eye.

Know that when sentient beings leap beyond and attain true awakening, they are buddha ancestors, disciples and teachers of buddha ancestors, and the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow of buddha ancestors. They are no longer the siblings of any ordinary sentient beings, but the siblings of buddha ancestors.

Likewise, even if the words in the ten-scroll Shurangama Sutra are inauthentic, the saying discussed above is an extraordinary buddha saying and ancestor saying that cannot be compared with usual words. However, even if these words go beyond, do not regard the entire text of the sutra as buddha words and ancestor words; do not regard the entire text as the eyeball of study.

There are many reasons that this saying should not be compared with usual words. I will present some of the reasons. What is called turning the dharma wheel is the activity of buddha ancestors. There have been no buddha ancestors who do not turn the dharma wheel. How the dharma wheel is turned is by taking up sound and form and smashing sound and form, by leaping out of sound and form and turning the dharma wheel, by plucking out the eyeball and turning the dharma wheel, or by raising a fist and turning the dharma wheel. The dharma wheel also turns by itself when the nostrils are grabbed and empty space is grasped. Taking up the saying discussed above at this immediate moment is taking up the morning star, nostrils, peach blossoms, or empty space. This is no other than taking up buddha ancestors and taking up the dharma wheel. This is the essence of clearly turning the dharma wheel.

Turning the dharma wheel is to practice without separating from the monastery for a whole lifetime, to ask for instructions, and to whole-heartedly engage the way on the sitting platform.



Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, Echizen Province, on the twenty-seventh day, the second month, the second year of the Kangen Era [1244].





