80



SEEING OTHERS’ MINDS



HUIZHONG, NATIONAL TEACHER Dazheng of the Guangzhai Monastery in Xijing, was from Zhuji, Yue Province. His family name was Ran. After receiving the mind seal, he resided in Dangzi Valley, Mount Boya of Nanyang, for over forty years without going out of the monastery gate.

His practice was known in the imperial capital [of Chang’an]. In the second year of the Shangyuan Era [761] of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Su dispatched Sun Zhongjin as his messenger, invited Huizhong to the palace, and asked him to be his teacher. The emperor appointed Hui-zhong abbot of the Xichan Temple of the Qianfu Monastery.

Later, Emperor Dai visited Huizhong and asked him to be abbot of the Guangzhai Monastery, where Huizhong resided for sixteen years, expounding dharma on occasion.

There was a man called Tripitaka Master Daer from India. He claimed that he had mastered the power of seeing others’ minds. Emperor Dai asked Huizhong to test him.

Daer saw Huizhong, bowed to him, and stood on the right side of him.

Huizhong said, “Have you mastered the art of seeing others’ minds?”

Daer said, “Not really.”

Huizhong said, “Tell me where this old monk is.”

Daer said, “You are the teacher of the nation, reverend. Why are you in the West River enjoying the racing boats?”

Huizhong paused for a while and said, “Tell me where this old monk is now.”

Daer said, “You are the teacher of the nation, reverend. Why are you on the Tianjin Bridge watching monkeys play?”

Huizhong again said, “Tell me where this old monk is at this very moment.”

Daer tried to see for some time but could not see where Huizhong was.

Huizhong yelled: “You are possessed by the spirit of a wild fox. You don’t have the power of seeing others’ minds.”

Daer remained silent.





A monk asked Zhaozhou, “Why didn’t Daer see where Huizhong was the third time?”

Zhaozhou said, “Huizhong was on top of Daer’s nostrils, so he could not see Huizhong.”



A monk asked Xuansha, “Why did Daer not see Huizhong, who was on top of his nostrils?”

Xuansha said, “Because he was too close.”



A monk asked Yangshan, “Why could Daer not answer the third time?”

Yangshan said, “The first two times Daer was dealing with an object of mind. But later, Huizhong entered receptive samadhi. That’s why Daer could not see him.”



Haihui Shouduan said, “If Huizhong was on top of Daer’s nostrils, why was it difficult to see? Because Daer did not know that Huizhong was inside his eyeball.”



Also, Xuansha criticized Daer by saying, “Say! Did you actually see Huizhong the first two times?”

Xuedou [Zhongxian], Zen Master Mingjue, said, “You lost. You lost.”





A number of stinky fists [determined practitioners], particularly these five masters, have spoken of this story of Huizhong testing Tripitaka Master Daer.

These five masters strike the point but still miss Huizhong’s practice. It’s like saying Daer did not get it the third time but did the first two times. This is how they miss it. Those who study later should be aware of it.



I have two doubts about these five masters. One: they did not know why Huizhong had tested Daer. Two: they did not know the body and mind of Huizhong.

Now, the reason I say that they did not know why Huizhong had tested Daer is this: First of all, Huizhong said, Tell me where this old monk is. This is how he asked Daer if he had the eye to see and hear buddha dharma. He is asking Daer if he had mastered seeing others’ minds in buddha dharma.

If Daer had understood buddha dharma, he would have had a way to go beyond discriminatory thoughts or would have had a means to directly experience thusness when Huizhong asked this question.

Huizhong’s question, Tell me where this old monk is, was like saying, “Who am I?” Asking, Tell me where this old monk is, was asking, “What is the time right now?” Tell me where is no other than asking, “Where is this?” It is just like inquiring, “What do you call this old monk?” Hui-zhong is not necessarily the old monk. The old monk is a fist [an accomplished practitioner].



Although Daer was from India, he did not see through Huizhong’s mind because he had not understood buddha dharma. He had only studied views of ordinary people or of the Two Lesser Vehicles.

Huizhong said again, Tell me where this old monk is now. For this Daer presented another fruitless statement.

Huizhong finally asked, Tell me where this old monk is at this very moment. Daer thought about it for some time but did not say anything. He was dumbfounded. Then Huizhong scolded him and said, You are possessed by the spirit of a wild fox. You don’t have the power of seeing others’ minds. But Daer could not say anything. He had no way to penetrate the way.

Regarding this case, all of the five masters thought that Huizhong’s criticism indicated that Daer knew where he was the first two times but he did not the third time.

It is not so. Huizhong scolded Daer that he had not even dreamed of buddha dharma. It is not that Daer knew where he was the first two times but he did not the third time. Huizhong scolded Daer for being unable to see through others’ minds though he claimed to be able to do so.

Huizhong’s first point was to test Daer by asking if there was the power of seeing others’ minds in buddha dharma. Daer said Not really, but, in fact, he meant there was.

Then Huizhong thought that Daer would be right if he said there was the power of seeing others’ minds in buddha dharma and let the power be manifested in buddha dharma. But if he could not prove what he said, this would not be buddha dharma.

Even if Daer had a right answer the third time, what he said the first two times was not right expression; he should be scolded altogether. The reason why Huizhong asked him three times was to see if Daer had understood the true meaning of the question.

Secondly, I say that these five masters did not understand Huizhong’s mind. The reason is this: The body and mind of Huizhong were not easily known and understood by Daer. They cannot be reached by bodhisattvas of the ten stages or three classes, or known by bodhisattvas whose enlightenment is equal to buddhas’, being close to becoming buddhas. How could an ordinary person like Daer know the entire body of Hui-zhong? Clearly understand this.

Be sure of this. To say that the body and mind of Huizhong can be known by a scholar of the Tripitaka is to slander buddha dharma. To think that Huizhong is only equal to a master of sutras and treatises is extreme confusion. Do not assume that those who have the power of seeing others’ minds can tell Huizhong’s whereabouts.





The art of seeing others’ minds is a folk practice of India, and there were some who had mastered it. But it is not based on the aspiration for enlightenment, nor on the right Mahayana view. There have been no known examples of such practitioners who realized buddha dharma with the art of seeing others’ minds.

It is possible to enter realization of buddha dharma for those who have mastered the art of seeing others’ minds, if they arouse the aspiration for enlightenment and practice like ordinary people. If the art of seeing others’ minds had the power to help understand the buddha way, all ancient sages would have first acquired the art of seeing others’ minds and understood the fruit of buddhahood with its power. However, this has never been the case for the emergence of one thousand or ten thousand buddhas. What would they do without knowing the way of buddha ancestors? I must say that such an art would be of no use in the buddha way. There is no difference in maintaining buddha nature between those who have mastered the art of seeing others’ minds and those who have not.

You who study buddha dharma should not think that the five or six miraculous powers of those outside the way or those in the Two Lesser Vehicles surpass ordinary people. It is just that those who have way-seeking mind and want to study buddha dharma surpass those who have mastered the five or six miraculous powers. It is like the singing voice of a karavinka chick inside an egg already surpassing the voices of all other birds.

Furthermore, what is called the art of seeing others’ minds in India should be seen as the art of seeing others’ thoughts. Although practitioners of the art can relate to thoughts that have arisen, they have no idea about thoughts that have not yet arisen. It is ridiculous.

Even further, mind is not necessarily thought; thought is not necessarily mind. When mind is thought, however, one who has mastered the art of seeing others’ minds does not know it. When thought is mind, one who has mastered the art of seeing others’ minds does not know it.

Thus, those who have mastered five or six miraculous powers in India do not come up to those who cut weeds and work on rice fields in this country. Such miraculous powers are useless. Because they are not essential, the earlier teachers in China and eastward never favored or practiced such powers.

A foot-wide jade may be more useful than such powers. And yet, a foot-wide jade is not a treasure. A moment of time is most essential. Who, among those who value each moment, has time to practice such powers? Thus, remind yourself that the power of seeing others’ minds does not come close to the realm of buddha wisdom.



Nevertheless, the five masters all thought that Daer had known where Huizhong was the first two times. It is a great mistake. Huizhong was a buddha ancestor. Daer was an ordinary person. How could they understand each other?

Huizhong first said, Tell me where this old monk is. There is nothing hidden in this question. It was not Daer’s fault that he did not understand its true meaning. But it was a mistake that the five masters could not hear and see it.

Huizhong’s question was Tell me where this old monk is. He did not say, “Tell me where my mind is,” or “Tell me where my thought is.” This is the point that one needs to notice and examine. But the five masters did not notice and examine this point. Because of that, they did not understand Huizhong’s body and mind. The one who has the point of this teaching is Huizhong, and the one who does not is not Huizhong.

The five masters could not know Huizhong, as his body and mind were neither large nor small, neither self nor other. It seems that they forgot that Huizhong had a head top and nostrils. Although he practiced continuously, how could he have intended to become a buddha? Thus, one should not take up a buddha and give dualistic interpretations.

Huizhong did have the body and mind of buddha dharma. Do not try to understand him with the practice of miraculous powers. Do not discuss him by emptying thought and forgetting relationships. He was not where discernment and beyond discernment could hit the point.

Huizhong neither had buddha nature nor did not have buddha nature. He was not the body of void. The body and mind of Huizhong were ungraspable. In the assembly of Huineng at Caoxi, beside Qingyuan and Nanyue, only Huizhong, National Teacher Dazheng, was a buddha ancestor.



The five masters’ views should be altogether seen through:

Zhaozhou said, Huizhong was on top of Daer’s nostrils, so he could not see Huizhong. This statement did not hit the point. How could Hui-zhong be on top of Daer’s nostrils? Daer didn’t have nostrils. Had he had nostrils, Huizhong would have had a true encounter with him. Had Huizhong had a true encounter with him, it would have been nostrils seeing nostrils. Daer, however, did not have a true encounter with Huizhong.

Xuansha said, Because he was too close. Daer was not even close. He was not in Huizhong’s neighborhood. How could Xuansha say too close? He did not know what was too close, and he did not practice what was too close. Although he knew that what is too close is not true encountering, he did not know that true encountering is too close. I should say that Xuansha was far, far away in buddha dharma. If he meant that Daer was too close only at the third time, the first two times would be much too close.

Let me ask Xuansha now: What do you regard as too close? A fist? An eyeball? From now on, do not say what is too close is not worth examining.

Yangshan said, The first two times Daer was dealing with an object of mind. But later, Huizhong entered receptive samadhi. That’s why Daer could not see him. Although his fame as Small Shakyamuni prevailed in India, his statement is completely wrong. It is not that merging with the object of mind and receptive samadhi are different. So he should not have said that Daer had not seen Huizhong because merging with the object of mind and receptive samadhi are different. Thus, although Yangshan presented a reason why Daer had not seen Huizhong the third time, his statement was not yet a [correct] statement.

If one did not see another in receptive samadhi, receptive samadhi would not manifest and actualize receptive samadhi. If Yangshan assumed that Daer had known Huizhong’s whereabouts the first two times, he could be someone who understood buddha dharma.

Daer did not know or see Huizhong’s whereabouts the third time, or the first two times. As Yangshan made such a statement, neither Daer nor Yangshan knew Huizhong’s whereabouts.

Let me ask Yangshan: where is Huizhong now? When Yangshan is about to speak, I will give him a shout.

Xuansha criticized Daer by saying, Did you actually see Huizhong the first two times? This statement appears to express what needs to be expressed. But Xuansha ought to examine his own statement. This is a good statement. But it is like seeing without seeing. Thus, it is not right.

Xuedou, Zen Master Mingjiao, said upon hearing Xuansha, You lost. You lost. Xuedou should have said so if he had approved Xuansha. He should not have said so if he did not.

Haihui Shouduan said, If Huizhong was on top of Daer’s nostrils, why was it difficult to see? Because Daer did not know that Huizhong was inside his eyeball. He only discussed the third time. He should have denied Daer’s seeing of Huizhong the first two times, but he didn’t. How could he know that Huizhong was on top of Daer’s nose or inside his eyeball?

As Haihui said this, we should say that he did not hear Huizhong. Daer did not have nostrils or an eyeball. Even if he had his eyeball and nostrils, if Huizhong had entered Daer’s eyeball and nostrils, they would have exploded. If they had exploded, they would not have been Hui-zhong’s cave or basket [abode].



None of these five masters was clear about Huizhong’s teaching. Huizhong is a buddha who excelled in his time, a tathagata of the world. He had clarified and authentically received transmission of the Buddha’s treasury of the true dharma eye. Certainly maintaining the soapberry-pit [complete] eye, he transmitted dharma to himself, who was buddha, and to others who were buddhas.

Although Huizhong practiced simultaneously with Shakyamuni Buddha, he also practiced simultaneously with the Seven Original Buddhas. He attained the way before the King of the Empty Eon, after the King of the Empty Eon, and at the very time of the King of the Empty Eon.

Naturally, Huizhong abides in the Saha World, but his Saha World is not necessarily in the world of phenomena, or in the entire world of the ten directions. Shakyamuni Buddha, who presides over the Saha World, will not take away or hinder Huizhong’s land. It is just like buddha ancestors from the past and future who will not rob or hinder each other. This is so, because attaining the way of buddha ancestors from the past and future is totally immersed in attaining the way.





Clearly understand that Daer’s not knowing Huizhong can be a proof that shravakas and pratyeka-buddhas in the Lesser Vehicles cannot even come close to buddha ancestors. Study the meaning of Huizhong’s criticism of Daer.

If Huizhong’s whereabouts had been guessed the first two times and he had criticized Daer the third time, it would not have been a point of teaching. Guessing two out of three would be no different from guessing all three times. This would not be a criticism. If Huizhong had criticized in this way, Daer would not have been criticized for complete ignorance. What Daer guessed would have been Huizhong’s shame. If so, who would have trusted Huizhong? People would have criticized him for what Daer had guessed.

Huizhong’s intention was to criticize Daer for never knowing his whereabouts, his thoughts, his body and mind, these three times. He criticized Daer for not having seen, heard, or studied buddha dharma. Because of this intention, Huizhong asked the same question three times.

First Daer said, You are the teacher of the nation, reverend. Why are you in the West River enjoying the racing boats? But Huizhong did not utter words. He did not admit that Daer knew his whereabouts. He just kept asking the same question. Without knowing the true meaning of his intention, for hundreds of years after Huizhong, masters of various places have mistakenly expressed their opinions.

None of these five masters’ statements express Huizhong’s intention, nor do they fit the meaning of buddha dharma. What a pity that the old gimlets before and after are all mistaken!





If you say that there is the art of seeing others’ minds in buddha dharma, there should be the art of seeing others’ bodies, the art of seeing others’ fists, and the art of seeing others’ eyeballs. If so, there should be the art of seeing through the mind of the self and the art of seeing through the body of the self. And if so, the self taking up the mind of the self is the art of seeing through the mind of the self. To manifest such a statement is the art of seeing others’ minds, by the self and by the mind.

Now ask: “Is it all right to take up the art of seeing others’ minds?” Or, “Is it all right to take up the art of seeing through the mind of the self?” Answer quickly. Answer quickly.

Setting these questions aside, “You have attained my marrow” is no other than the art of seeing others’ minds.



Presented to the assembly of the Daibutsu Monastery, Echizen Province, on the fourth day, the seventh month, the third year of the Kangen Era [1245].





