81



KING WANTS THE SAINDHAVA



EXPRESSING WITH WORDS and without words is like a wisteria vine entwined around a tree, herding a donkey and a horse, or penetrating water and cloud.

Thus, the World-Honored One said in the Great Maha Pari-nirvana Sutra:



It is like a great king telling his courtiers to bring the saindhava. The word saindhava indicates any of four things: water, salt, cup, or horse. These four things are called by the same name.



A wise courtier understood this word well. When the king was about to wash his hands and wanted the saindhava, the courtier would bring water. When the king was about to have a meal and wanted the saindhava, the courtier would bring some salt. When the king finished eating and asked for the saindhava so he could have a drink, the courtier would bring the cup. When the king desired to go out and requested the saindhava, the courtier would bring the horse.



This wise courtier thoroughly understood the great king’s subtle use of this word.





This story of the king wanting the saindhava and the courtier bringing it has been handed down for a long time. It has been transmitted just like a dharma robe.

As the World-Honored One did not fail to bring it up, his descendants often quoted him. I suspect that those who practice together with the World-Honored One journey with the saindhava. Those who do not practice together with the World-Honored One should buy sandals and take one step of the journey to understand it.

The saindhava subtly permeates the house of buddha ancestors, just as it did in the house of the great king.





Hongzhi, Old Buddha of Mount Tiantong, Qingyuan Prefecture of Great Song, ascended the teaching seat and spoke to the assembly:



A monk asked Zhaozhou, ‘What about the moment the king wants the saindhava?’



Zhaozhou bent his body forward and held his hands together.



Xuedou later commented: “When the king wanted salt, the courtier brought the horse.”



Xuedou established a house one hundred years ago. Zhaozhou was an old buddha who lived for one hundred twenty years. If Zhaozhou was right, Xuedou was not right. If Xuedou was right, Zhaozhou was not right.



Say it now. Ultimately, what is this?



I cannot help adding comments. If there is a hairbreadth of discrepancy, I would miss it by ten thousand li.



Even if you understand it, it is like scaring a snake by hitting the grass. Even if you don’t understand it, it is like burning paper coins to attract the spirit of the dead. If you don’t plow an unattended field, it will be like Old Monk Juzhi [who would always hold up one finger]. I just let my hand take it up.





When Rujing, my late master, ascended the teaching seat, he would often mention Old Buddha Xuedou. The only one who encountered Xuedou was Rujing, my late master, Old Buddha. At the time of Xue-dou, there was someone called Zonggao, Zen Master Dahui of Mount Jing, a remote descendant of Nanyue. People all over Song China think he equaled or even excelled Xuedou. This mistake was made because monks and laypeople in Song China are shallow in their studies and their eyes are not clear; they do not discern true persons, nor do they have the power to discern themselves.



Hongzhi’s words expressed the true heart. Thus, study the meaning of Zhaozhou bent forward and held his hands together. At this very moment, is it the king wanting the saindhava, or is it the courtier bringing the saindhava?

Study Xuedou’s words, When the king wanted salt, the courtier brought the horse. Wanting salt and bringing the horse are also the king wanting the saindhava and the courtier wanting the saindhava.

The World-Honored One wanted the saindhava and Mahakashyapa smiled. Bodhidharma wanted the saindhava and his four disciples brought the horse, the salt, the water, and the cup. Study the key point that when the horse, the salt, the water, and the cup want the saindhava, the horse is brought and the water is brought.





One day Nanquan saw Deng Yinfeng coming. He pointed to a water jar and said, “That jar is an object. There is water in it. Bring me the water without moving the object.”

Deng Yinfeng brought the jar and poured out the water in front of Nanquan.

Nanquan shut up.



When Nanquan wanted water, the ocean dried out to the bottom. When Deng Yinfeng brought the jar, he tilted it and poured out the water. Thus, investigate water in an object and an object in water. Water has not moved, the object has not moved.





Xiangyan, Great Master Xideng, was asked by a monk, “What is the meaning of the king wanting the saindhava?”

Xiangyan said, “Get over here.”

The monk got closer.

Xiangyan said, “Human stupidity is deadly.”

Now, let me ask you: do the words by Xiangyan, Get over here, indicate wanting the saindhava or bringing the saindhava? Tell me. I ask you.

Responding to Xiangyan’s words, the monk got closer. Was it what Xiangyan wanted? Was it what Xiangyan brought forth? Had it been just as expected by Xiangyan? If it had not been expected, Xiangyan would not have said, Human stupidity is deadly.

Even if these words were Xiangyan’s utmost statement, he could not have avoided the lack of vitality. It sounds like the commander of a lost battle boasting about the fight.

Expounding yellow and speaking in detail of black [expressing this way and that], through head top and eye, is the wanting and the bringing of the saindhava. Who doesn’t know about taking up a staff and taking up a whisk? And yet, this cannot be done by those who try to keep a stringed instrument in tune by gluing down its movable bridges [causing a lack of flexibility]. As they do not understand the effect of gluing down the bridges, they do not have the capacity to keep the koto in tune.





One day the World-Honored One ascended the teaching seat.

Manjushri struck a bell with a mallet and said to the assembly, “Contemplate the Dharma King’s teaching. The Dharma King’s teaching is just like this.”

The World-Honored One descended the seat.



Xuedou Zhongxian, Zen Master Mingjiao, commented on this story: “In the assembly of sages, only masters know that the dharma of the Dharma King is not like that. If there had been a person of the saindhava in the assembly, how would Manjushri have struck the bell with his mallet?”



Thus, Xuedou suggested in this statement that if this single mallet is entirely without fault, both striking and not striking are dropped away without fault. If it is so, a single striking of the mallet is the saindhava.

If you are a person of thusness, you are a person of the saindhava in the assembly [of the Buddha]. This being so, the dharma of the Dharma King is thus. Activating the twelve hours of the day is to want the saindhava. Being activated by the twelve hours of the day is to want the saindhava. Want a fist and bring a fist. Want a whisk and bring a whisk.

Those who are called elders in monasteries in China, however, have never dreamed of the saindhava. How painful! How terrible that the ancestral way is declining! Don’t be negligent in your endeavor of the way. Receive and maintain the buddha ancestors’ life vein.

For example, ask, “What is buddha?” Or say, “Mind is itself buddha.” What does it mean? Is it not the saindhava?

Thoroughly investigate who is “Mind is itself buddha.” Who knows the poundings and cracklings of the saindhava?



Presented to the assembly of the Daibutsu Monastery on the twenty-second day, the tenth month, the third year of the Kangen Era [1245].





