82



INSTRUCTIONS ON KITCHEN WORK



Presented to the assembly on the sixth day, the eighth month, the fourth year of the Kangen Era [1246].





Regarding the method of serving meals to the community of monks, it is said [in the Guidelines for Zen Monasteries], “Make respect the essence of this pure practice.”



The method that has been authentically transmitted from faraway India to neighboring China, after the pari-nirvana of the Tathagata, is to serve the offerings from the devas to the Buddha and monks, and to dedicate the kingly meals to the Buddha and monks. In addition, there are meals offered from the households of wealthy families and lay practitioners, and also from the households of those in the merchant and untouchable classes.

Such offerings should be equally respected and handled with utmost care. The deepest bows and the most venerated words among humans and devas should be employed for serving the food. Even on a deep and remote mountain the authentic manner and speech found in the monastery kitchen should be maintained. This is how humans and devas learn the buddha dharma.

Call the morning meal onkayu [the honorific form of kayu], and do not bluntly call it kayu. Call the midday meal ontoki [the honorific form of toki], and do not call it toki. Call the midday meal time saiji [in a formal way].

Say “Yone mairaseyo” or “Shirome maira seyo” [“Please serve the rice” in a formal way], and don’t say “Yone tsuke yo” [“Put the rice on” in a disrespectful way]. Say “Jomai shi maira seyo” [“Please clean the rice” in a formal way], and do not say “Yone kase” [“Wash the rice” in a disrespectful way].

Say “Osai wo eri maira seyo” [“Please select vegetables (in the honorific form) for cooking”], and don’t say “Sai ere” [“Pick vegetables”]. Say “Oshiru no mono, shi mairase yo” [“Please cook the soup” in a respectful way], but don’t say “Shiru niyo.” Say “On atsunomono shi mairase yo,” [“Make hot vegetables,” in the honorific form] and don’t say “Atsumono seyo.”

Say “Ontoki [or] onkayu wa mumase sase tamai taru” (“The midday meal or the morning meal is fully cooked” in an honorific form). All the materials being prepared for the midday or morning meals should be referred to with respect in this way. Being disrespectful to materials causes disaster and brings forth no merit.

When you prepare the midday or morning meal, don’t blow onto the rice, vegetables, or any other food. Do not let the sleeves of your work clothes touch any food, even food that is dry.

Do not touch the utensils or food for the midday or morning meal with the hand you have used to touch your head or face; first wash your hands. From the time you select good rice grains until the time you cook the rice and vegetables, always wash your hands if you happen to scratch yourself.

When you cook, chant lines from a sutra or words of a buddha ancestor. Do not make worldly or unnecessary conversation.

Use honorific forms of verbs for describing how to handle rice, vegetables, salt, and soy sauce; do not use plain language for this.

When passing by food prepared for the morning or midday meal, monks and workers should make a standing bow toward the food with hands joined together. Dropped grains of rice or pieces of vegetables should be used later. Do not disrupt the meal serving [by picking them up and trying to use them right away].

Carefully protect the tools for cooking meals, and do not use them for anything else. Do not let those from lay households touch the tools before they have washed their hands. Purify unwashed vegetables and fruit from lay households with water, incense, and fire before you offer them to the three treasures and the assembly of monks.

Nowadays, in monasteries on various mountains of Great Song China, when bean cakes, milk cakes, or steamed cakes are brought from lay households, they are steamed again and then offered to the assembly of monks. This is to purify the food; without this procedure the food is not offered to the monks.

These are some of the many guidelines. Grasp the essential meaning of them and practice them in the kitchen. Do not be negligent.

These guidelines are the life vein of buddha ancestors, the eyeball of monks. Those who are outside the way do not know them. Heavenly demons do not bear them. Only children of the Buddha receive transmission of them. The officer in charge of the kitchen should understand these guidelines clearly and not ignore them.



Instructed by Dogen, Founding Monk.




POSTSCRIPT



To the officers of the Eihei Monastery: From now on, if you happen to receive meal offerings from donors to the monastery, hold them until the following day. However, noodles, cakes, and various kinds of gruel should be distributed in the evening. These are medicinal snacks [supper] in the assemblies of buddha ancestors. There are excellent precedents for such practice in Great Song China. Just as the Tathagata permitted the wearing of double clothes in the Snow Mountains [Himalayas], medicinal snacks during the time of snow are permitted in this monastery.



Founding monk of the Eihei Monastery, Kigen [Dogen].





