83



LEAVING THE HOUSEHOLD



THE GUIDELINES FOR Zen Monasteries says:



It is taught that all buddhas in the past, present, and future leave the household and attain the way. The twenty-eight ancestors in India and the six early ancestors in China who transmitted the Buddha’s mind seal were all monks. They are distinguished in the three realms by strictly observing the precepts. Thus, precepts are primary for practicing Zen in pursuit of the way. How can one become a buddha ancestor without becoming free from faults and preventing wrongdoing?



In preparation for receiving the precepts you should have three types of robes, eating bowls and utensils, and new and purified clothes. If new clothes are not available, use freshly washed clothes. Do not borrow clothes or eating bowls for stepping onto the platform to receive the precepts. Concentrate your mind and do not be concerned with other matters. To take a form of the Buddha, to embody the precepts of the Buddha, and to acquire what the Buddha received are not a trifle. You should not be casual about it. If you borrow someone’s robes and bowls, you do not actually receive the precepts, even if you step onto the platform and receive them. Without actually receiving the precepts, you will be one without precepts, mistakenly associated with the gate of emptiness [buddha dharma] and falsely accepting faithful donations.



Beginning practitioners may not be familiar with the guidelines. Without a teacher’s advice, they may make such mistakes. So, here is some advice. Keep it in mind.



If you have already received the bhikshu precepts, receive the bodhisattva precepts. This is the beginning of entering the dharma.





Clearly know that the attainment of the way by all buddhas and ancestors is only accomplished by leaving the household and receiving the precepts. The life vein of all buddhas and ancestors is no other than leaving the household and receiving the precepts. None of those who have not left the household are buddha ancestors. To meet a buddha and to meet an ancestor is to leave the household and receive the precepts.





Mahakashyapa followed the World-Honored One, aspired to leave the household, and expressed hope to awaken all beings.

The World-Honored One said, “Come, monk.”

Then, Mahakashyapa’s hair dropped all by itself and a kashaya wrapped around his body.



This is an excellent example of leaving the household and receiving the precepts when one studied with the Buddha and hoped to liberate all beings.





The Maha Prajna Paramita Sutra quotes the Buddha, the World-Honored One, in its third fascicle:



Some bodhisattvas, great beings, may think in this way:



“Someday I will abandon my country and my position, and leave my household. On that day I will attain unsurpassable, complete enlightenment and turn the dharma wheel. I will help innumerable sentient beings to become free from dust and defilement and give rise to a pure dharma eye. I will also help innumerable sentient beings to keep transforming delusion and attain unsurpassable, complete enlightenment without remitting.”



If such bodhisattvas, great beings, want to fulfill such a vow, they should study the manifestation of prajna.





In this way, unsurpassable enlightenment is fulfilled at the moment you leave the household and receive the precepts. It is not fulfilled other than on this day.

Thus, you take up the day of leaving the household and actualize the day of attaining unsurpassable enlightenment. Taking up the day of attaining unsurpassable enlightenment is the day of leaving the household.

To turn cartwheels on the day of leaving the household is to turn the wondrous dharma wheel. This leaving the household makes innumerable sentient beings unremitting in unsurpassable enlightenment.

Know that to fulfill benefiting the self and benefiting the other and to be unremitting in unsurpassable enlightenment are leaving the house-hold and receiving the precepts. Attaining unsurpassable enlightenment in turn actualizes the day of leaving the household.

Know that the day of leaving the household goes beyond one or many. On the day of leaving the household, you practice and realize countless eons. On the day of leaving the household, you cross over the boundless ocean of eons and turn the wondrous dharma wheel.

The day of leaving the household is not the length of a mealtime. It is not sixty small eons. It goes beyond the past, present, and future. It drops away from the top of the head. The day of leaving the household goes beyond the day of leaving the household. This being so, by crushing baskets and traps, the day of leaving the household becomes the day of leaving the household. The day of attaining the way becomes the day of attaining the way.





The Treatise on Realization of Great Wisdom says in its thirteenth fascicle:



When the Buddha was at Jeta Grove, there was a drunken Brahman. He went to see the Buddha and asked him to make him a monk. The Buddha told his monks to shave the Brahman’s head and let him wear a buddha robe. When the man became sober, he was shocked to see himself turned into a monk, so he ran away.



The monks asked the Buddha, “Why did you allow that drunken Brahman to become a monk? When he saw what you had done, he ran away.”



The Buddha said, “That Brahman would never intend to leave the household even for innumerable eons. But, because he aroused a faint aspiration when he was drunk, due to such causes and conditions he will leave the household and attain the way in the future.



“In this way, there are a variety of causes and conditions for leaving the household. Breaking the precepts as a home leaver is better than keeping them as a layperson. You cannot experience emancipation by keeping the precepts as a layperson.”





Thus, the essence of the Buddha’s teaching is clear. His teaching makes home leaving primary. Those who have not left the household are not in buddha dharma. When the Tathagata was living in the world, a number of those outside the way wanted to give up their wrong paths and take refuge in him, so first they asked his permission to leave the household.

The Tathagata would accept them by saying, “Come, monk.” And when he asked his monks to shave their heads and faces, helping them to leave the household and receive the precepts, the procedure of leaving the household and receiving the precepts was immediately complete.

Know that when Mahakashyapa accepted the Buddha’s teaching in his body and mind, his hair dropped spontaneously from his head and his body was wrapped by a kashaya. Without the permission of buddhas, his hair and beard would not have been shaved off, his body would not have been wrapped by the kashaya, and he would not have received the precepts. Thus, leaving the household and receiving the precepts are no other than being personally given the prediction of enlightenment by buddha tathagatas.





Shakyamuni Buddha said:



Good people, the Tathagata, seeing that sentient beings pursue minor matters, being thin in their virtue and heavy in their defilement, tells them, “I left the household when I was young and attained unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. Truly, I have been a buddha for a long time. I teach sentient beings with skillful means and speak in this way for the sake of letting them enter the buddha way.”





Thus, I have been a buddha for a long time is because I left the household when I was young. Unsurpassable, complete enlightenment is I left the household when I was young. When the Buddha says I left the household when I was young, sentient beings who pursue minor matters, being thin in their virtue and heavy in their defilement, follow the Buddha and leave the household when they are young.

When sentient beings see, hear, and study the Buddha’s words I left the household when I was young, they encounter the Buddha’s unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. When the Buddha awakens sentient beings thin in their virtue and heavy in their defilement, he tells them, I left the household when I was young and I attained unsurpassable, complete enlightenment.

Even though this is so, ask, “How much is the merit of leaving the household?”

If someone asks in this way, say, “To the top of the head.”



Presented to the assembly of the Eihei Monastery, Echizen Province, on the fifteenth day, the ninth month, the fourth year of the Kangen Era [1246].





