96



ONE HUNDRED EIGHT GATES OF REALIZING DHARMA



[THE Sutra of the Buddha’s Practices in Former Lives says:]



Bodhisattva Realization Protector [a former life of Shakyamuni Buddha] was in Tushita Heaven at a celestial palace called High Banner that spread in a square sixty yojana on each side. At various times, the bodhisattva expounded essential dharma there.



Once, he meditated on the place of his birth in his next life [in the human realm]. Then, sitting in the palace, he called to the devas of Tushita Heaven:





I want all of you to assemble here because I am going to descend to the human realm soon. I would like to offer a teaching that is called “the gates of skillful means for entering all aspects of dharma.” This will be the last time I offer you guidance. This is for you to memorize. Rejoice when you hear me and learn about these dharma gates.





Hearing his call, a great number of devas with all of their family members, including jeweled women of heaven, assembled together.



Before expounding this dharma, Bodhisattva Realization Protector made a new palace appear and placed it on top of the High Banner Palace. It was high and broad, decorated with jewels, and it covered the entire world. Its magnificence was incomparable. There was nothing like it among palaces in the desire realm. Devas in the form realm saw that this illusory palace was like a kingly tomb.



Bodhisattva Realization Protector had conducted valuable practices, planted wholesome roots, accomplished benevolence in the past, and possessed great merit. When he was seated on the high lion seat, innumerable treasures were spread around him in glory. Various celestial robes were laid out on his seat, and all types of wondrous scents permeated the air. Incense was burnt in countless incense bowls, and petals of fragrant flowers were sprinkled on the ground. Rare treasures surrounded the high seat, and hundreds, thousands, and millions of splendid rays illuminated the palace.



Jeweled nets were spread above and below the palace walls. Golden bells hanging from them rang with exquisite sound. This great jeweled palace radiated innumerable kinds of radiant light. Thousands of banners and canopies reflecting hues of wondrous colors covered the palace, which was adorned with all types of swinging tassels.



Each of the hundreds, thousands, and millions of celestial women held seven types of treasures, played tunes, and sang their admiration of the boundless merit of the bodhisattva’s practice in the past. Hundreds, thousands, and millions of the four types of protectors of the world stood on the right and left sides, guarding the palace. Thousands of Indras bowed to the palace, and thousands of Brahmas paid homage. Countless bodhisattvas guarded the palace, and all buddhas in the ten directions protected it with mindfulness. Their practices, realizations, and beneficial results from hundreds, thousands, and countless eons in the past were actualized. The causes and effects were completed, and their benefit increased day and night. Immeasurable merit was adorned in this way, which is impossible to explain.



The bodhisattva sat on the high lion seat of great splendor and said to all the devas:





Now, Devas, those of you bodhisattva mahasattvas who abide in Tushita Heaven and are about to be born in the human realm should expound to other devas the one hundred eight gates of realizing dharma. You should leave this teaching for them, let them memorize it, and then make your descent.



Now, Devas, listen and accept the truth wholeheartedly. I am going to explain it:



What are the one hundred eight gates of realizing dharmas?



Right trust is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps determined aspiration from breaking. Pure heart is a gate of realizing dharma; it is not defiled. Rejoicing is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps the mind calm and at ease. Love of enjoyment is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps the heart pure.



Right practice of the body is a gate of realizing dharma, for the three actions [of body, speech, and thought] are kept pure. Pure practice of speech is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps us from the four types of unwholesomeness. Pure practice of mind is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps the mind from the three types of poison.



Mindfulness of the Buddha is a gate of realizing dharma; it visualizes the buddha in purity. Mindfulness of dharma is a gate of realizing dharma; it visualizes dharma in purity. Mindfulness of sangha is a gate of realizing dharma; it makes attaining the way sustained.



Mindfulness of giving is a gate of realizing dharma; it makes you free from wanting a reward. Mindfulness of the precepts is a gate of realizing dharma; it fully contains all vows. Mindfulness of heaven is a gate of realizing dharma; it arouses vast aspiration.



Compassion is a gate of realizing dharma; it encompasses wholesome roots in all realms of birth. Grieving is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps you from harming sentient beings. Joy is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps you from all joyless matters. Letting go is a gate of realizing dharma; it frees you from the five types of desire.



Visualizing impermanence is a gate of realizing dharma; it illustrates the desires of the three realms. Visualizing suffering is a gate of realizing dharma; it frees you from all wishes. Visualizing no-self is a gate of realizing dharma; it frees you from the self. Visualizing serene samadhi is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps your heart and mind from being stirred.



Repentance is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps your inner mind in serene samadhi. Shame is a gate of realizing dharma; it destroys outer unwholesomeness. Realness is a gate of realizing dharma; it does not deceive devas and humans. Truthfulness is a gate of realizing dharma; it does not deceive you. Practice of dharma is a gate of realizing dharma; it engages the practice of dharma. Taking refuge in the three [treasures] is a gate of realizing dharma; it purifies the three unwholesome paths.



Knowing another person’s kindness is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps the wholesome roots from being abandoned. Repaying another person’s kindness is a gate of realizing dharma; it does not ignore the debt. Not deceiving yourself is a gate of realizing dharma; it does not allow you to praise yourself.



Helping sentient beings is a gate of realizing dharma; it does not allow you to slander others. Helping dharma is a gate of realizing dharma; it lets you practice in accordance with dharma. Being aware of time is a gate of realizing dharma; it does not allow you to speak lightly. Being patient is a gate of realizing dharma; it fulfills wisdom. Not arousing unwholesome intention is a gate of realizing dharma; it protects the self and others. Not being hindered is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps your mind free from doubt. Understanding with trust is a gate of realizing dharma; it clarifies the matter of primary significance.



Visualizing impurity is a gate of realizing dharma; it abandons the desire for defilement. Not fighting is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps you from anger and argument. Not being ignorant is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps you from killing.



Enjoying the meaning of dharma is a gate of realizing dharma; it seeks the meaning of dharma. Love of realizing dharma is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads to realizing dharma. Seeking extensive learning is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads to right awakening to aspects of dharma. Right skillful means is a gate of realizing dharma; it embodies right action. Knowing names and forms is a gate of realizing dharma; it removes various hindrances.



Removing the views of causes is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads to emancipation. The intention not to resent those close to you is a gate of realizing dharma; it creates the heart of oneness in the midst of resenting those who are close. Subtle skillful means is a gate of realizing dharma; it knows all forms of suffering. A great sense of equality is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads to freedom from all things that are composed. Entering is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads to the practice of the right path. Not having to arouse patience is a gate of realizing dharma; it realizes the truth of eliminating [causes of suffering].



The ground of mindfulness of the body is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads all things to serenity. The ground of mindfulness of perception is a gate of realizing dharma; it frees all perceptions. The ground of mindfulness of the mind is a gate of realizing dharma; it sees the mind as not different from a phantom. The ground of mindfulness of dharma is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads to wisdom with no obscuration.



The four types of right effort are a gate of realizing dharma; they prevent all unwholesome actions and lead to wholesome actions. The four types of fulfillment are a gate of realizing dharma; they lead to lightness of body and mind.



The root of trust is a gate of realizing dharma; it does not follow others’ words. The root of effort is a gate of realizing dharma; it attains various types of wisdom. The root of mindfulness is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads to various wholesome actions. The root of samadhi is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps the mind pure. The root of wisdom is a gate of realizing dharma; it sees all things as they are.



The ability to trust is a gate of realizing dharma; it excels all demonic power. The ability to make effort is a gate of realizing dharma; it is not remitting. The ability of mindfulness is a gate of realizing dharma; it does not blindly go along with others. The ability of samadhi is a gate of realizing dharma; it becomes free from all thoughts. The ability of wisdom is a gate of realizing dharma; it goes beyond dualism.



Branches of mindfulness are a gate of realizing dharma; they are like wisdom about all things. Branches of awakening with dharma are a gate of realizing dharma; they illuminate all things. Branches of making effort are a gate of realizing dharma; they perceive well. Branches of joy are a gate of realizing dharma; they lead to various types of samadhi. Branches of letting go are a gate of realizing dharma; they discern actions. Branches of samadhi are a gate of realizing dharma; they know the oneness of all things. Branches of letting go are a gate of realizing dharma; they become secluded from all living things.



Right view is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads to exhaustion of desire and attainment of the noble path. Right thinking is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads to freedom from thinking and beyond thinking. Right speech is a gate of realizing dharma; it knows that all names, sounds, and phrases are mere echoes. Right livelihood is a gate of realizing dharma; it prevents all unwholesome paths. Right action is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads you to the other shore. Right mindfulness is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads to freedom from thoughts on all things. Right samadhi is a gate of realizing dharma; it attains undivided concentration.



The aspiration for enlightenment is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps the three treasures from being cut off. Dependence [on enlightenment] is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps you from desiring the Lesser Vehicles. Right trust is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads to attaining the most excellent dharma. Improvement is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads to attaining all wholesome roots.



The realization of giving is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads to attaining a joyful appearance each moment, embellishing the buddha land, and freeing sentient beings from greed. The realization of precepts is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps away the hindrance of unwholesome paths and guides sentient beings who have broken the precepts. The realization of patience is a gate of realizing dharma; it lets go of all anger, pride, flattery, and amusement, and guides sentient beings who are filled with such emotions. The realization of making effort is a gate of realizing dharma; it attains all wholesome things and guides lazy sentient beings. The realization of meditation is a gate of realizing dharma; it attains all types of meditation and miraculous actions, and guides sentient beings whose minds are scattered. The realization of wisdom is a gate of realizing dharma; it cuts off the darkness of ignorance and attachment to all views, and guides foolish sentient beings.



Skillful means is a gate of realizing dharma; it manifests guidance in accordance with the awesome presence viewed by sentient beings, and accomplishes the dharma of all buddhas. The four methods of guidance are a gate of realizing dharma; they include all sentient beings, help them to be enlightened, and offer them dharma. Teaching sentient beings is a gate of realizing dharma; it does not bring unwholesome pleasure and indulgence. Accepting true dharma is a gate of realizing dharma; it transforms the delusions of sentient beings. Assembling benefaction is a gate of realizing dharma; it benefits sentient beings.



Practice of meditation is a gate of realizing dharma; it fulfills the ten types of abilities. Serene samadhi is a gate of realizing dharma; it accomplishes and maintains the samadhi of the Tathagata. Insight of wisdom is a gate of realizing dharma; it accomplishes and fulfills wisdom.



Entering unhindered understanding is a gate of realizing dharma; it acquires and completes the dharma eye. Entering all types of practice is a gate of realizing dharma; it acquires and completes the buddha eye.



Accomplishing dharani is a gate of realizing dharma; it hears and maintains the dharma of all buddhas. Attaining unhindered understanding is a gate of realizing dharma; it causes all sentient beings to rejoice.



Practicing patience is a gate of realizing dharma; it accords with the dharma of all buddhas. Attaining patience beyond birth is a gate of realizing dharma; it attains the prediction of enlightenment.



The ground of unremitting practice is a gate of realizing dharma; it embodies the dharma of all past buddhas. Following and reaching the ground of wisdom are a gate of realizing dharma; it sprinkles wisdom water on the head and achieves all wisdom. The ground of sprinkling wisdom water on the head is a gate of realizing dharma; it brings forth birth, leaving the household, and unsurpassable, complete enlightenment.





Thus, Bodhisattva Realization Protector finished expounding this dharma and said to all the devas, “Devas, these are the one hundred eight gates of realizing dharma, which I offer to you. Accept and maintain them. Always keep them in mind and do not forget them.





[Dogen says:]





These are the one hundred eight gates of realizing dharma. It is customary in the buddha world that when bodhisattvas who taught throughout their lives in Tushita Heaven are about to descend to the Jambudvipa Continent [where humans abide], they expound this teaching to devas.



Bodhisattva Realization Protector is the name of Shakyamuni Buddha when he was a bodhisattva teaching throughout his life in the Fourth Heaven. When Li Fuma compiled the Tiansheng Extensive Record of the Lamp, he added “One Hundred Eight Gates of Realizing Dharma” to the title of the book.



Not many of those who study know about this teaching. Those who are unaware of it are as many as straws, flax, bamboo, and reeds.



I am showing this teaching to beginners and latecomers. Those who may ascend to the lion seat and become teachers of humans and devas should study this thoroughly. Those who do not teach throughout their lives in Tushita Heaven [before descending to the human realm] are not buddhas. Practitioners, do not be proud of yourselves. The bodhisattvas who teach throughout their lives do not have intermediary realms [before rebirth into the human realm].





