[page 20]

2. Symbolic Transformation
The vitality and energies of the imagination do not
operate at will; they are fountains, not machinery.
D. G. JAMES, Skepticism and Poetry.
A CHANGED APPROACH to the theory of knowledge naturally
has its effect upon psychology, too. As long as sense was supposed to be the chief factor in knowledge, psychologists took a prime interest in the organs that were the windows of the mind, and in the details of their functioning; other things were accorded a sketchier and sometimes vaguer treatment.
If scientists demanded, and philosophers dutifully admitted,
that all true belief must be based on sense-evidence, then the activity of the mind had to be conceived purely as a matter of recording and combining; then intelligence had to be a product of impression, memory, and association. But now, an epistemological insight has uncovered a more potent, howbeit more difficult, factor in scientific procedure—the use of symbols to attain, as well as to organize, belief. Of course, this alters our conception of intelligence at a stroke. Not higher sensitivity, not longer memory or even quicker association sets man so far above other animals that he can regard them as denizens of a lower world: no, it is the power of using symbols—the power of speech—that makes him lord of the earth.
So our interest in the mind has shifted more and more from
the acquisition of experience, the domain of sense, to the uses of sense-data, the realm of conception and expression. The importance of symbol-using, once admitted, soon becomes paramount in the study of intelligence. It has lent a new orientation especially to genetic psychology, which traces the growth of the mind; for this growth is paralleled, in large measure, by the observable uses of language, from the first words in infancy to the complete self-expression of maturity, and perhaps the relapse into meaningless verbiage that accompanies senile decline. Such researches have even been extended from the development of individuals to the evolution of mental traits in nations and races. There is an increasing

[page 21]

rapprochement between philology and psychology—between the science of language and the science of what we do with language. The recent literature of psychogenetics bears ample witness to the central position which symbol-using, or language in its most general sense, holds in our conception of human mentality. Frank Lorimer's The Growth of Reason bears the sub-title: "A Study of the Role of Verbal Activity in the Growth and Structure of the Human Mind." Grace De Laguna's Speech: its Function and Development treats the acquisition of language as not only indicative of the growth of concepts, but as the principal agent in this evolution. Much the same view is held by Professor A. D. Ritchie, who remarks, in The Natural History of the Mind: "As far as thought is concerned, and at all levels of thought, it [mental life] is a symbolic process. It is mental not because the symbols are immaterial, for they are often material, perhaps always material, but because they are symbols. . . . The essential act of thought is symbolization." 1 There is, I think, more depth in this statement than its author realized; had he been aware of it, the proposition would have occurred earlier in the book, and given the whole work a somewhat novel turn. As it is, he goes on to an excellent account of sign-using and sign-making, which stand forth clearly as the essential means of intellection.
Quotations could be multiplied almost indefinitely, from an
imposing list of sources—from John Dewey and Bertrand Russell, from Brunschwicg and Piaget and Head, Köhler and Koffka, Carnap, Delacroix, Ribot, Cassirer, Whitehead—from philosophers, psychologists, neurologists, and anthropologists —to substantiate the claim that symbolism is the recognized key to that mental life which is characteristically human and above the level of sheer animality. Symbol and meaning make man's world, far more than sensation; Miss Helen Keller, bereft of sight and hearing, or even a person like the late
Laura Bridgman, with the single sense of touch, is capable of
living in a wider and richer world than a dog or an ape with all his senses alert. Genetic psychology grew out of the study of animals, children, and savages, both from a physiological and from a behavioristic angle. Its fundamental standpoint is that the responses of an organism to the environment are adaptive, and are dictated by that organism's needs. Such needs may be variously conceived; one school reduces them all to one basic requirement, such as keeping the metabolic balance, persisting in an

[footnote 1] A. D. Ritchie, The Natural History of the Mind (London, 1936), pp. 278-279.

[page 22]

ideal status; 2 others distinguish as elementary more specific aims—e.g., nutrition, parturition, defense—or even such differentiated cravings as physical comfort, companionship, self-assertion, security, play. 3 The tenor of these primary concepts is suggested largely by the investigator's starting point. A biologist tends to postulate only the obvious needs of a clam or even an infusorian; an animal-psychologist generalizes somewhat less, for he makes distinctions that are relevant, say, to a white rat, but hardly to a clam. An observer of childhood conceives the cardinal interests on a still higher level. But through the whole hierarchy of genetic studies there runs a feeling of continuity, a tendency to identify the "real" or "ultimate" motive conditions of human action with the needs of primitive life, to trace all wants and aims of mankind to some initial protoplasmic response. This dominant principle is the most important thing that the evolutionist school has bestowed upon psychology — the assumption, sometimes avowed, more often tacit, that "Nihil est in homine quod non prius in amoeba erat."
When students of mental evolution discovered how great a
role in science is played by symbols, they were not slow to exploit that valuable insight. The acquisition of so decisive a tool must certainly be regarded as one of the great landmarks in human progress, probably the starting point of all genuinely intellectual growth. Since symbol-using appears at a late stage, it is presumably a highly integrated form of simpler animal activities. It must spring from biological needs, and justify itself as a practical asset. Man's conquest of the world undoubtedly rests on the supreme development of his brain, which allows him to synthesize, delay, and modify his reactions by the interpolation of symbols in the gaps and confusions of direct experience, and by means of "verbal signs" to add the experiences of other people to his own.
There is a profound difference between using symbols and
merely using signs. The use of signs is the very first manifestation of mind. It arises as early in biological history as the famous "conditioned reflex," by which a concomitant of a stimulus takes over the stimulus-function. The concomitant becomes a sign of the condition to which the reaction is really appropriate. This is the real beginning of mentality, for here is the birthplace of error, and therewith of truth. If truth and

[footnote 2] Cf. Eugenio Rignano, The Psychology of Reasoning (New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1927).
[footnote 3] Cf. William James, The Principles of Psychology (New York, 1899; first published in 1890), II, 348.

[page 23]

error are to be attributed only to belief, then we must recognize in the earliest misuse of signs, in the inappropriate conditioned reflex, not error, but some prototype of error. We might call it mistake. Every piano player, every typist, knows that the hand can make mistakes where consciousness entertains no error. However, whether we speak of truth and error, or of their respective prototypes, whether we regard the creature liable to them as conscious or preconscious, or dispense with such terms altogether, the use of signs is certainly a mental function. It is the beginning of intelligence. As soon as sensations function as signs of conditions in the surrounding world, the animal receiving them is moved to exploit or avoid those conditions. The sound of a gong or a whistle, itself entirely unrelated to the process of eating, causes a dog to expect food, if in past experience this sound has always preceded dinner; it is a sign, not a part, of his food. Or, the smell of a cigarette, in itself not necessarily displeasing, tells a wild animal that there is danger, and drives it into hiding. The growth of this sign-language runs parallel with the physical development of sense organs and synaptic nerve-structure. It consists in the transmission of sense messages to muscles and glands— to the organs of eating, mating, flight and defense—and obviously functions in the interest of the elementary biological requirements: self-preservation, growth, procreation, the preservation of the species.
Even animal mentality, therefore, is built up on a primitive
semantic; it is the power of learning, by trial and error, that certain phenomena in the world are signs of certain others, existing or about to exist; adaptation to an environment is its purpose, and hence the measure of its success. The environment may be very narrow, as it is for the mole, whose world is a back yard, or it may be as wide as an eagle's range and as complicated as a monkey's jungle preserve. That depends on the variety of signals a creature can receive, the variety of combinations of them to which he can react, and the fixity or adjustability of his responses. Obviously, if he have very fixed reactions, he cannot adapt himself to a varied or transient environment; if he cannot easily combine and integrate several activities, then the occurrence of more than one stimulus at a time will throw him into confusion; if he be poor in sensory organs—deaf, or blind, hard-shelled, or otherwise limited—he cannot receive many signals to begin with. Man's superiority in the race for self-preservation was first ascribed to his wider range of signals, his greater power of

[page 24]

integrating reflexes, his quicker learning by trial and error; but a little reflection brought a much more fundamental trait to light, namely his peculiar use of "signs." Man, unlike all other animals, uses "signs" not only to indicate things, but also to represent them. To a clever dog, the name of a person is a signal that the person is present; you say the name, he pricks up his ears and looks for its object. If you say "dinner," he becomes restive, expecting food. You cannot make any communication to him that is not taken as a signal of something immediately forthcoming. His mind is a simple and direct transmitter of messages from the world to his motor centers. With man it is different. We use certain "signs" among ourselves that do not point to anything in our actual surroundings. Most of our words are not signs in the sense of signals. They are used to talk about things, not to direct our eyes and ears and noses toward them. Instead of announcers of things, they are reminders. They have been called "substitute signs," for in our present experience they take the place of things that we have perceived in the past, or even things that we can merely imagine by combining memories, things that might be in past or future experience. Of course such "signs" do not usually serve as vicarious stimuli to actions that would be appropriate to their meanings; where the objects are quite normally not present, that would result in a complete chaos of behavior. They serve, rather, to let us develop a characteristic attitude toward objects in absentia, which is called "thinking of" or "referring to" what is not here. "Signs" used in this capacity are not symptoms of things, but symbols.
The development of language is the history of the gradual
accumulation and elaboration of verbal symbols. By means of this phenomenon, man's whole behavior-pattern has undergone an immense change from the simple biological scheme, and his mentality has expanded to such a degree that it is no longer comparable to the minds of animals. Instead of a direct transmitter of coded signals, we have a system that has sometimes been likened to a telephone-exchange, 4 wherein messages may be relayed, stored up if a line is busy, answered by proxy, perhaps sent over a line that did not exist when they were first given, noted down and kept if the desired number gives no answer. Words are the plugs in this super-switchboard; they connect impressions and let them function together; sometimes they cause lines to become crossed in funny or disastrous ways.

[footnote 4] The simile of the telephone-exchange has been used by Leonard Troland in The Mystery of Mind (New York: P. Van Nostrand Co., Inc., 1926), p. 100 ff.

[page 25]

This view of mentality, of its growth through trial and
error, its apparently complicated but essentially simple aims— namely, to advance the persistence, growth, and procreation of the organism, and to produce, and provide for, its progeny—brings the troublesome concept of Mind into line with other basic ideas of biology. Man is doing in his elaborate way just what the mouse in his simplicity is doing, and what the unconscious or semiconscious jellyfish is performing after its own chemical fashion. The ideal of "Nihil est in homine . . ." is supported by living example. The speech line between man and beast is minimized by the recognition that speech is primarily an instrument of social control, just like the cries of animals, but has acquired a representative function, allowing a much greater degree of cooperation among individuals, and the focussing of personal attention on absent objects. The passage from the sign-function of a word to its symbolic function is gradual, a result of social organization, an instrument that proves indispensable once it is discovered, and develops through successful use. If the theoretic position here attributed to students of genetic psychology requires any affidavit, we can find it in the words of a psychologist, in Frank Lorimer's The Growth of
Reason:

"The apes described by Köhler," he says, "certainly have quite elaborate 'ape-ways' into which a newcomer is gradually acculturated, including among other patterns ways of using available instruments for reaching and climbing, a sort of rhythmic play or dance, and types of murmurs, wails and rejoicings. . . .

"It is not surprising that still more intelligent animals should have developed much more definite and elaborate 'animal ways,' including techniques of tool-uses and specific mechanisms of vocal social control, which gradually developed into the 'folk-ways' of the modern anthropologist. . . .

"Vocal acts are originally involved in the intellectual correlation of behaviour just as other physiological processes are.
During the whole course of meaningless vocal chatter, vocal
processes gradually accumulate intensity and dominance in behaviour. . . . Specific vocables become dominant foci of fixed reactions to various situations and the instruments of specific social adjustments. . . . The gradual differentiation and expansion of the social functions of vocal activity, among a race of animals characterized by increasingly complex nervous systems,

[page 26]

is the fundamental principle of the historic trend of vocal activity to verbal activity, and the emergence of language." 5
An interpretation of observed facts that adjusts them to a
general scientific outlook, a theory that bridges what used to appear as a saltus naturae, a logical explanation displacing a shamefaced resort to miracle, has so much to recommend it that one hates to challenge it on any count. But the best ideas are also the ones most worth reflecting on. At first glance it seems as though the genetic conception of language, which regards the power of symbol-using as the latest and highest device of practical intelligence, an added instrument for gaining animal ends, must be the key to all essential features of human mentality. It makes rationality plausible, and shows at once the relationship of man and brute, and the gulf between them as a fairly simple phenomenon.
The difficulty of the theory arises when we consider how
people with synaptic switchboards between their sense organs and their muscles should use their verbal symbols to make the telephone-exchange work most efficiently. Obviously the only proper use of the words which "plug in" the many complicated wires is the denotation of facts. Such facts may be concrete and personal, or they may be highly general and universal ; but they should be chosen for the sake of orientation in the world for better living, for more advantageous practice.
It is easy to see how errors might arise, just as they occur in
overt action; the white rat in a maze makes mistakes, and so does the trout who bites at a feather-and-silk fly. In so complicated an organ as the human cortex, a confusion of messages or of responses would be even more likely than in the reflex arcs of rodents or fish. But of course the mistakes should be subject to quick correction by the world's punishments; behavior should, on the whole, be rational and realistic. Any other response must be chalked up as failure, as a miscarriage of biological purposes.
There are, indeed, philosophical and scientific thinkers who
have accepted the biogenetic theory of mind on its great merits, and drawn just the conclusions indicated above. They have looked at the way men really use their power of symbolic thinking, the responses they actually make, and have been forced to admit that the cortical telephone-exchange does business in most extraordinary ways. The results of their candid observations are such books as W. B. Pitkin's Short Introduction

[footnote 5] Frank Lorimer, The Growth of Reason (New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1929), pp. 76-77.

[page 27]

to the History of Human Stupidity, Charles Richet's L'homme Stupide (which deals not with men generally regarded as stupid, but with the impractical customs and beliefs of aliens, and the folly of religious convictions), and Stuart Chase's The Tyranny of Words. To contemplate the unbelievable folly of which symbol-using animals are capable is very disgusting or very amusing, according to our mood; but philosophically it is, above all, confounding. How can an instrument develop in the interests of better practice, and survive, if it harbors so many dangers for the creature possessed of it? How can language increase a man's efficiency if it puts him at a biological disadvantage beside his cat?
Mr. Chase, watching his cat Hobie Baker, reflects:

"Hobie can never learn to talk. He can learn to respond to my talk, as he responds to other signs. . . . He can utter cries indicating pain, pleasure, excitement. He can announce that he wants to go out of doors. . . . But he cannot master words and language. This in some respects is fortunate for Hobie, for he will not suffer from hallucinations provoked by bad language. He will remain a realist all his life. . . . He is certainly able to think after a fashion, interpreting signs in the light of past experience, deliberately deciding his course of action, the survival value of which is high.

"Instead of words, Hobie sometimes uses a crude gesture language. We know that he has a nervous system corresponding to that of man, with messages coming in to the receptors in skin, ear and eye and going over the wires to the cortex, where memories are duly filed for reference. There are fewer switchboards in his cortex than in mine, which may be one of the reasons why he cannot learn to talk. . . .

"Meaning comes to Hobie as it comes to me, through past experience. . . .

"Generally speaking, animals tend to learn cumulatively through experience. The old elephant is the wisest of the herd. This selective process does not always operate in the case of human beings. The old are sometimes wise, but more often they are stuffed above the average with superstitions, misconceptions, and irrational dogmas. One may hazard the guess that erroneous identifications in human beings are pickled and preserved in words, and so not subject to the constant check of the environment, as in the case of cats and elephants. . . .

"I find Hobie a useful exhibit along this difficult trail of semantics. What 'meaning' connotes to him is often so clear and simple that I have no trouble in following it. I come from

[page 28]

a like evolutionary matrix. 'Meaning' to me has like roots, and a like mechanism of apprehension. I have a six-cylinder brain and he has a one-lunger, but they operate on like principles.

". . . Most children do not long maintain Hobie Baker's realistic appraisal of the environment. Verbal identifications and confused abstractions begin at a tender age. . . . Language is no more than crudely acquired before children begin to suffer from it, and to misinterpret the world by reason of it." 6

A cat with a "stalking-instinct," or other special equipment, who could never learn to use that asset properly, but was forever stalking chairs or elephants, would scarcely rise in animal estate by virtue of his talent. Men who can use symbols to facilitate their practical responses, but use them constantly to confuse and inhibit, warp and misadapt their actions, and gain no other end by their symbolic devices, have no prospect of inheriting the earth. Such an "instinct" would have no chance to develop by any process of successful exercise. The error-quotient is too great. The commonly recognized biological needs—food and shelter, security, sexual satisfaction, and the safety of young ones—are probably better assuaged by the realistic activities, the meows and gestures, of Hobie Baker than by the verbal imagination and reflection of his master. The cat's world is not falsified by the beliefs and poetic figments that language creates, nor his behavior unbalanced by the bootless rites and sacrifices that characterize religion, art, and other vagaries of a word-mongering mind. In fact, his vital purposes are so well served without the intervention of these vast mental constructions, these flourishes and embellishments of the cerebral switchboard, that it is hard to see why such an overcomplication of the central exchange was ever permitted, in man's "higher centers," to block the routes from sensory to motor organs and garble all the messages.
The dilemma for philosophy is bad enough to make one
reconsider the genetic hypothesis that underlies it. If our basic needs were really just those of lower creatures much refined, we should have evolved a more realistic language than in fact we have. If the mind were essentially a recorder and transmitter, typified by the simile of the telephone-exchange, we should act very differently from the way we actually do. Certainly no "learning-process" has caused man to believe in magic; yet "word-magic" is a common practice among primitive peoples, and so is vicarious treatment—burning in effigy,

[footnote 6] Stuart Chase, The Tyranny of Words (New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1938), pp. 46-56.

[page 29]

etc.—where the proxy is plainly a mere symbol of the desired victim. Another strange, universal phenomenon is ritual. It is obviously symbolic, except where it is aimed at concrete results, and then it may be regarded as a communal form of magic. Now, all magical and ritual practices are hopelessly inappropriate to the preservation and increase of life. My cat would turn up his nose and his tail at them. To regard them as mistaken attempts to control nature, as a result of wrong synapses, or "crossed wires," in the brain, seems to me to leave the most rational of animals too deep in the slough of error. If a savage in his ignorance of physics tries to make a mountain open its caverns by dancing round it, we must admit with shame that no rat in a psychologist's maze would try such patently ineffectual methods of opening a door. Nor should such experiments be carried on, in the face of failure, for thousands of years; even morons should learn more quickly than that.
Another item in human behavior is our serious attitude
toward art. Genetic psychology usually regards art as a form of play, a luxury product of the mind. This is not only a scientific theory, it is a common-sense view; we play an instrument, we act a play. Yet like many common-sense doctrines, it is probably false. Great artists are rarely recruited from the leisure class, and it is only in careless speech that we denote music or tragedy as our "hobby"; we do not really class them with tennis or bridge. We condemn as barbarous people who destroy works of art, even under the stress of war—blame them for ruining the Parthenon, when only a recent, sentimental generation has learned to blame them for ruining the homes that surrounded the sanctuary of Beauty! Why should the world wail over the loss of a play product, and look with its old callousness on the destruction of so much that dire labor has produced? It seems a poor economy of nature that men will suffer and starve for the sake of play, when play is supposed to be the abundance of their strength after their needs are satisfied. Yet artists as a class are so ready to sacrifice wealth and comfort and even health to their trade, that a lean and hollow look has become an indispensable feature in the popular conception of genius.
There is a third factor in human life that challenges the
utilitarian doctrine of symbolism. That is the constant, ineffectual process of dreaming during sleep. The activity of the mind seems to go on all the time, like that of the heart and lungs and viscera; but during sleep it serves no practical purpose. That dream-material is symbolic is a fairly established

[page 30]

fact. And symbols are supposed to have evolved from the advantageous use of signs. They are representative signs, that help to retain things for later reference, for comparing, planning, and generally for purposive thinking. Yet the symbolism of dreams performs no such acquired function. At best it presents us with the things we do not want to think about, the things which stand in the way of practical living. Why should the mind produce symbols that do not direct the dreamer's activities, that only mix up the present with unsuitable past experiences?
There are several theories of dream, notably, of course, the
Freudian interpretation. But those which—like Freud's—regard it as more than excess mental energy or visceral disturbance do not fit the scientific picture of the mind's growth and function at all. A mind whose semantic powers are evolved from the functioning of the motor arc should only think; any vagaries of association are "mistakes." If our viscera made as many mistakes in sleep as the brain, we should all die of indigestion after our first nursing. It may be replied that the mistakes of dream are harmless, since they have no motor terminals, though they enter into waking life as memories, and we have to learn to discount them. But why does the central switchboard not rest when there is no need of making connections? Why should the plugs be popped in and out, and set the whole system wildly ringing, only to end with a universal "Excuse it, please"?
The love of magic, the high development of ritual, the
seriousness of art, and the characteristic activity of dreams, are rather large factors to leave out of account in constructing a theory of mind. Obviously the mind is doing something else, or at least something more, than just connecting experiential items. It is not functioning simply in the interest of those biological needs which genetic psychology recognizes.
Yet it is a natural organ, and presumably does nothing that is
not relevant to the total behavior, the response to nature that constitutes human life. The moral of this long critique is, therefore, to reconsider the inventory of human needs, which scientists have established on a basis of animal psychology, and somewhat hastily set up as the measure of a man. An unrecorded motive might well account for many an unexplained action. I propose, therefore, to try a new general principle: to conceive the mind, still as an organ in the service of primary needs, but of characteristically human needs; instead of assuming that the human mind tries to do the same things as a

[page 31]

cat's mind, but by the use of a special talent which miscarries four times out of five, I shall assume that the human mind is trying to do something else; and that the cat does not act humanly because he does not need to. This difference in fundamental needs, I believe, determines the difference of function which sets man so far apart from all his zoölogical brethren; and the recognition of it is the key to those paradoxes in the philosophy of mind which our too consistently zoölogical model of human intelligence has engendered. It is generally conceded that men have certain "higher" aims and desires than animals; but what these are, and in what sense they are "higher," may still be mooted without any universal agreement. There are essentially two schools of opinion: one which considers man the highest animal, and his supreme desires as products of his supreme mind; and another which regards him as the lowest spirit, and his unique longings as a manifestation of his otherworldly admixture. To the naturalists, the difference between physical and mental interests, between organismic will and moral will, between hungry meows and harvest prayers, or between faith in the mother cat and faith in a heavenly father, is a difference of complexity, abstractness, articulateness, in short: a difference of degree. To the religious interpreters it seems a radical distinction, a difference, in each case, of kind and cause. The moral sentiments especially are deemed a sign of the ultimate godhead in man; likewise the power of prayer, which is regarded as a gift, not a native and natural power like laughter, tears, language, and song. The Ancient Mariner, when suddenly he could pray, had not merely found his speech; he had received grace, he was given back the divine status from which he had fallen. According to the religious conception, man is at most half-brother to the beast. No matter how many of his traits may be identified as simian features, there is that in him yet which springs from a different source and is forever unzoölogical. This view is the antithesis of the naturalistic; it breaks the structure of genetic psychology in principle. For, the study of psychogenesis has grown up on exactly the opposite creed —that man is a true-blooded, full-franchised denizen of the animal kingdom, without any alien ancestors, and therefore has no features or functions which animals do not share in some degree.
That man is an animal I certainly believe; and also, that he
has no supernatural essence, "soul" or "entelechy" or "mind-Stuff," enclosed in his skin. He is an organism, his substance

[page 32]

is chemical, and what he does, suffers, or knows, is just what this sort of chemical structure may do, suffer, or know. When the structure goes to pieces, it never does, suffers, or knows anything again. If we ask how physical objects, chemically analyzable, can be conscious, how ideas can occur to them, we are talking ambiguously; for the conception of "physical object" is a conception of chemical substance not biologically organized. What causes this tremendous organization of substances, is one of the things the tremendous organisms do not know; but with their organization, suffering and impulse and awareness arise. It is really no harder to imagine that a chemically active body wills, knows, thinks, and feels, than that an invisible, intangible something does so, "animates" the body without physical agency, and "inhabits" it without being in any place.
Now this is a mere declaration of faith, preliminary to a
confession of heresy. The heresy is this: that I believe there is a primary need in man, which other creatures probably do not have, and which actuates all his apparently unzoölogical aims, his wistful fancies, his consciousness of value, his utterly impractical enthusiasms, and his awareness of a "Beyond" filled with holiness. Despite the fact that this need gives rise to almost everything that we commonly assign to the "higher" life, it is not itself a "higher" form of some "lower" need; it is quite essential, imperious, and general, and may be called "high" only in the sense that it belongs exclusively (I think) to a very complex and perhaps recent genus. It may be satisfied in crude, primitive ways or in conscious and refined ways, so it has its own hierarchy of "higher" and "lower," elementary and derivative forms.
This basic need, which certainly is obvious only in man, is
the need of symbolization. The symbol-making function is one of man's primary activities, like eating, looking, or moving about. It is the fundamental process of his mind, and goes on all the time. Sometimes we are aware of it, sometimes we merely find its results, and realize that certain experiences have passed through our brains and have been digested there.
Hark back, now, to a passage already quoted above, from
Ritchie's The Natural History of the Mind: "As far as thought is concerned, and at all levels of thought, it is a symbolic process. . . . The essential act of thought is symbolization." 7
The significance of this statement strikes us more forcibly
now. For if the material of thought is symbolism, then the

[footnote 7] See p. 21.

[page 33]

thinking organism must be forever furnishing symbolic versions of its experiences, in order to let thinking proceed. As a matter of fact, it is not the essential act of thought that is symbolization, but an act essential to thought, and prior to it.
Symbolization is the essential act of mind; and mind takes in
more than what is commonly called thought. Only certain products of the symbol-making brain can be used according to the canons of discursive reasoning. In every mind there is an enormous store of other symbolic material, which is put to different uses or perhaps even to no use at all—a mere result of spontaneous brain activity, a reserve fund of conceptions, a surplus of mental wealth. The brain works as naturally as the kidneys and the blood vessels. It is not dormant just because there is no conscious purpose to be served at the moment. If it were, indeed, a vast and intricate telephone-exchange, then it should be quiescent when the rest of the organism sleeps, or at most transmit experiences of digestion, of wanted oxygen or itching toes, of after-images on the retina or little throbbings in pressed arteries. Instead of that, it goes right on manufacturing ideas—streams and deluges of ideas, that the sleeper is not using to think with about anything. But the brain is following its own law; it is actively translating experiences into symbols, in fulfilment of a basic need to do so. It carries on a constant process of ideation. Ideas are undoubtedly made out of impressions—out of sense messages from the special organs of perception, and vague visceral reports of feeling. The law by which they are made, however, is not a law of direct combination. Any attempt to use such principles as association by contiguity or similarity soon runs into sheer unintelligible complication and artifice. Ideation proceeds by a more potent principle, which seems to be best described as a principle of symbolization.
The material furnished by the senses is constantly wrought
into symbols, which are our elementary ideas. Some of these ideas can be combined and manipulated in the manner we call "reasoning." Others do not lend themselves to this use, but are naturally telescoped into dreams, or vapor off in conscious fantasy; and a vast number of them build the most typical and fundamental edifice of the human mind—religion.
Symbolization is pre-rationative, but not pre-rational. It is
the starting point of all intellection in the human sense, and is more general than thinking, fancying, or taking action. For the brain is not merely a great transmitter, a super-switch[page 34]board; it is better likened to a great transformer. The current of experience that passes through it undergoes a change of character, not through the agency of the sense by which the perception entered, but by virtue of a primary use which is made of it immediately: it is sucked into the stream of symbols which constitutes a human mind. Our overt acts are governed by representations whose counterparts can nowhere be pointed out, whose objects are "percepts" only in a Pickwickian sense. The representations on which we act are symbols of various kinds. This fact is recognized in a vague and general way by most epistemologists; but what has not received their due recognition is the enormous importance of the kinds. So long as we regard sensations as signs of the things which are supposed to give rise to them, and perhaps endow such signs with further reference to past sensations that were similar signs, we have not even scratched the surface of the symbol-mongering human mind. It is only when we penetrate into the varieties of symbolific activity—as Cassirer, for instance, has done—that we begin to see why human beings do not act as superintelligent cats, dogs, or apes would act. Because our brain is only a fairly good transmitter, but a tremendously powerful transformer, we do things that Mr. Chase's cat would reject as too impractical, if he were able to conceive them. So they would be, for him; so are they for the psychologist who deems himself a cat of the nth degree.
The fact that the human brain is constantly carrying on a
process of symbolic transformation of the experiential data that come to it causes it to be a veritable fountain of more or less spontaneous ideas. As all registered experience tends to terminate in action, it is only natural that a typically human function should require a typically human form of overt activity; and that is just what we find in the sheer expression of ideas. This is the activity of which beasts appear to have no need. And it accounts for just those traits in man which he does not hold in common with the other animals—ritual, art, laughter, weeping, speech, superstition, and scientific genius. Only a part—howbeit a very important part—of our behavior is practical. Only some of our expressions are signs, indicative or mnemonic, and belong to the heightened animal wisdom called common sense; and only a small and relatively unimportant part are immediate signs of feeling. The remainder serve simply to express ideas that the organism yearns to express, i.e. to act upon, without practical purpose, without

[page 35]

any view to satisfying other needs than the need of completing in overt action the brain's symbolic process. How else shall we account for man's-love of talk? From the first dawning recognition that words can express something, talk is a dominant interest, an irresistible desire. As soon as this avenue of action opens, a whole stream of symbolic process is set free in the jumbled outpouring of words—often repeated, disconnected, random words—that we observe in the "chattering" stage of early childhood. Psychologists generally, and perhaps correctly, regard such babble as verbal play, and explain it through its obvious utilitarian function of developing the lines of communication that will be needed later in life. But an explanation by final causes does not really account for the occurrence of an act. What gives a child the present stimulus to talk? Surely not the prospect of acquiring a useful tool toward his future social relations! The impulse must be motivated by a present need, not a prospective one.
Mr. Chase, who sees no use in words except their practical
effect on other people, admits the puzzling fact that "children practice them with as much gusto as Hobie stalks a mouse." 8 But we can hardly believe that they do so for the sake of practice. There must be immediate satisfaction in this strange exercise, as there is in running and kicking. The effect of words on other people is only a secondary consideration. Mrs. De
Laguna has pointed this out in her book on the general nature
of speech: "The little child," she says there, "spends many hours and much energy in vocal play. It is far more agreeable to carry on this play with others . . . but the little child indulges in language-play even when he is alone. . . . Internal speech, fragmentary or continuous, becomes the habitual accompaniment of his active behaviour and the occupation of his idle hours." 9 Speech is, in fact, the readiest active termination of that basic process in the human brain which may be called symbolic transformation of experiences. The fact that it makes elaborate communication with others possible becomes important at a somewhat later stage. Piaget has observed that children of kindergarten age pay little attention to the response of others; they talk just as blithely to a companion who does not understand them as to one who gives correct answers. 10 Of course they have long learned to use language

[footnote 8] Op. cit., p. 54.
[footnote 9] Grace De Laguna, Speech: its Function and Development (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1927), p. 307.
[footnote 10] Jean Piaget, The Language and Thought of the Child (New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1926). See esp. chaps. i and ii.

[page 36]

practically; but the typically infantile, or "egocentric," function persists side by side with the progressively social development of communication. The sheer symbolific use of sounds is the more primitive, the easier use, which can be made before conventional forms are really mastered, just as soon as any meaning-experience has occurred to the vociferous little human animal. The practical use, though early, is more difficult, for it is not the direct fulfilment of a craving; it is an adaptation of language for the satisfaction of other needs. Words are certainly our most important instruments of expression, our most characteristic, universal, and enviable tools in the conduct of life. Speech is the mark of humanity. It is the normal terminus of thought. We are apt to be so impressed with its symbolistic mission that we regard it as the only important expressive act, and assume that all other activity must be practical in an animalian way, or else irrational—playful, or atavistic (residual) past recognition, or mistaken, i.e., unsuccessful. But in fact, speech is the natural outcome of only one kind of symbolic process. There are transformations of experience in the human mind that have quite different overt endings. They end in acts that are neither practical nor communicative, though they may be both effective and communal;
I mean the actions we call ritual.
Human life is shot through and through with ritual, as it is
also with animalian practices. It is an intricate fabric of reason and rite, of knowledge and religion, prose and poetry, fact and dream. Just as the results of that primitive process of mental digestion, verbal symbolism, may be used for the satisfaction of other needs than symbolization, so all other instinctive acts may serve the expressive function. Eating, traveling, asking or answering questions, construction, destruction, prostitution—any or all such activities may enter into rites; yet rites in themselves are not practical, but expressive. Ritual, like art, is essentially the active termination of a symbolic transformation of experience. It is born in the cortex, not in the "old brain"; but it is born of an elementary need of that organ, once the organ has grown to human estate. If the "impractical" use of language has mystified philosophers and psychologists who measured it by standards it is not really designed to meet, the apparent perversity of ritual from the same point of view has simply overcome them. They have had to invent excuses for its existence, to save the psychogenetic theory of mind. They have sought its explanation in social purposes, in ulterior motivations of the most unlikely

[page 37]

sort, in "mistakes" of sense and reason that verge on complete imbecility; they have wondered at the incorrigibility of religious follies, at the docility of the poor dupes who let themselves be misled, and at the disproportionate cost of the supposed social advantages; but they have not been led to the assumption of a peculiarly human need which is fed, as every need must be, at the expense of other interests.
The ethnologists who were the first white men to interest
themselves in the ritual of primitive races for any other purpose than to suppress or correct it were mystified by the high seriousness of actions that looked purely clownish and farcical to the European beholder; just as the Christian missionaries had long reported the difficulty of making the gospels plausible to men who were able to believe stories far more mysterious and fantastic in their own idiom. Andrew Lang, for instance, discussing the belief in magic, makes the following observation:

"The theory requires for its existence an almost boundless credulity. This credulity appears to Europeans to prevail in full force among savages. . . . But it is a curious fact that while savages are, as a rule, so credulous, they often 'laugh consumedly' at the religious doctrines taught them by missionaries. Savages and civilized men have different standards of credulity. Dr. Moffat remarks, To speak of the Creation, the
Fall, and the Resurrection, seemed more fabulous, extravagant,
and ludicrous to them than their own vain stories of lions and hyaenas." . . . It is, apparently, in regard to imported and novel opinions about religion and science alone that savages imitate the conduct of the adder which according to St. Augustine, is voluntarily deaf. . . ." 11
Frobenius, also a pioneer in the study of primitive society,
describes an initiation ceremony in New South Wales, in the course of which the older men performed a dog-dance, on all fours, for the benefit of the young acolytes who watched these rites, preliminary to the painful honor of having a tooth knocked out. Frobenius refers to the ritual as a "comedy," a "farce," and is amazed at the solemnity with which the boys sat through the "ridiculous canine display." "They acted as if they never caught sight of the comical procession of men."
A little later he describes a funeral among the Bougala, in the
Southern Congo; again, each step in the performance seems to
him a circus act, until at last "there now followed, if possible,

[footnote 11] Myth, Ritual, and Religion, 2 vols. (1887), I, 91.
[footnote 12] Leo Frobenius, The Childhood of Man (London, 1909; first published in 1901 under the title Aus den Flegeljahren der Menschheit), p. 41 ff.

[page 38]

a still more clownish farce. The deceased had now himself to declare what was the cause of his death." 13 The professor is at a loss to understand how even the least intelligent of men can reach such depths of folly. Perhaps the savages who "laughed consumedly" at a tonsured father's sacraments with
Holy Water, his God-eating and his scriptural explanations,
were having a similar difficulty!
Later scholars gradually realized that the irrationality of
customs and rites were so great that they could not possibly be "mistakes" of practice, or rest on "erroneous" theories of nature. Obviously they serve some natural purpose to which their practical justification or lack of justification is entirely irrelevant. Mrs. De Laguna seeks this purpose in the social solidarity which a prescribed ritual imparts: "Those elaborate and monstrous systems of belief," she says, "cannot possibly be accounted for by any simple theory that beliefs are determined by their successful 'working' in practice. . . . The truth is . . . that some more or less organized system of beliefs and sentiments is an absolute necessity for the carrying on of social life. So long as group solidarity is secured by some such system, the particular beliefs which enter into it may to an indefinite degree lead to behavior ill-adapted to the objective order of nature." 14 But why should this social purpose not be served by a sensible dogma which the members of the society could reasonably be called on to believe, instead of "elaborate and monstrous" creeds issuing in all sorts of cruel rites, mutilations and even human sacrifices, such as Baal or the Aztec gods demanded? Why did the Cults of Reason set up in post-Revolutionary France and in early Soviet Russia not serve the purpose of social solidarity every bit as well as the "Christian hocus-pocus" they displaced, and much better than the dog-dances and interrogation of the dead that disturbed Frobenius by their incredibility? Why should a priesthood primarily interested in accomplishing a social end demand that its laity should believe in immoral and unreasonable gods? Plato, who treated religion in just this sociological spirit, found himself confronted with this question. The established religion of
Greece was not only irrational, but the social unity that might
be achieved by participating in one form of worship and following one divine example was off-set by the fact that this worship was often degrading and the example bad. How could any wise ruler or rulers prescribe such ritual, or indorse such a mythology?

[footnote 13] Ibid., p. 148.
[footnote 14] Speech, pp. 345-346.

[page 39]

The answer is, of course, that ritual is not prescribed for a
practical purpose, not even that of social solidarity. Such solidarity may be one of its effects, and sophisticated warlords may realize this fact and capitalize on it by emphasizing national religion or holding compulsory prayers before battle; but neither myth nor ritual arose originally for this purpose.
Even the pioneers in anthropology, to whom the practices of
savage society must have been more surprising than to us who are initiated through their reports, realized that the "farces" and "antics" of primitive men were profoundly serious, and that their wizards could not be accused of bad faith. "Magic has not its origin in fraud, and seems seldom practiced as an utter imposture," observed Tylor, seventy years ago. "It is, in fact, a sincere but fallacious system of philosophy, evolved by the human intellect by processes still in great measure unintelligible to our minds, and it had thus an original standing-ground in the world." 15 Its roots lie much deeper than any conscious purpose, any trickery, policy, or practical design; they lie in that substratum of the mind, the realm of fundamental ideas, and bear their strange if not poisonous fruits, by virtue of the human need for expressing such ideas. Whatever purpose magical practice may serve, its direct motivation is the desire to symbolize great conceptions. It is the overt action in which a rich and savage imagination automatically ends. Its origin is probably not practical at all, but ritualistic; its central aim is to symbolize a Presence, to aid in the formulation of a religious universe. "Show us a miracle, that we may believe thou art God." Magic is never employed in a commonplace mood, like ordinary causal agency; this fact belies the widely accepted belief that the "method of magic" rests on a mistaken view of causality. After all, a savage who beats a tom-tom to drive off his brother's malaria would never make such a practical mistake as to shoot his arrow blunt end forward or bait his fishline with flowers. It is not ignorance of causal relations, but the supervention of an interest stronger than his practical interest, that holds him to magical rites.
This stronger interest concerns the expressive value of such
mystic acts.
Magic, then, is not a method, but a language; it is part and
parcel of that greater phenomenon, ritual, which is the language of religion. Ritual is a symbolic transformation of experiences that no other medium can adequately express.

[footnote 15] E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture, 2 vols. (6th ed., 1920; first published in 1871), I, 134.

[page 40]

Because it springs from a primary human need, it is a spontaneous activity—that is to say, it arises without intention, without adaptation to a conscious purpose; its growth is undesigned, its pattern purely natural, however intricate it may be. It was never "imposed" on people; they acted thus quite of themselves, exactly as bees swarmed and birds built nests, squirrels hoarded food, and cats washed their faces. No one made up ritual, any more than anyone made up Hebrew or Sanskrit or Latin. The forms of expressive acts—speech and gesture, song and sacrifice—are the symbolic transformations which minds of certain species, at certain stages of their development and communion, naturally produce.
Franz Boas remarked, even in one of his early works, that
ritual resembled language in the unconscious development of its forms; and furthermore he saw, though less clearly, that it had certain symbolistic functions. After a discussion of the role played by language in the actual division and arrangement of sense-experience, he says: "The behavior of primitive man makes it perfectly clear that all these linguistic classes have never risen to consciousness, and that consequently their origin must be sought, not in rational, but in entirely unconscious, processes of the mind. . . . It seems very plausible . . . that the fundamental religious notions . . . are in their origin just as little conscious as the fundamental ideas of language." 16
And a few pages later he touches, howbeit only tentatively and
vaguely, upon the expressive nature of those practices which seem "impractical" to us: "Primitive man views each action not only as adapted to its main object, each thought related to its main end, as we should perceive them, but . . . he associates them with other ideas, often of a religious or at least a symbolic nature. Thus he gives them a higher significance than they seem to us to deserve. Every taboo is an example of such associations of apparently trifling actions with ideas that are so sacred that a deviation from the customary mode of performance creates the strongest emotions of abhorrence. The interpretation of ornaments as charms, the symbolism of decorative art, are other examples of association of ideas that, on the whole, are foreign to our mode of thought." 17 A year after Boas's book, there appeared the articles by Sigmund Freud which are now collected under the title of Totem and Taboo. 18 It was Freud who recognized that ritual acts are

[footnote 16] The Mind of Primitive Man (New York: Macmillan, 1911), pp. 198-199.
[footnote 17] Ibid., p. 209.
[footnote 18] Published in New York by Dodd, Mead & Co. in 1918.

[page 41]

not genuine instrumental acts, but are motivated primarily a tergo, and carry with them, consequently, a feeling not of purpose, but of compulsion. They must be performed, not to any visible end, but from a sheer inward need; and he is familiar enough with such compulsive acts in other settings to suspect at once that in the religious sphere, too, they are best interpreted as expressive behavior. Empirically senseless, they are none the less important and justified when we regard them as symbolic presentations rather than practical measures. They are spontaneous transformations of experience, and the form they take is normal for the primitive mind. In civilized society, the same phenomena are apt to be pathological; there is a good reason for this, but that must be postponed to a later chapter.
The great contribution of Freud to the philosophy of mind
has been the realization that human behavior is not only a food-getting strategy, but is also a language; that every move is at the same time a gesture. Symbolization is both an end and an instrument. So far, epistemology has treated it only in the latter capacity; and philosophers have ample reason to wonder why this purely utilitarian trait of man's mind so frequently plays him false, why nature permitted it to grow beyond the limits of usefulness, to assume a tyrant role and lure him into patently impractical ventures. The fact is, I believe, that it did not originate purely in the service of other activities.
It is a primary interest, and may require a sacrifice of other
ends, just as the imperative demand for food or sex-life may necessitate sacrifices under difficult conditions. This fundamentally—not adventitiously—symbolific function of the mind was suggested to Freud by his psychiatric studies, but in later works he has given it a very general development, notably in the book already cited, Totem and Taboo. 19 Certainly he has carried his theories far enough to make a philosophical study of "impractical" actions—rites, formalities, dramatizations, and above all, the unapplied arts—relevant and promising in the light of them. Yet few epistemologists have seriously taken advantage of the new ideas that fairly cry to be explored.
The reason is, probably, that traditional theory of mind is
epistemology—theory of knowledge: and Freud's psychology is not directly applicable to the problems which compose this field. Symbolism, as it enters into the structure of knowledge, is better typified by mathematical "expressions" than by swastikas

[footnote 19] See also, Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (New York: Boni & Liveright, 1922).

[page 42]

or genuflexions. Language, not ritual, is its main representative. In order to relate these two distinct conceptions of symbolism, and exhibit the respective parts they play in that general human response we call a life, it is necessary to examine more accurately that which makes symbols out of anything—out of marks on paper, the little squeaks and grunts we interpret as "words," or bended knees—the quality of meaning, in its several aspects and forms. Meaning rests upon a condition which is, in the last analysis, logical; therefore the next chapter will have to concern itself mainly with logical structure, and cannot help being somewhat technical. But without such a grounding the whole argument would remain intangible, unfounded, and would probably appear more fantastic than cogent; so a short account of what constitutes meaning, what characterizes symbols, and also the different kinds of symbolism and their logical distinctions, will have to precede any further elaborations of the ideas so far suggested.
