[page 165]

8. On Significance in Music
WHAT DISTINGUISHES a work of art from a "mere" artifact?
What distinguishes the Greek vase, as an artistic achievement,
from the hand-made bean pot of New England, or the wooden bucket, which cannot be classed as a work of art? The Greek vase is an artifact, too; it was fashioned according to a traditional pattern; it was made to hold grain or oil or other domestic asset, not to stand in a museum. Yet it has an artistic value for all generations. What gives it that preeminence? To reply, "Its beauty," is simply to beg the question, since artistic value is beauty in the broadest sense. Bean pots and wooden buckets often have what artists call "a good shape," i.e., they are in no wise offensive to the eye. Yet, without being at all ugly, they are insignificant, commonplace, nonartistic rather than inartistic. What do they lack, that a work of art— even a humble, domestic Greek vase—possesses? In the words of a well-known critic, Mr. Clive Bell, " 'Significant Form' is the one quality common to all works of visual art." * Professor L. A. Reid, a philosopher well versed in
1
Art (London, 1914), p. 8.

[page 166]

the problems of aesthetics, extends the scope of this characteristic to all art whatsoever. For him, "Beauty is just expressiveness." and "the true aesthetic form . . . is expressive form." 2 Another art critic, Mr. Roger Fry, accepts the term "Significant Form," though he frankly cannot define its meaning. From the contemplation of (say) a beautiful pot, and as an effect of its harmony of line and texture and color, "there comes to us," he says, "a feeling of purpose; we feel that all these sensually logical conformities are the outcome of a particular feeling, or of what, for want of a better word, we call an idea; and we may even say that the pot is the expression of an idea in the artist's mind." 3 After many efforts to define the notion of artistic expressiveness, he concludes: "I seem to be unable at present to get beyond this vague adumbration of significant form. Flaubert's 'expression of the idea' seems to me to correspond exactly to what I mean, but alas! he never explained, and probably could not, what he meant by the 'idea.' " 4
There is a strong tendency today to treat art as a significant
phenomenon rather than as a pleasurable experience, a gratification of the senses. This is probably due to the free use of dissonance and so-called "ugliness" by our leading artists in all fields—in literature, music, and the plastic arts. It may also be due in some measure to the striking indifference of the uneducated masses to artistic values. In past ages, these masses had no access to great works of art; music and painting and even books were the pleasures of the wealthy; it could be assumed that the poor and vulgar would enjoy art if they could have it. But now, since everybody can read, visit museums, and hear great music at least over the radio, the judgment of the masses on these things has become a reality, and has made it quite obvious that great art is not a direct sensuous pleasure. If it were, it would appeal—like cake or cocktails—to the untutored as well as to the cultured taste. This fact, together with the intrinsic "unpleasantness" of much contemporary art, would naturally weaken any theory that treated art as pure pleasure. Add to this the current logical and psychological interest in symbolism, in expressive media and the articulation of ideas, and we need not look far afield for a new philosophy of art, based upon the concept of "significant form." 5 'A Study in Aesthetics (1931). See esp. pp. 43 and 197. See also Knowledge and Truth (London, 1923), esp. the final chapter, and "Beauty and Significance," Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, N.S. XXIX (1928-29), pp. 123-154. "Vision and Design (London, 1925), p. 50. 'Ibid., p. 302.
5
This tendency was recognized long ago by the author of an article on symbolism, which opens with the words: "An exhaustive treatise on the symbol is an aesthetic in miniature; for in recent years symbolism has acquired such a central

[page 167]

Bat if forms in and of themselves be significant, and indeed
must be so to be classed as artistic, then certainly the kind of significance that belongs to them constitutes a very special problem in semantics. What is artistic significance? What sort of meaning do "expressive forms" express?
Clearly they do not convey propositions, as literal symbols
do. We all know that a seascape (sav) represents water and rocks, boats and fish-piers; that a still-life represents oranges and apples, a vase of flowers, dead game or fish, etc. But such a content is not what makes the paint-patterns on the canvas "expressive forms." The mere notion of rabbits, grapes, or even boats at sunset is not the "idea" that inspires a painting. The artistic idea is always a "deeper" conception. Several psychologists have ventured to unmask this "deeper" significance by interpreting pictures, poems, and even musical compositions as symbols of loved objects, mainly, of course, of a forbidden nature. Artistic activity, according to the psychoanalysts who have given it their attention, is an expression of primitive dynamisms, of unconscious wishes, and uses the objects or scenes represented to embody the secret fantasies of the artist.6
This explanation has much to recommend it. It accounts
for the fact that we are inclined to credit works of art with significance, although (by reason of the moral censorship which distorts the appearance of basic desires) we can never say what they signify. It does justice to the emotional interest, the seriousness with which we receive artistic experience.
Above all, it brings this baffling department of human activity
into the compass of a general psychological system—the so-called "dynamic psychology," based on the recognition of certain fundamental human needs, of the conflicts resulting from position in aesthetics that one can hardly take a step in that wide domain without stumbling upon some sort of symbolic relation." R. M. Wernaer. "Das aesthetische Symbol."" Zeitschrift fur Philosophic and philosophische Kritik, CXXX (1907), I : 47-7S. "See Ch. Badouin, Psychoanalyse de Vart (1929); A. M. Bodkin. "The Relevance of Psycho-Analysis to Art Criticism," British Journal of Psychology. XV (1924-25), part II, 174-183; J. W. Brown, "Psychoanalysis in the Plastic Arts," International Journal of Psychoanalysis, X. part I (January 1929); J. Landquist, "Das kunstlerische Symbol." Imago VI (1920), 4: 297-322; Hanns Sachs. "Kunst als Personlichkeit," Imago, XV (1929), 1: 1-14; the same author's bibliographical essay, "Aesthetics and Psychology of the Artist " International Journal of Psychoanalysis. II (1921), part I, 94-100; George Whitehead. Psychoanalysis and Art (1930) With special reference to music, see A. Elster, Musik und Erotik fBonn, 1925); Man Graf, Die innere Werk.'tatt des Musikers (Stuttgart, 1910): K. Eggar, "The Sub-ons-ious Mind and the Musical Faculty," Proceedings of the Musical Association XLVII (1920-21). 23-38; D. Mosonyi, "Die irratinnalen Grundlagen der Musik " Imago. XXI (1935), 2: 207-226; A. van der Chijs. "Ueber das Unisono in der Komposition," Imago, XII (1926), 1: 23-31. This list is not exhaustive, but representative.

[page 168]

their mutual interference, and of the mechanism whereby they assert, disguise, and finally realize themselves. The startingpoint of this psychology is the discovery of a previously unrecognized symbolic mode, typified in dream, and perfectly trace.-'ble in all works of fantasy. To assimilate art to the imaginative life in general is surely not a forced procedure. It seems, moreover, to bring the problem of aesthetic experience into the symbol-centered philosophy that constitutes the theme of this book.
These are strong recommendations for the psychoanalytic
theory of aesthetics. But despite them all, I do not think this theory (though probably valid) throws any real light on those issues which confront artists and critics and constitute the philosophical problem of art. For the Freudian interpretation, no matter how far it be carried, never offers even the rudest criterion of artistic excellence. It may explain why a poem was written, why it is popular, what human features it hides under its fanciful imagery; what secret ideas a picture combines, and why Leonardo's women smile mysteriously. But it makes no distinction between good and bad art. The features to which it attributes the importance and significance of a great masterpiece may all be found just as well in an obscure work of some quite incompetent painter or poet. Wilhelm
Stekel, one of the leading Freudian psychologists interested in
artistic productions as a field for analysis, has stated this fact explicitly: "I want to point out at once," he says, "that it is irrelevant to our purpose whether the poet in question is a great, universally acknowledged poet, or whether we are dealing with a little poetaster. For, after all, we are investigating only the impulse which drives people to create." 7
An analysis to which the artistic merit of a work is irrelevant
can hardly be regarded as a promising technique of art-criticism,8 for it can look only to a hidden content of the work,
7
Die
8
Traume der Dichter (Wiesbaden. 1912), p. 32. Oddly enough, this fact is overlooked by so excellent a literary critic as J. M. Thorburn, who says: "The poet must, I think, be regarded as striving after the simplicity of a childish utterance. His goal is to think as a child, to understand as a child. . . . "When he has written, and the work is good, the measure of his genius is the depth to which he has gone back, the originality of his idiom and the degree of its antiquity." (Art and the Unconscious [London, 1925], pp. 70-71.) "If art be symbolic, it is the artist who discovers the symbol. But he need not—though of course he may—recognize it as a symbol. We, the appreciative recipients of his work, must so recognize it." (Ibid., p. 79.) This makes artistic judgment a special development of psychoanalytic technique. "We try to reconstruct his [the artist's] personality from whatever sources we may." (Ibid., p. 21.) The more dreamlike and subjective the work, the more primitive is its language; the greatest poets should then be the most graphic dreamers. Stekel has pointed out, however, that at the level of symbol production the poet does not differ from the most prosaic soul. After analyzing three dreams

[page 169]

and not to what every artist knows as the real problem—the perfection of form, which makes this form "significant" in the artistic sense. We cannot evaluate this perfection by finding more and more obscure objects represented or suggested by the form.
Interest in represented objects and interest in the visual or
verbal structures that depict them are always getting hopelessly entangled. Yet I believe "artistic meaning" belongs to the sensuous construct as such; this alone is beautiful, and contains all that contributes to its beauty.
The most obvious approach to the formal aspect of art
would be, of course, through the study of pure design. But in poetry pure design is non-existent, and in the plastic arts it has played but a minor role until very recent times. It is carried to considerable heights in textiles, and occurs as decoration in conjunction with architecture and ceramics. But the world's greatest artists have rarely worked in these media; sculptures and paintings are their high achievements. If we would really restrict ourselves to pure perceptible forms, the plastic arts offer but a sparse field for research, and not a central one.
Music, on the other hand, is preeminently non-representative
even in its classical productions, its highest attainments. It exhibits pure form not as an embellishment, but as its very essence; we can take it in its flower—for instance, German music from Bach to Beethoven—and have practically nothing but tonal structures before us: no scene, no object, no fact. That is a great aid to our chosen preoccupation with form. There is no obvious, literal content in our way. If the meaning of art belongs to the sensuous percept itself apart from what it ostensibly represents, then such purely artistic meaning should be most accessible through musical works. This is not to say that music is the highest, the most expressive, or the most universal art. Sound is the easiest medium to use in a purely artistic way; but to work in the safest medium is not at all the same thing as to achieve the highest aim. Furthermore, we should take warning against the fallacy of hasty generalization—of assuming that through music we are studying all the arts, so that every insight into the nature of music is immediately applicable to painting, architecture, poetry, —one reported by a woman under his care, one by Goethe, aiid one by lhat poet's friend and henchman. Erkerrr."nn—he observes: "Is it not remarkable that the great poet Goethe and the unknown little woman . . . should have constructed such similar dreams? And were one to award a prize for poetic excellence, Eckermaim and the deserted woman would both win over Goethe." (Die TrUume tier Dic.hter, P. 14.)

[page 170]

dance, and drama; and above all, that propositions which do not have obvious analogues in all these departments are not very valuable in their restricted musical context.9 A basic unity of purpose and even of general method for all the arts is a very inviting hypothesis, and may well be demonstrable in the end; but as a foregone conclusion, a dogmatic premise, it is dangerous because it discourages special theories and single-minded, technical study. General theories should be constructed by generalization from the principles of a special field, known and understood in full detail. Where no such systematic order exists to serve as a pattern, a general theory is more likely to consist of vague generalities than of valid generalizations. Therefore let us concern ourselves, at present, with the significance of music alone. A great deal of philosophical thought has been bestowed on this subject, if not since Winkelmann and Herder, at least since Schopenhauer; and not only from the general standpoint of the aesthetician, which those early writers took, but from the more specialized one of the musician and the musical critic. The history of musical aesthetics is an eventful one, as intellectual histories go, so it is unavoidable that a good many theories have to be weighed in considering it.
In the course of all this reflection and controversy, the problem
of the nature and function of music has shifted its center several times; in Kant's day it hinged on the conception of the arts as cultural agencies, and concerned the place of music among these contributions to intellectual progress. On this basis the great worshiper of reason naturally ranked it lowest of all art-forms.10 The Darwinians of later days sought the key to its importance in its origins; if it could be proved—or at least, imagined—to have survival value, or even to be the residue of some formedy useful instinct or device, its dignity was saved, even if our interest in it now were only what William James took it to be—"a mere incidental peculiarity of the nervous system, with no teleological significance." n Helmholtz, Wundt, Stumpf, and other psychologists to whom the
8
An artistic principle may be obvious in just one special field, and prove to be generally applicable only after development in that field; for instance, Edward Bullough's excellent notion of "psychical distance" (of which more will be said later) would probably not have been recognized as an important principle in music or ceramic art, but the peculiar problems of drama required such a concept. Even if it had not proved to be universally applicable, it would be valid in its original domain. (See " 'Psychical Distance* as a Factor in Art and as an Aesthetic Principle," British Journal of Psychology, V (1912), part II, 87-118.)
10
See the excerpt from Kant's Kritik der Urteihkraft in F. M. Gatz's sourcebook,
Musik-Aesthetik
(Stuttgart, 1929), p. 53.
11
Principles of Psychology, 2 vols. (1890). See vol. II, p. 419. His words refer directly to fear-reactions in high places, which, he says, in this respect resemble "liability to sea-sickness, or love of music."

[page 171]

existence and persistence of music presented a problem, based their inquiries on the assumption that music was a form of pleasurable sensation, and tried to compound the value of musical compositions out of the "pleasure-elements" of their tonal constituents. This gave rise to an aesthetic based on liking and disliking, a hunt for a sensationist definition of beauty, and a conception of art as the satisfaction of taste; this type of art theory, which of course applies without distinction to all the arts, is "aesthetic" in the most literal sense, and its exponents today are rather proud of not overstepping the limits of the field so defined. 12 But beyond a description of tested pleasuredispleasure reactions to simple sounds or elementary soundcomplexes, and certain observations on people's tastes in musical selections, this approach has not taken us; it seems to be an essentially barren adventure. Another kind of reaction to music, however, is more striking, and seems more significant: that is the emotional response it is commonly supposed to evoke. The belief that music arouses emotions goes back even to the Greek philosophers.
It led Plato to demand, for his ideal state, a strict censorship
of modes and tunes, lest his citizens be tempted by weak or voluptuous airs to indulge in demoralizing emotions.13 The same principle is often invoked to explain the use of music in tribal society, the lure of the African drum, the clarion call and the "Pibroch" calling armies or clans to battle, the worldold custom of lulling the baby to sleep with slumber songs.
The legend of the sirens is based on a belief in the narcotic and
toxic effect of music, as also the story of Terpander's preventing civil war in Sparta, or of the Danish King Eric, who committed murder as a result of a harpist's deliberate experiment in mood-production.14 Despite the fact that there is, to my knowledge, not a single authentic record of any specific change of disposition or intention, or even the inhibition of a practical impulse in any person by the agency of music, this belief in the physical power of the art has come down to modern times. Music is known, indeed, to affect pulse-rate and respiration, to facilitate or disturb concentration, to excite or '-'Thus Clivo Bell, having proposed the concept of "significant form" as the keynote of art criticism, says: "At this point a query arises . . .: 'Why are we so profoundly moved by forms related in a particular way?' The question is extremely interesting, but irrelevant to aesthetics. In pure aesthetics we have only to consider our emotion and its object." If questions about the relation between emotion and object are irrelevant, what is there to "consider" about these factors?
13
Republic, bk. iii.
" These and other stories are cited by Irmgard Otto in an essay, "Von sonderbahrer Wurckung und Krafft der Musik." Die Musik, XXIX (19.57), part II, 625-630.

[page 172]

relax the organism, while the stimulus lasts; but beyond evoking impulses to sing, tap, adjust one's step to musical rhythm, perhaps to stare, hold one's breath or take a tense attitude, music does not ordinarily influence behavior.13 Its somatic influences seem to affect unmusical as well as musical persons (the selections usually employed in experimentation would be more likely to irritate than to soothe or inspire a musical person), and to be, therefore, functions of sound rather than of music.1° Experiments made with vocal music are entirely unreliable, since words and the pathos of the human voice are added to the musical stimulus. On the whole, the behavior of concert audiences after even the most thrilling performances makes the traditional magical influence of music on human actions very dubious. Its somatic effects are transient, and its moral hangovers or uplifts seem to be negligible.
Granting, however, that the effects do not long outlive their
causes, the proposition that music arouses emotions in the listener does not seem, offhand, like a fantastic or mythical assertion. In fact, the belief in the affective power of music is respectable enough to have led some very factual-minded modern psychologists to conduct tests for the emotional effects of different compositions and collect the reported data. They have compiled lists of possible "effects," such as:
Sad
Serious
Like dancing
Stirred, excited
Devotional
Gay, happy
Rested
Amused
Sentimental
Longing
Patriotic
Irritated
The auditors of certain musical selections, which were usually
of the so-called "semi-popular" sort (e.g. MacDowell's To a Wild Rose, Sousa's Volunteer Alarcb), were given prepared data-sheets and asked to check their musically stimulated feelings with the rubrics there suggested.17
18
For an exhaustive treatment of the physica! and mental effects of music, see the dissertation by Charles M. Disserens, The Influence of Music on Behavior (1926). Dr. Disserens accepts much evidence that I would question, yet offers no report of practical acts inspired by music, or even permanent effects on temperament or disposition, such as were claimed for it in the eighteenth century. (Cf., e.g., Reflections on Antient and Modern Musick. with Application to the Cure of
Diseases
(Anon., 1749); or Albrecht's De Effectu Musices in Corpus Animatum.)
1
- An often, neglected distinction pointed out in Ernst Kurth's Musik-psychologie (Berlin, 1931), p. 152. Kurth observes that Stumpf, working deliberately with unmusical rather than musical persons, gave us a Tonpsychologie but not a Musikpsychologie.
17
See Esther Gatewood, "The Nature of Musical Enjoyment," in The Effects of Music, edited by Max Schoen (New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1927).

[page 173]

The results of such experiments 18 add very little to the well-known fact that most people connect feelings with music, and (unless they have thought about the precise nature of that connection) believe they have the feelings while they are under the influence of the music, especially if you ask them which of several feelings the music is giving them. That quick, lilting tunes are said to make one feel happy or "like dancing," hymns to make one solemn, and funeral marches sad, is hardly surprising; nor that Love's Old Sweet Song was generally said to stir "tender memories." The whole inquiry really took for granted what Charles Avison, a British musicologist and organist, said without experimental evidence in 1775: that "the force of sound in alarming the passions is prodigious," and that music "does naturally raise a variety of passions in the human breast, similar to the sounds which are expressed; and thus, by the musician's art, . . . we are by turns elated with joy, or sunk in pleasing sorrow rouzed to courage, or quelled by grateful terrors, melted into pity, tenderness, and love, or transported to the regions of bliss, in an extacy of divine praise." 19 The terms "pleasing sorrow" and "grateful terrors" present something of a puzzle. If music really grieves or frightens us, why do we listen to it? The modern experimenters are not disturbed by this question, but Avison felt called upon to meet it. The sorrows and terrors of music, he explained, are not our own, but are sympathetically felt by us; "There are certain sounds natural to joy, others to grief or despondency, others to tenderness and love; and by hearing these, we naturally sympathize with those who either enjoy or suffer." 20 But if we are moved by sympathy, with whom are we sympathizing? Whose feelings do we thus appreciate? The obvious answer is: the musician's. He who produces the music is pouring out the real feelings of his heart. Music is his avenue of self-expression, he confesses his emotions to an audience, or—in solitude—just works them off to relieve himself. In an
18
These results were, of course, not spontaneous, since the questionnaire directed the subjects' expectations to a special kind of experience which is popularly supposed to result from hearing music, and moreover dictated a choice, which made it necessary to attribute some particular feeling wholly, or preeminently, to any given piece. Fleeting affects, superseded by others, could not be checked off without creating a wrong impression; only general states of feeling were supposed to result, and were therefore dutifully reported. Essentially the same technique is employed by Kate Hevner; see her "Expression in Music: Discussion of Experimental Studies and Theories," Psychological Review, XLII (1935), 2: 186-204, and "Experimental Studies of the Elements of Expression in Music," American Journal oj Psychology, XLVIII (1936), 2: 246268. "An Essay on Musical Expression (London, 1775), pp. 3-4.
20
Loc. cit. See also p. 5, n.

[page 174]

age when most performers offered their own compositions or even improvisations, this explanation of music was quite natural. Rousseau, Marpurg, Mattheson, C. Ph. E. Bach, were all convinced that (as Bach put it) "since a musician cannot otherwise move people, but he be moved himself, so he must necessarily be able to induce in himself all those affects which he would arouse in his auditors; he conveys his feelings to them, and thus most readily moves them to sympathetic emotions." 21 The problem was somewhat complicated by the growing distinction between composers and performers toward the end of the century; but here the reciprocity of expression and impression came to the rescue. The composer is, indeed, the orieinal subject of the emotions deo;cted, but the performer becomes at once his confidant and his mouthpiece. He transmits the feelings of the master to a sympathetic audience.
In this form the doctrine has come down to our day, and is
widely accepted by musicians and philosophers alike. From
Rousseau to Kierkegaard and Croce among philosophers, from
Maroure to Hausegger and Riemann among music critics, but
above all among musicians themselves—composers, conductors, and performers—we find the belief very widely disseminated that music is an emotional catharsis, that its essence is self-expression. Beethoven, Schumann, Liszt, to mention only the great, have left us testimonials to that effect. Moreover, it is the opinion of the average sentimental music-lover that all moving and poignant music must translate some personal experience, the longing or ecstasy or despair of the artist's own vie amoureuse; and most musical amateurs will accept without hesitation the statement of Henri Prunieres, who says categorically that whatever feelings a composer may convey, "we may rest assured that he will not express these sentiments with authority unless he has experienced them at some given moment of his existence." 22 Most likely they will even go so far as to agree that, in the case of a theme which Beethoven used ten years after he had first jotted it down, "It is probable that such a theme, translating an impression of keenest sorrow, came to him during a day of suffering." 23 The self-expression theory, which classes music with "such expressions as 'oh-oh,' or at a higher level, lyrical verses," as Carnap says, M Versltck ueber die wahre Art, das Klavier zu spielen (Leipzig, 1925, reprint from 2nd ed.; 1st ed., part I, 1753, part II, 1762). See part I, p. 85. For a detailed study of this early theory, see WPhelm Caspari's dissertation, Geg*.nstand und Wirkung der Tonkunst nach der Ansicht der Deutschen im I S . Jahrhundert (Erlangen 1903). For extensive source-material, see Gatz, Musik-Aesthetik. M "Musical Symbolism," Musical Quarterly, XIX (1933), 1: 18-28. See p. 20. "Ibid., p. 21.

[page 175]

is the most popular doctrine of the significance and function of music. 24 It explains in a very plausible way the undeniable connection of music with feeling, and the mystery of a work of art without ostensible subject-matter; above all, it brings musical activity within the compass of modern psychology—• behavioristic, dynamic, genetic, or what not. Yet the belief that music is essentially a form of self-expression meets with paradox in very short order; philosophically it comes to a stop almost at its very beginning. For the history of music has been a history of more and more integrated, disciplined, and articulated forms, much like the history of language, which waxes important only as it is weaned from its ancient source in expressive cries, and becomes denotative and connotative rather than emotional. We have more need of, and respect for, so-called "pure music" than ancient cultures seem to have had; 2 5 yet our counterpoints and harmonic involutions have nothing like the expressive abandon of the Indian "Ki-yi" and "How-how," the wailing primitive dirge, the wild syncopated shouts of African tribesmen. Sheer self-expression requires no artistic form. A lynching-party howling round the gallows-tree, a woman wringing her hands over a sick child, a lover who has just rescued his sweetheart in an accident and stands trembling, sweating, and perhaps laughing or crying with emotion, is giving vent to intense feelings; but such scenes are not occasions for music, least of all for composing. Not even a theme, "translating an impression of keenest sorrow," is apt to come to a man, a woman, or a mob in a moment when passionate self-expression is needed.
The laws of emotional catharsis are natural laws, not artistic.
Verbal responses like "Ah!" "Oh-oh!" are not creations, but speech-habits; even the expressiveness of oaths rests not on the fact that such words were invented for psycho-cathartic purposes, but that they are taboo, and the breaking of a taboo gives emotional release. Breaking a vase would do better still.
Yet it may well be argued that in playing music we seek,
and often find, self-expression. Even Hanslick, to whom emotive meanings in a composition were anathema, granted the possibility of relieving one's feelings at the keyboard; 26 and !4
Even our leading psychologists subscribe to this conviction: "To be successful, the musician must carry his audience on a wave of emotion often bordering on the point of ecstasy." This from Carl Seashore, who prides himself on his strict investigation of facts, not "the rehashing of semi-scientific knowledge under the name of philosophy in aesthetics"! (See Psychology of -Music (New York:
McGraw-Hill
Book Co., 1938), pp. 174 and 377.)
28
Cf Eduard Hanslick, Vom Musikatisch-Schonen (Leipzig, 5th ed. 1876; 1st ed. 1854), p. 103; also Ferruccio Busoni, Entmtrf einer neuen Aesthetik der Tonkunst (1907), p. 5.
20
Op. cit., pp. 78-79.

[page 176]

anyone who has a voice or an instrument can verify the relief of musical outpourings, from his own experience. Surely, at some time, he has been moved to vent his excitement in song or rhapsody or furious tarantelle. and felt better for the manic outburst: and. being "keyed up," he probably sane or played unusually well. He chose the piece because it seemed to "express" his condition. It seemed to him, at least at the time, that rhe piece was designed to speak his feelings, and not impossibly he may believe forever after that these must be the verv feelings the composer intended to record in the score.
The great variety of interpretations which different players
or auditors will give to one and the same piece—differences even of such general feeling-contents as sad. angry, elated, impatient—make such confidence in the author's intentions appear somewhat naive. He could not poss;bly have been feeling all the different emotions his composition seems to be able to express. The fact is, that we can use music to work off our subjective experiences and restore our personal balance, but this is not its primary function. Were it so, it would be utterly impossible for an artist to announce a program in advance, and expect to play it well; or even, having announced it on the spot, to express himself successively in allegro, adagio, presto, and allegretto, as the chanping moods of a single sonata are apt to dictate. Such mercurial passions would be abnormal even in the notoriously capricious race of musicians! If music has any significance, it is semantic, not symptomatic. Its "meaning" is evidently not that of a stimulus to evoke emotions, nor that of a signal to announce them; if it has an emotional content, it "has" it in the same sense that language "has" its conceotual content—symbolically. It is not usually derived from affects nor intended for them; but we may say, with certain reservations, that it is about them. Music is not the cause or the cure of feelings, but their logical expression: though even in this capacity it has its special ways of functioning, that make it incommensurable with language, and even with presentational symbols like images, gestures, and rites.
Many attempts have been made to treat music as a language
of emotions. None has been really satisfactory, though some of them are both searching and well-directed. An extraordinary amount of able thinking has been expended on the philosophy of music, and the only stumbling-block wh ; ch has held up the progress of this central problem of "significant form" has been, I think, a lack of understanding of the ways in which

[page 177]

logical structures may enter into various types of "sign;ficance." Practically all the work has been done; the anomalies and puzzles that remain, though very baffling, are mainly due to logical misconceptions, or slightly naive assumptions which only a logician could be expected to recognize as such. Here we run into a difficulty inherent in the scholarship of our time —the obstacle of too much knowledge, which forces us to accept the so-called "findings" of specialists in other fields, "findings" that were not made with reference to our searchings, and often leave the things that would be most important for us, unfound. Riemann, for instance, declared with perfect confidence that musical aesthetics may and must accept the laws of logic and the doctrines of logicians as given.27 But it happens that just in musical aesthetics the vital problem with which we are faced is one that involves the entire logic of symbolism. It is a logical problem of art, and no logician would be likely to search, in his own interest, for the "findings" that are relevant to it. It concerns the logical structure of a type of symbol that logicians do not use, and would therefore not even stumble upon as an interesting freak. In short, we are dealing with a philosophical problem, requiring logical study, and involving music: for to be able to define "musical meaning" adequately, precisely, but for an artistic, not a positivistic context and purpose, is the touchstone of a really powerful philosophy of symbolism.
For the sake of orientation, let us now explicitly abandon
the problems of music as stimulus and music as emotive symptom, since neither of these functions (though both undoubtedly exist) would suffice to account for the importance we attach to it; and let us assume that its "significance" is in some sense that of a symbol. The challenge to our theory, then, is to determine in what sense this can be said; for it is certainly not true in every sense. The question takes us back to Chapter
III, to the logic of symbols and the various possibilities of
meaning that symbolic structures may contain. Here we should find the conditions for a "language of music" if such there be, or of "significant form" of any other sort than language.
The assumption that music is a kind of language, not of
the here-and-now, but of genuine conceptual content, is widely entertained, though perhaps not as universally as the emotivesymptom theory. The best-known pioneer in this field is Schopenhauer: and it has become something of an accepted verdict that his attempt to interpret music as a symbol of the irrational "'Hugo Riemann, Die Elemente dtr musikaliscken Aetthetik (1903), p. 3.

[page 178]

aspect of mental life, the Will, was a good venture, though of course his conclusion, being "metaphysical," was quite bad.
However that may be, his novel contribution to the present
issue was certainly his treatment of music as an impersonal, negotiable, real semantic, a symbolism with a content of ideas, instead of an overt sign of somebody's emotional condition.
This principle was quickly adopted by other thinkers, though
there was considerable debate as to what ideational content was embodied in the language of tones. Indeed, one author lists no less than sixteen interpretations, including "the expression of the Freedom of the Will" and "the expression of Conscience." 28 The most obvious and naive reading of this "language" is the onomatopoetic one, the recognition of natural sounds in musical effects. This, as everybody knows, is the basis of "program music," which deliberately imitates the clatter and cries of the market place, hoof-beats, clanging hammers, running brooks, nightingales and bells and the inevitable cuckoo. Such "sound-painting" is by no means modern; it goes back as far as the thirteenth century, when the cuckoo's note was introduced as a theme in the musical setting of "Summer is acumen in." 29 An eighteenth-century critic says disapprovingly, "Our intermezzi . . . are full of fantastic imitations and silly tricks. There one can hear clocks striking, ducks jabbering, frogs quacking, and pretty soon one will be able to hear fleas sneezing and grass growing." so But its early uses were frankly tricks, like Bach's fugue on the letters of his name, B-A-C-H (to a German, B[>-A-C-Bb). Only with the development of opera and oratorio, the orchestra was called upon to furnish sounds appropriate to certain scenes. In Haydn's Creation the prancing horses and sinuous worms merely furnish musical figures with technical possibilities, like the traditional cuckoos and cocks, but the waters over the earth are certainly used with the serious intent of building up a thought with the soundeffect. In Bach's Passion According to St. Matthew the orchestra registers the rending of the temple curtain in the midst of an unmistakable musical storm. From this time onward, soundpainting increases until the romantic symphony may require a whole outfit of wooden rattles, cowbells, whistles, even
28
Colin McAlpin, Hermaia: A Study in Comparative Esthetics (London and New York, 1915). See his table of contents.
Cf.
Richard Aldrich, Musical Discourse (London, 1928), p. 25.
30
J. A. Hiller, "Abhandlung von der Nachahmung der Natur in der Musik," in Marpurg's Historisch-kritische Beytrage zur Aufnahme der Musik, 5 vols. (Berlin, 1754-1760). See vol. I, p. 532.

[page 179]

soui.d-recordings and a wind-machine. 31 A veritable code of "effects" grew up, helped by the more and mere deta ; led and indispensable program notes. Finally, as an eminent New York Times critic says, "Strauss, in the heyday of his programmatic frenzy, went so far as to declare that a day would come when a composer could compose the silverware on the table so that the listener could distinguish the knives from the forks." 32
But not all conceptions of musical semantic were thus naive
and literal. Side by side with the evolution of sound-painting runs the development of "dramatic" music in a more objective sense—music that is intended, and taken, to be a language of feelinp Not silverware, nor even parades and thunderstorms, are the objects of musical representation here, but love and loneing, hope and fear, the essence of tragedy and comedy. This is not "self-expression"; it is exposition of feelings which may be attributed to persons on the stage or fictitious characters in a ballad. In pure instrumental music without dramatic action, there may be a high emotional import which is not referred to any subject, and the glib assurance of some program writers that this is the composer's protest against life, cry of despair, vision of his beloved, or what not, is a perfectly unjustified fancy; for if music is really a language of emotion, it expresses primarily the composer's knowledge of human feeling, not how or when that knowledge was acquired; as his conversation presumably expresses his knowledge of more tangible things, and usually not his first experience of them. This is the most persistent, plausible, and interesting doctrine of meaning in music, and has lent itself to considerable development; on the theoretical side by Kretschmar, E. v.
Hartmann, more recently Schweitzer and Pirro, and on die
practical side by Schumann, Wagner, Liszt, Berlioz (who have all left us theoretical statements as well), and many others.
From Wagner I take what may be the most explicit rendering
of the principle: "What music expresses, is eternal, infinite and ideal; it does not express the passion, love, or longing of such-andsuch an individual on such-and-such an occasion, but passion, love or longing in itself, and this it presents in that unlimited variety of motivations, which is the exclusive and particular » Respighi's The Pines ol Rome features a phonograph record of a nightingale's song; Strauss' Alpine Symphony calls for th? "wind-machine.
85
Aldrich, up. tit., p. 15.

[page 180]

characteristic of music, foreign and inexpressible to any other language." 33
Despite the romantic phraseology, this passage states quite
clearly that music is not self-expression, but -formulation and representation of emotions, moods, mental tensions and resolutions—a "logical picture" of sentient, responsive life, a source of insight, not a plea for sympathy. Feelings revealed in music are essentially not "the passion, love or longing of such-and-such an individual," inviting us to put ourselves in that individual's place, but are presented directly to our understanding, that we may grasp, realize, comprehend these feelings, without pretending to have them or imputing them to anyone else. Just as words can describe events we have not witnessed, places and things we have not seen, so music can present emotions and moods we have not felt, passions we did not know before. Its subject-matter is the same as that of "selfexpression," and its symbols may even be borrowed, upon occasion, from the realm of expressive symptoms; yet the borrowed suggestive elements are formalized, and the subjectmatter "distanced" in an artistic perspective. The notion of "psychical distance" as the hall-mark of every artistic "projection" of experience, which Edward Builough has developed, does not make the emotive contents typical, general, impersonal, or "static"; but it makes them conceivable, so that we can envisage and understand them without verbal helps, and without the scaffolding of an occasion wherein they figure (as all self-expression implies an occasion, a cause—true or imaginary—for the subject's temporary feelings). A composer not only indicates, but articulates subtle complexes of feeling that language cannot even name, let alone set forth; he knows the forms of emotion and can handle them, "compose" them. We do not "compose" our exclamations and jitters.
The actual opposition between the two emotive theories of
musical meaning—that of self-expression and that of logical expression—is best summed up by contrasting the passage from C. Ph. E. Bach, already quoted on page 174, to the effect that "a musician cannot otherwise move people, but he be moved himself," and always "conveys his feelings to them, and thus most readily moves them to sympathetic emotion," with Busoni's statement: "Just as an artist, if he is to move his audience, must never
83
Richard Wagner, "Ein gliKkHcher Abend," reprinted by Gatz, in MusikAesthetik, from the Gazette Musicale, nos. 56-58 (1841).

[page 181]

be moved himself—lest he lose, at that moment, his mastery over the material—so the auditor who wants to get the full operatic effect must never regard it as real, if his artistic appreciation is not to be degraded to mere human sympathy." 34
This degradation is what Bullough would call a loss of
"psychical distance." It is, in fact, a confusion between a symbol, which lets us conceive its object, and a sign, which causes us to deal with what it means. "Distance . . . is obtained by separating the object and its appeal from one's own self, by putting it out of gear with practical needs and ends. But . . . distance does not imply an impersonal, purely intellectually interested relation. . . . On the contrary, it describes a personal relation, often highly emotionally colored, but of a peculiar character. Its peculiarity lies in that the personal character of the relation has been, so to speak, filtered. It has been cleared of the practical, concrete nature of its appeal. . . ." 35
The content has been symbolized for us, and what it invites
is not emotional response, but insight. "Psychical Distance" is simply the experience of apprehending through a symbol what was not articulated before. The content of art is always real; the mode of its presentation, whereby it is at once revealed and "distanced," may be a fiction. It may also be music, or, as in the dance, motion. But if the content be the life of feeling, impulse, passion, then the symbols which reveal it will not be the sounds or actions that normally would express this life; not associated signs, but symbolic forms must convey it to our understanding.
Very few writers who assign significance of any sort to
music have kept these several kinds of meaning strictly apart. Literal meanings—the renderings of birds and bells and thunder and the Twentieth Century Limited by orchestral instruments—are usually mixed up in a vague way with emotive meanings, which they are supposed to support, or even to inspire by suggestion. And emotions, in turn, are treated now as effects, now as causes, now as contents of so-called "emotive music." Even in Wagner, who stated explicitly the abstractive, generalizing function of music in depicting feelings, there is plenty of confusion. In describing his own furor poeticus he presents himself as expressing his personal sentiments and upheavals. In Oper und Drama he says that operatic music must express the sentiments of the speaker and actor ("des Reden" Busoni. Entviur/ et*tr neuea Aestketik der Tonkunst, here quoted from Gatz, op. tit., p. 498. * Bullough, "Psychical Distance," p. 91.

[page 182]

den und Darstellenden," not "des redend Dargestellten") .atf Yet it is perfectly clear that the "poetic intention" ("die dichterische Absicht") which is the raison d'etre of the work is not to give the actors self-expression, nor the audience an emotional orgy, but is to put over, to make conceivable, a great insight into human passional nature. And again, in the same work, he refers to the tragic fate of Beethoven as an inability to communicate his private feelings, his sufferings, to the curious but unmoved listener who could not understand him.37
So it was that, when Hanslick wrote his famous little book
Vom Musikalisch-Schonen, which attempted to blast the growing romantic conception of a "language of music," he found himself called upon to combat not only the use of onomatopoeia, the hoofbeats of Wagner's riding Valkyries and the thunder-peals that announce the wreck of the Flying Dutchman, but also the production, exhibition, or symbolic representation of emotions—the moan and tremolo of the orchestra, the surging outbursts of Tristan and Isolde. Against all these alleged "expressive functions" of music the great purist mustered his arguments. Vehemently he declared that music conveys no meanings whatever, that the content of music is nothing but dynamic sound-patterns ("tonend bewegte Formen"),3S and that "the theme of a musical composition is its proper content." 39 But especially the true Wagnerian aim —the semantic use of music, the representation of emotive life —aroused his opposition. "It is no mere fencing with words," he declares at the very outset, "to protest most emphatically against the notion of 'representation,' because this notion has given rise to the greatest errors of musical aesthetics. To 'represent something always involves the conception (Vorstellung) of two separate, distinct things, one of which must first be given, by a specific act, an explicit relation of reference to the other." 40 Music, in his estimation, can never be used in this degrading fashion.
His statement of the conditions for representation can, of
course, be challenged in the light of a better knowledge of symbolism. What he says applies generally to literal, especially to scientific, expression; but it is not true of some other modes, which serve rather to formulate knowledge than to communicate its finished products. Yet there is justice in his protest, too; for the claim of his adversaries to a language of music '* Here quoted from Gatz, of. cit., p. 166. * Hanslick, Vom Musikalisch-Schiinen, p. 45.
40
Ibid., introd., p. viii.
"Ibid., p. 172. "Ibid., p. 136.

[page 183]

ON
SIGNIFICANCE
IN
MUSIC
183
is indeed a misleading one, which may well do mischief among musicians and audiences alike. Those claims, just like Hanslick's counter-claims, invite logical criticism. So, instead of wrangling over this or that alleged "meaning," let us look at music from the purely logical standpoint as a possible symbolic form of some sort. As such it would have to have, first of all, formal characteristics which were analogous to whatever it purported to symbolize; that is to say, if it represented anything, e.g. an event, a passion, a dramatic action, it would have to exhibit a logical -form which that object could also take. Everything we conceive is conceived in some form, though there are alternative forms for every content; but the musical figure which we recognize as such must be a figuration under which we could apprehend the thing referred to.
That musical structures logically resemble certain dynamic
patterns of human experience is a well-established fact. Even Hanslick admitted as much, perhaps with less scientific backing than our modern theorists can claim; for what in his day was a psychological assumption for the sake of musical understanding, has become, in ours, a psychological doctrine aptly illustrated by musical examples. Wolfgang Kohler, the great pioneer of Gestalt psychology, remarks the usefulness of so-called musical "dynamics" to describe the forms of mental life. "Quite generally," he says, "the inner processes, whether emotional or intelectual, show types of development which may be given names, usually applied to musical events, such as: crescendo and diminuendo, accelerando and ritardando." He carries these convenient terms over into the description of overt behavior, the reflection of inner life in physical attitudes and gestures. "As these qualities occur in the world of acoustical experiences, they are found in the visual world too, and so they can express similar dynamical traits of inner life in directly observable activity. . . . To the increasing inner tempo and dynamical level there corresponds a crescendo and accelerando in visible movement. Of course, the same inner development may express itself acoustically, as in the accelerando . and rejorzando of speech. . . . Hesitation and lack of inner determination become visible . . . as ritardando of visible or audible behavior. . . ." 41 This is just the inverse of Jean D'Udine's description of music, which treats it as a kind of gesture, a tonal projection of the forms of feeling, more directly reflected in the mimic
11
Kohler, Gestalt Psychology. pp. 248-21°

[page 184]

"dance" of the orchestral conductor. "All the expressive gesticulations of the conductor," says that provocative and readable book, L'art et le geste, "is really a dance . . . all music is dancing. . . . All melody is a series of attitudes." 42 And again: "Every feeling contributes, in effect, certain special gestures which reveal to us, bit by bit, the essential characteristic of Life: movement. . . . All living creatures are constantly consummating their own internal rhythm." This rhythm, the essence of life, is the steady background against which we experience the special articulations produced by feeling; "and even the most uneventful life exhibits some such breaks in its rhythm, sources of joys and sorrows without which we would be as inert as the pebbles of the highway." 43 And these rhythms are the prototypes of musical structures, for all art is but a projection of them from one domain of sense to another, a symbolic transformation. "Every artist is a transformer; all artistic creation is but a transmutation." 44 Just as Kohler uses the language of musical dynamics to express psychological phenomena, on the basis of their formal analogy. so D'Udine makes movement the prototype of vital forms and thus reduces all the arts to "a kind of dance" (this analogy with life-functions, both lower and higher, was made long ago by Havelock Ellis in The Dance of Life) ; and so the musicologist von Hoeslin likens dance, plastic art, thought, and feeling to music by reason of that same analogy. The fundamental relationships in music, he says, are tensions and resolutions; and the patterns generated by these functions are the patterns exemplified in all art, and also in all emotive responses. Wherever sheer contrasts of ideas produce a reaction, wherever experiences of pure form produce mental tension, we have the essence of melody; and so he speaks of Sprachmelodien in poetry and Gedankenmelodien in life. 45 More naturalistically inclined critics often mediate the comparison between the forms of music and those of feeling, by assuming that music exhibits patterns of excitation occurring in the nervous tissues, which are the physical sources of emotion; 46 but it really all comes to the same thing. The upshot of all these speculations and researches is, that there are certain "Jean D'Udine, (A. Cozanet) L'art et le geste (Paris, 1910), p. xiv. " Ibid., p. 6. « Ibid., p. xii. ">}. K. v. Hoeslin, Die Melodic als gestaltender Ausdruck seelischen Lebens (Leipzig. 1920). *" Both Kohler and Koffka subscribe to this notion of the "physiological picture," of which we see, according to them, not some external duplicate, but the actual outward aspects of a total bodily state or activity. The same standpoint was already defined by C. Beauquier in his Philosophie de la musique in Paris in 1865, and by subsequent authors too numerous to cite.

[page 185]

aspects of the so-called "inner life"—physical or mental— which have formal properties similar to those of music—patterns of motion and rest, of tension and release, of agreement and disagreement, preparation, fulfilment, excitation, sudden change, etc. So the first requirement for a connotative relationship between music and subjective experience, a certain similarity of logical form, is certainly satisfied. Furthermore, there is no doubt that musical forms have certain properties to recommend them for symbolic use: they are composed of many separable items, easily produced, and easily combined in a great variety of ways; in themselves they play no important practical role which would overshadow their semantic function; they are readily distinguished, remembered, and repeated ; and finally, they have a remarkable tendency to modify each other's characters in combination, as words do, by all serving each as a context.47 The purely structural requirements for a symbolism are satisfied by the peculiar tonal phenomenon we call "music."
Yet it is not, logically speaking, a language, for it has no
vocabulary. To call the tones of a scale its "words," harmony its "grammar," and thematic development its "syntax," is a useless allegory, for tones lack the very thing that distinguishes a word from a mere vocable: fixed connotation, or "dictionary meaning." Moreover, a tone has many aspects that enter into the notion of musical significance, but not of harmony. These aspects have been minutely and seriously studied from a psychological standpoint, in ways that fairly well exclude nonmusical factors such as personal associations with tunes, instruments, styles (e.g. church music, military music), or programmatic suggestions. In a remarkably able and careful work,48 Dr. Kurt Huber has traced the successive emergence of expressive factors in the apprehension of the simplest possible tonal patterns—bare pitch-patterns of two or three tones,
47
A. Gehring carried this principle of contextual function even beyond the compass of the individual composition. "Unrelated compositions," he said, "will affect one another as inevitably as those which are related. The whole realm of music may be regarded as a single huge composition, in which every note that is written exerts its influence throughout the whole domain of tones. To speak with
Guyau, . , . it changes the very conditions of beauty.
"This explains the different effects produced by the same composition at different times. The harmonies which sound novel today will be familiar in a few decades; the volume and richness of sound which pleased our ancestors are inadequate today." (The Basis of Musical Pleasure [New York, 1910], p. 34.) Gehring's observation bears out the similarity with language, where every word that is used even in a narrow context contributes its meaning, as there established, to the living and growing language. " Der Ausdruck musikalischer Elementarmotrje. Eine exfenmental-psychologische Vntcrsuchung (1923).

[page 186]

stripped of all contextual elements of timbre, rhythm, volume, etc., by their uniform production on an electrical instrument, in timed succession and equal strength. The subjects were instructed to describe their experiences in any terms they chose: by their qualities, relations, meanings, emotional characters, somatic effects, associations, suggestions, or what-not. They were asked to report any images or memories evoked, or, failing such experiences, simply to convey their impressions as best they could. This form of experiment is certainly much more controlled and decisive than the Schoen and Gatewood questionnaires on the influence of musical selections; and the results of Huber's experiments, which might be expected to be poorer, by reason of the simplicity of the material and lack of specific instructions, are actually much more significant and more capable of systematic arrangement than the emotive-value statistics. They may be briefly summarized as follows: (1) The lowest stage of tone-apprehension yields merely an impression of tone-color of the whole tonal complex, or of a difference between tone-colors of the separate tones. (2) Meanings conveyed by such a mere impression of tonal brightness always involve states or qualities or their changes, i.e. passive changes. Imagination of an event does not occur without an impression of tonal movement. (3) The most primitive factor in the perception of tonal movement is a sense of its direction. This, according to the author, "constitutes the point of departure of that psychological symbolism of figures (psychische Gestaltsymbolik) which we encounter in the tendency to relate musical motives to sentiments." (4) The apprehension of a width of tonal intervals is independent of this sense of direction; and "all spatial symbolism in the interpretation of motives has its roots in this impression of inter-tonal distance." (5) The idea of a musical step requires a joint perception of tonal distance and direction. "We are not saying too much if we make all the higher psychical interpretation directly dependent on the grasping of interval-forms, or at least view them as mediately related to these." (6) Impressions of consonance, dissonance and relatedness (Zusammengehorigkeit) require the notion of a musical step, or progression (simultaneous tones were not given; the inquiry rested on melodic elements). (7) Tones taken as related may then be referred to a tonic, either chosen among them or "understood," i.e.

[page 187]

imaginatively supplied by the auditor (this orientation is most forcibly suggested by the perfect fourth, e.g. , which connotes almost irresistibly the setting:
(8) Reference to a tonic determines the feeling of modality; for instance,
ity if taken as
connotes a different modal-
from what it would as
(9) A subject accent may simply fall upon the tone which is harmonically more important as the hearer has organized the interval; it may, but need not, suggest a rhythmic structure. (10) Subjective rhythmatization, when it occurs, is built upon mental accentuation.
Since such mental accentuation may occur without any
actual emphasis (as in these experiments it necessarily did), the problem of rhythm in music as we know it is immensely complicated, and cannot be solved by mere reference to the drum and footfall of dancing hordes. In fact, Huber distinguishes between such purely temporal measure, and "musical rhythm," which latter results from the internal, tonal organization of the motif. 49
The entire study shows effectively how many factors of
possible expressive virtue are involved in even the simplest musical structure, how many things beside the acknowledged materials of composition have crucial functions in conveying a musical message. One may argue that voice-inflections enter
49
"So it appears," he says, "upon this view (which is shared, incidentally, by Ohmann) that musical rhythm, in contrast with the mere temporal rhythm of measures, grows out of the inner Geiia/^relations of the motif itself." (Ibid., p. 179.) This conclusion corroborates by scientific evidence the doctrines of Heinrich Schenker concerninK meter and rhythm, namely that rhythm is a function of tonal motion, not of time-division; such motion depends as much on melodic and harmonic tension and direction as on tempo. (See Schenker's Neue musikalische Theorien und Phantasien. 3 vols. [Stuttgart, 1935], esp. vol. Ill, DPT ireie Satz, ch. xii, pp. 191-206.)

[page 188]

into the "expressiveness" of speech, too; but the fact is that the verbal message may be understood apart from these. They do not alter the content of a statement, which is uniquely determined by vocabulary and syntax, but at most they may affect one's reaction to the statement. Musical semantic factors, however, have never been isolated; even the efforts of Schweitzer 50 and Pirro 51 to trace the "emotional vocabulary" of Bach by correlating musical figures with the words he usually sets to them, interesting though they are, show us certain associations in Bach's mind, perhaps also accepted conventions of his day or his school, rather than musical laws of expression. Such precise interpretations of separate figures are inconclusive because, as Huber remarked in his direct psychological study, "It is impossible to determine the absolute expressive value of separate intervals (third, fifth, etc.) because their absolute pitch affects the brightness of their constituents and therewith their qualities of contrast, apprehensibility, etc." 52 That there are tonal figures derived from natural rhythms, that upward and downward direction, pendular motion, etc., may be musically "imitated," that melodic lines may suggest sobs, whimpers, or yodelers, need not be reiterated here; such general classifications 53 do not give us a vocabulary of music; and even if we accept the more ambitious dictionary of Schweitzer or Pirro, what is usually called the "grammar" of music, i.e. harmony, does not recognize such "words" as elements at all.
The analogy between music and language breaks down if we
carry it beyond the mere semantic function in general, which they are supposed to share.54 Logically, music has not the characteristic properties of language—separable terms with fixed connotations, and syntactical rules for deriving complex connotations without any loss to the constituent elements.
Apart from a few onomatopoetic themes that have become
conventional—the cuckoo, the bugle-calls, and possibly the church-bell—music has no literal meaning.
Yet it may be a presentational symbol, and present emotive
experience through global forms that are indivisible as the elements of chiaroscuro. This view has indeed been suggested.53 But it seems peculiarly hard for our literal minds to M Albert Schweitzer, /. S. Bach, le musicien-poHe (2nd ed. Leipzig, 1905).
11
AnMr£ Pirro, L'esttitlique dp, Jean-Sebastien Bach (Paris. 1907). *2 Huber, Der Ausdruck musikaliscfier Elewtntarmotive (Leipzig. 1923), p. 182.
53
A perfect example may be found in E. Sorantin's The Problem oi Musical Expression (Vashville Tenn.: Marshall & Bruce Co., 1932). "Ci. Siegfried F. Nadel, Der duale Sinn der Musik (Ratisbon, 1931), p. 78. K Ci. Julius Bittner, "Die Grenzen des Kompoaierbaren," Der Merker, II (1910). part I, pp. 11-14.

[page 189]

grasp the idea that anything can be known which cannot be named. Therefore philosophers and critics have repeatedly denied the musical symbolization of emotion on the ground that, as Paul Moos puts it, "Pure instrumental music is unable to render even the most ordinary feelings, such as love, loyalty, ox anger, unambiguously and distinctly, by its own unaided powers." 56 Or Heinrich, in the same vein: "There are many musical works of high artistic value, that completely baffle us when we try to denote by one word the mood they are supposed to convey. This alone suffices to make the conception of music as a sentimental art, or an art of expressing sentiments, quite untenable." ST And A. Gehring, pointing out that one cannot prove every musical phrase or figure to mean some nameable feeling, memory, or idea, declares, "Until this is done, we must deny that symbolization accounts for the essential charm of the art." 58
But this is a fallacy, based on the assumptions that the
rubrics established by language are absolute, so that any other semantic must make the same distinctions as discursive thought, and individualize the same "things," "aspects," "events," and "emotions." What is here criticized as a weakness, is really the strength of musical expressiveness: that music articulates forms which language cannot set forth. The classifications which language makes automatically preclude many relations, and many of those resting-points of thought which we call "terms." It is just because music has not the same terminology and pattern, that it lends itself to the revelation of non-scientific concepts. To render "the most ordinary feelings, such as love, loyalty or anger, unambiguously and distinctly," would be merely to duplicate what verbal appellations do well enough. I cannot agree, therefore, with Professor Urban's statement: "It is true that there are other symbols than those of language, namely, the symbols of art and mathematics, by means of which meanings may be communicated. But these symbols themselves require interpretation, and interpretation is only possible in terms of language." 59 His very combination of art and mathematics seems to me to bespeak a misunderstanding; for mathematics is discursive and literal, a specialized and abbreviated language. It appeals essentially to the eye, and is *> Paul Moos, Die Philosophie der Musik (Stuttgart, 1922), p. 297. " F Heinrich "Die Tonkunst in ihrem Verhaltnis zum Ausdruck und zura SymM." Zeitschrift fur Musikwissenschaft, VIII (1925-26), 66-92. See p. 75. » The Basis of Musical Pleasure, p. 90. "W. M. Urban, Language and Reality, p. 5S.

[page 190]

therefore most easily "done on paper," but all its symbols have names; a complex like
may always be verbally ex-
pressed as "the square root of a-plus-p, over c to the m-plusnth power." This is not a non-linguistic symbolism; it is merely a highly technical jargon, and the teaching of mathematics is its interpretation to the uninitiate. But in art such interpretation is vicious, because art—certainly music, and probably all art—is formally and essentially untranslatable; and I cannot agree that "interpretation of poetry is the determination of what poetry says. . . . One of the essential functions of the teaching of literature is its interpretation. . . . Now a character of such interpretation is that it is always carried out in nonpoetic terms or in less poetic terms than the thing interpreted." 6° Evidently Professor Urban would extend this sort of explanation even to music, for he says elsewhere: "Even in such non-linguistic arts as music or pure design, where the element of assertion is apparently absent, it is, I should hold, only apparently so." 61
In that case, of course, Moos and Heinrich and Gehring are
justified in denying "emotive" meanings to music on the ground that no propositions about feelings can be assigned, with any confidence, as the contents of its forms. But it seems to me that truth rests rather with another statement of Urban's, which is hard to reconcile with his prevailing, explicit views about the primacy and supremacy of language: "The poet . . . does well to speak in figure, to keep to his own symbolic form.
For precisely in that symbolic form an aspect of reality is given
which cannot be adequately expressed otherwise. It is not true that whatever can be expressed symbolically can be better expressed literally. For there is no literal expression, but only another kind of symbol." 62 For the musician, this other kind of symbol is not constantly obscured by something that is said; wherefore musicians have grasped its character and importance more clearly than literary critics. If music is a symbolism, it is essentially of this untranslatable form. That is the gist of Wagner's description of the "orchestral language." Since this "language" has no conventional words, it can never appeal to discursive reason. But it expresses "just what is unspeakable in verbal language,
00
Ibid., pp. 487-488. " Ibid., p. 478. "Ibid., p. 500. Oddly enough, this same passage concludes with the words: "But when all is said and done, it remains true that poetry is covert metaphysics, and it is only when its implications, critically interpreted and adequately expressed, become part of philosophy that an adequate view of the world can be achieved." What is this critical and adeauate exnression. if not literal interpretation?

[page 191]

and what, viewed from our rationalistic (verstandesmeiischlichen) standpoint, may therefore be called simply the Unspeakable." 63 Because the forms of human feeling are much more congruent with musical forms than with the forms of language music can reveal the nature of feelings with a detail and truth that language cannot approach. This peculiar articulateness of music as a semantic of vital and emotional facts was discovered nearly two centuries ago by one of the contributors to Marpurg's famous Beitrage zur Musik. This writer (the same Hiiller who objected to ducks and sneezing fleas in "modern music") says: "There are feelings . . . which are so constantly suppressed by the tumult of our passions, that they can reveal themselves but timidly, and are practically unknown to us. . . . Note, however, what response a certain kind of music evokes in our hearts: we are attentive, it is charming; it does not aim to arouse either sorrow or joy, pity or anger, and yet we are moved by it. We are so imperceptibly, so gently moved, that we do not know we are affected, or rather, that we can give no name to the affect, . . . "Indeed, it is quite impossible to name everything fascinating in music, and bring it under definite headings. Therefore music has fulfilled its mission whenever our hearts are satisfied." « Since the day when this was written, many musicologists— notably Vischer, Riemann, and Kurth—have emphasized the impossibility of interpreting the "language of feeling," although they admit its function to be, somehow, a revelation of emotions, moods, or subtle nameless affects. Liszt warned specifically against the practice of expounding the emotive content of a symphonic poem, "because in such case the words tend to destroy the magic, to desecrate the feelings, and to break the most delicate fabrics of the soul, which had taken this form just because they were incapable of formulation in words, images or ideas." 85 But there are musicians for whom it is not enough to recognize the ineffable character of musical significance; they must remove their art from the realm of meaning altogether. They cannot entertain the idea that music expresses anything in any way. The oddest thing about this perfectly legitimate problem "Oper und Drama. See Gatz. Musik-Aesthetik p. 192. . " Fuller. "Abhandlung von der Nachahmung der Natur m de
ttsit,
„
pp. 515
™ « Franz Liszt™"Berlioz und seine Harold-Symphonie." reprinted by Gatz from Liszt's Cesammelte Schriften. See Gatz, op. cit., p. 127.

[page 192]

of musical meaning is that it seems impossible for people to discuss it with anything like detachment or candor. It is almost like a religious issue; only that in matters of faith the proponents of a doctrine are usually the vehement believers, the passionate defenders, whereas in this musicological argument it is apt to be the non-believers, the scoffers and critics, who are most emotional about it. Those who deny that music is a language of feelings do not simply reject the symbolistic theory as unconvincing or indemonstrable; they are not content to say that they cannot find the alleged meaning in music, and therefore consider the hypothesis far-fetched; no, they reject with horror the very attempt to construe music as a semantic, they regard the imputation of any meaning—emotional or other—as an insult to the Muse, a degradation of the pure dynamic forms, an invidious heresy. They seem to feel that if musical structures should really be found to have significance, to relate to anything beyond themselves, those structures would forthwith cease to be musical. The dignity of music demands that it should be autonomous; its existence should have no explanation. To add "meaning" to its sensuous virtues is worse than to deny it any virtue—it is, somehow, to destroy its life.66
Yet the most vehement critics of the emotive-content theory
seem to have caught a germ from the doctrine they attacked: in denying the very possibility of any content of music, they have fallen into the way of thinking about it in terms of form and content. They are suddenly faced with the dichotomy: significant or meaningless. And while they fiercely repudiate the proposition that music is a semantic, they cannot assert that it is meaningless. It is the problem, not the doctrine, that has infected them. Consequently they try to eat their cake and have it too, by a logical trick that is usually accepted only among mathematicians—by a statement which has the form of an answer to the question in hand, and really commits them to nothing. Musical form, they reply, is its own content; its means itself. This evasion was suggested by Hanslick when he said, "The theme of a musical composition is its essential content." He knew that this was an evasion; 67 but his sucs " The importance of this conflict was recognized by Dr. Wierling, who says: "The great reaction which Hanslick evoked with his book shows by its harshness that here was no contest of opinions, but a conflict of forces like that of dogma against heresy. . . . The reaction against Hanslick was that of persons attacked in their holiest convictions." (Das Tonkunstwerk als autonome Gestalt und ah Ausdruck der Personlickkeit [\Viirzburg, 1931], pp. 24-25.) Exactly the same spirit was certainly evinced by Hanslick himself, who repulsed what he considered not a mere error, but a pernicious doctrine.
07
See Hanslick, op. tit., p. 133: "In the art of music there is no content opposed to form, because music has no form over and above its content." This is an effectual repudiation of the form-and-content dichotomy, a rejection of the problem, not of its answers.

[page 193]

cessors have found it harder and harder to resist the question of content, and the silly fiction of self-significance has been raised to the dignity of a doctrine."8 It is really just a talisman against any and every assignment of specific content to music; and as such it will presently appear justified.
Whenever people vehemently reject a proposition, they do
so not because it simply does not recommend itself, but because it does, and yet its acceptance threatens to hamper their thinking in some important way. If they are unable to define the exact mischief it would do, they just call it "degrading," "materialistic," "pernicious," or any other bad name. Their judgment may be fuzzy, but the intuition they are trying to rationalize is right; to accept the opponent's proposition as it stands, would lead to unhappy consequences. So it is with "significant form" in music: to tie any tonal structure to a specific and speakable meaning would limit musical imagination, and probably substitute a preoccupation with feelings for a whole-hearted attention to music. "An inward singing," says Hanslick, "and not an inward feeling, prompts a gifted person to compose a musical piece." 69 Therefore it does not matter what feelings are afterward attributed to it, or to him; his responsibility is only to articulate the "dynamic tonal form."
It is a peculiar fact that some musical forms seem to bear a
sad and a happy interpretation equally well. At first sight that looks paradoxical; but it really has perfectly good reasons, which do not invalidate the notion of emotive significance, but do bear out the right-mindedness of thinkers who recoil from the admission of specific meanings. For what music can actually reflect is only the morphology of feeling; and it is quite plaus;b!e that some sad and some happy conditions may have a very similar morphology. This insight has led some philosophical musicologists to suppose that music conveys general forms of feeling, related to specific ones as algebraic expressions are related to arithmetic; a doctrine put forward by Moritz Hauptmann ™ and also by Moritz Carriere.71 These two excellent thinkers saw in music what most aestheticians failed to see—its intellectual value, its close relation to concepts, not by reason of its difficult academic "laws," but in virtue of its revelations. If it reveals the rationale of feelings, the rhythm
68
See. e.g., E. J. Dent, Terpander: or, the Music of the Future (New York: E. P. Dutton & Co., 19271, p. 1 2 ; Carroll C. Pratt. The Meaning of Music (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co.. 1931). p. 2 3 7 ; and F. Heinrich, "Die Tonkunst in ihrem Verhaltnis zum Ausdruck und zum Symbol," p. 67.
68
Op. cit., p. 75. 70 Die Natur der Harmonik und Metrik (Leipzig, 1853).
71
Aesttetik, 2 vols. (Leipzig. 1839).

[page 194]

and pattern of their rise and decline and intertwining, to our minds, then it is a force in our mental life, our awareness and understanding, and not only our affective experience.
Even Hanslick granted this logical analogy between music
and emotions; 72 but he did not realize how much he had granted. Because he considered nothing but conventional denotation as "meaning," he insisted that music could not mean anything. Every mathematician knows how hard it is to convince the naive beginner in algebra that its letters have any meaning, if they are not given specific denotations: "Let <J=5, let b=10," etc. Presently the novice learns that it makes no difference to the validity of the equation how the meanings of terms have been assigned; then he understands the generality of the symbolism. It is only when he sees the balance of the equation as a form in itself, apart from all its possible arithmetical instances, that he grasps the abstraction, the real concept expressed through the formula. Algebraic letters are pure symbols; we see numerical relationships not in them, but through them; they have the highest*"transparency" that language can attain. In likening music to such a symbolism, Hauptmann and Carriere claimed for it that peculiar "significance" that belongs to abstractions—a general reference to the realm of reality from which the form is abstracted, a reflection of the laws of that realm, a "logical picture" into which all instances must fit, yet not a "picture" of any actual instance.
But this explanation of musk as a high abstraction, and
musical experience as a purely logical revelation, does not do justice to the unmistakably sensuous value of tone, the vital nature of its effect, the sense of personal import which we meet in a great composition every time it is repeated to us. Its message is not an immutable abstraction, a bare, unambiguous, fixed concept, as a lesson in the higher mathematics of feeling should be. It is always new, no matter how well or how long we have known it, or it loses its meaning; it is not transparent but iridescent. Its values crowd each other, its symbols are inexhaustible.
The fact is, I think, that Hanslick, who admitted only the
formal similarity of music and emotive experience but denied the legitimacy of any further interpretation, and those authors who realized that formality, but took it for the nature of musical meanings rather than of musical symbols, were very close to a correct analysis. For music has all the earmarks of a true '•'' Op. cit., p. 26.

[page 195]

symbolism, except one: the existence of an assigned connotation. It is a form that is capable of connotation, and the meanings to which it is amenable are articulations of emotive, vital, sentient experiences. But its import is never fixed. In music we work essentially with free forms, following inherent psychological laws of "rightness," and take interest in possible articulations suggested entirely by the musical material. We are elaborating a symbolism of such vitality that it harbors a principle of development in its own elementary forms, as a really good symbolism is apt to do—as language has "linguistic laws" whereby words naturally give rise to cognates, sentence-structures to subordinate forms, indirect discourse to subjunctive constructions "by attraction," noun-inflections to inflections of their modifiers "by agreement." No conscious intellectual intent determines vowel changes, inflections, or idioms; the force of what has been called "linguistic feeling" or a "sense of words"—"the Spirit of Language," as Vossler says —develops the forms of speech. To make up a language upon a preconception of what it is to express never leads to a real language, because language grows in meaning by a process of articulation, not in articulate forms by a process of preconceived expression.
What is true of language, is essential in music: music that is
invented while the composer's mind is fixed on what is to be expressed is apt not to be music. It is a limited idiom, like an artificial language, only even less successful; for music at its highest, though clearly a symbolic form, is an unconsummated symbol. Articulation is its life, but not assertion; expressiveness, not expression. The actual function of meaning, which calls for permanent contents, is not fulfilled; for the assignment of one rather than another possible meaning to each form is never explicitly made. Therefore music is "Significant Form," in the peculiar sense of "significant" which
Mr. Bell and Mr. Fry maintain they can grasp, or feel, but not
define; such significance is implicit, but not conventionally fixed.
The fact that in music we have an unconsummated symbol,
a significant form without conventional significance, casts some light on all the obscure conflicting judgments that the rise of program music has evoked. The expression of an idea in a symbolic mode may be successful or unsuccessful; easy and adequate, or halting, askew, inexact. Ordinarily we have no precise "logical picture" of affects at all; but we refer to them, chiefly by the indirect method of describing their causes

[page 196]

or their effects. We say we feel "stunned," "left out," "moved," or "like swearing," "like running away." A mood can be described only by the situation that might give rise to it: there is the mood of "sunset and evening star," the mood of a village festival, or of a Vienna soiree. If, now, a composer's musical idiom is not so rich and definite that its tonal forms alone are perfectly coherent, significant, and satisfying, it is the most natural thing in the world that he should supplement them by the usual, non-musical ways of expressing ideas of feeling to ourselves and others; by envisaging situations, objects, or events that hold a mood or specify an emotion. He may use a mental picture merely as a scaffolding to organize his otherwise musical conception. Schumann tells of occasions when he or another composer had envisaged a scene or a being so that the vision directly inspired a coherent, well-wrought musical work.73 Sometimes the mere suggestion of what Huber calls a "sphere," e.g. "a medieval realm," "a fairy world," "a heroic setting," effected by one title-word such as "Scheherazade" or "Oberon," serves to crystallize a shifting and drifting musical theme into artistic form. Sometimes a composer sets himself an elaborate program and follows it as he might a libretto or a choreographer's book. It is true, and natural enoueh. that this latter practice produces a less perfect musical expression than purely thematic thinking, for it is not singleminded; not everything relevant is contained in the music: and there is nothing in the work to force the composer's helpful fancies on the listener. Nothing can constrain us to think of Till Eulenspiegel's escapades while listening to music.
But similarly, nothing can prevent our falling back on
mental pictures, fantasies, memories, or having a Spharenerlebnis of some sort, when we cannot directly make subjective sense out of music in playing or hearing it. A program is simply a crutch. It is a resort to the crude but familiar method of holding feelings in the imagination by envisaging their attendant circumstances. It does not mean that the listener is unmusical, but merely that he is not musical enough to think in entirely musical terms. He is like a person who understands a foreign language, but thinks in his mother tongue the minute an intellectual difficulty confronts him.
To a person of limited musical sense, such ideation seems
the most valuable response to music, the "subjective content" which the listener must supply. People of this persuasion often " Robert Schumann on Berlioz* Svmphonie Fantastique, reprinted by Gatz from Gesammelte Sc/iriften iiber Musik and Musiker. See Gatz, op. cil., pp. 299-303.

[page 197]

grant that there may also be an appreciation of pure beautiful sounds, which "gives us pleasure"; but we can understand the music better when it conveys a poetic content. 74 Goethe, for instance, who was not musical (despite his interest in the art as a cultural product), tells how, in listening to a new piano quartet, he could make no sense out of any part save an allegro, which he could interpret as the Witches' Sabbath on the Blockberg, "so that after all I found a conception which could underlie this peculiar music." 75
Where such interpretation is spontaneous, it is a perfectly
legitimate practice, common among musically limited persons, and helpful; but it becomes pernicious when teachers or critics or even composers initiate it, for then they make a virtue out of walking with a crutch. It is really a denial of the true nature of music, which is unconventionalized, unverbalized freedom of thought. That is why the opponents of programmusic and of hermeneutic are so vehement in their protests; they feel the complete misconception of the artistic significance of tonal structures, and although they give doubtful reasons for their objection, their reaction is perfectly sound. The real power of music lies in the fact that it can be "true" to the life of feeling in a way that language cannot; for its significant forms have that ambivalence of content which words cannot have. This is, I think, what Hans Mersmann meant, when he wrote: "The possibility of expressing opposites simultaneously gives the most intricate reaches of expressiveness to music as such, and carries it, in this respect, far
74
Henri Prunieres (the same "interpreter" who tells us so categorically how Beethoven felt when he invented his themes) writes of Strauss's programmatic work-: "These works are endowed with a form sufficiently beautiful in itself to afford the auditor lively pleasure, even should he not perceive all the author's intentions. It must be remembered, however, that his pleasure is doubled when he is capable of grasping, of gradually discovering, the hidden symbols." ("Musical Symbolism," p. 20.) D. M. Ferguson, in an essay entitled "How Can Music Express Emotion?" claims that music, "being unable, as words and pictures can do, to present to our attention the causes or external circumstances of feeling (from which we largely infer the nature of the feeling itself), begins in medias res, with the nervous disturbance itself and . . . instead of representing the conditions which arouse emotion and demanding that the observer observe therefrom the emotional meaning, music represents the emotional disturbance itself and demands that for its fullest comprehension its hearers shall infer the cause." (Proceedings of the Music Teachers' National Association, 1925, pp. 20-32. See pp. 26-27. Italics mine.) Another purveyor of interpretations, F. Nicholls, says (after classifying "chords of fear" and "arpeggios of joy"): "It is now desired to illuminate a piece of pure music by reading into it—in accordance with our acquired knowledge of musical symbolism—some more definite and particular meaning. . . . The music is the higher or cosmic interpretation of definite things. . . . An interpretation, nevertheless, is often very helpful; and a 'parable,' so to speak, in words often, and quite justifiably, adds to the enjoyment of the music." (The Language of Music, or, Musical Expression and Characterization (London, 1924), pp. 77-78.) Hereupon he writes doggerel words to a Beethoven piano sonata.
71
J. P. Eckermann, Gesprdche mil Goethe (Leipzig, ed. of 1912), p. 158.

[page 198]

beyond the limits of the other arts." 76 Music is revealing, where words are obscuring, because it can have not only a content, but a transient play of contents. It can articulate feelings without becoming wedded to them. The physical character of a tone, which we describe as "sweet," or "rich," or "strident," and so forth, may suggest a momentary interpretation, by a physical response. A key-change may convey a new Weltgefiihl. The assignment of meanings is a shifting, kaleidoscopic play, probably below the threshold of consciousness, certainly outside the pale of discursive thinking. The imagination that responds to music is personal and associative and logical, tinged with affect, tinged with bodily rhythm, tinged with dream, but concerned with a wealth of formulations for its wealth of wordless knowledge, its whole knowledge of emotional and organic experience, of vital impulse, balance, conflict, the ways of living and dying and feeling. Because no assignment of meaning is conventional, none is permanent beyond the sound that passes; yet the brief association was a flash of understanding. The lasting effect is. like the first effect of speech on the development of the mind, to make things conceivable rather than to store up propositions. Not communication but insight is the gift of music; in very naive phrase, a knowledge of "how feelings go." This has nothing to do with "Affektenlehre"; it is much more subtle, complex, protean, and much more important: for its entire record is emotional satisfaction, intellectual confidence, and musical understanding. "Thus music has fulfilled its mission whenever our hearts are satisfied." It also gives substance to a theory that sounds very odd outside some such context as this, a theory advanced by Riemann, and more recently developed by Professor Carroll Pratt, who (apparently quite independently) came to the conclusion that music neither causes nor "works off" real feelings, but produces some peculiar effects we mistake for them. Music has its special, purely auditory characters, that "intrinsically contain certain properties which, because of their close resemblance to certain characteristics in the subjective realm, are frequently confused with emotions proper." 77 But "these auditory characters are not emotions at all. They merely sound the way moods feel. . . . More often than not these formal characters of music go unnamed: they are simply what the music is. . . ." 78 "Versuch einer musikalischen Wertaesthetik," Zeitschrift fur Musikwissenschaft. XVII (1935), 1: 33-47. " Pratt, The Meaning of Music (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1931),

[page 199]

The notion that certain effects of music are so much like
feelings that we mistake them for the latter, though they are really entirely different, may seem queer, unless one looks at music as an "implicit" symbolism; then, however, the confusion appears as something to be expected. For until symbolic forms are consciously abstracted, they are regularly confused with the things they symbolize. This is the same principle that causes myths to be believed, and names denoting powers to be endowed with power, and sacraments to be taken for efficacious acts; the principle set forth by Cassirer, in a passage which I have quoted once before,79 but cannot refrain from repeating here: "It is typical of the first naive, unreflective manifestations of linguistic thinking as well as the mythical consciousness, that its content is not sharply divided into symbol and object, but both tend to unite in a perfectly undifferentiated fusion." 80 This principle marks the line between the "mythical consciousness" and the "scientific consciousness," or between implicit and explicit conception of reality. Music is our myth of the inner life—a young, vital, and meaningful myth, of recent inspiration and still in its "vegetative" growth.
