[page 199]

9. The Genesis of Artistic Import

THE ROOTS of music go far back in history, but in its beginnings it probably was not art. There seems to have been a long pre-musical period, when organized sounds were used for rhythmatization of work and ritual, for nervous excitation, and perhaps for magical purposes. In this period the elementary materials of music became established, tonal forms which finally reached a stage of articulation that made them, quite

[page 200]

spontaneously, instinct with meaning. That is why Bücher, in his famous book Arbeit und Rhythmus, can actually trace so many motifs back to sailors' cries, the long breaths of corn-grinders, to threshers' flail-strokes and the measure of bounding hammers in the smithy. All those mechanical sounds and spontaneous utterances had to be long familiar before their tonal quality could become abstracted for the listening ear; they had to attain fixed forms before they could become elements for musical imagination. Probably song of some kind, as well as drummed dance-rhythm, is older than any musical interest. If indeed, as von Humboldt says, "Man is a singing creature," then music is not necessarily given as soon as there is song; then he may have sung his reveilles and musters, his incantations and his dances, long before he knew that vocal forms were beautiful and could be sung without signifying anything. Group speaking is necessarily chanting. The length of a sentence that can be spoken in one breath is a natural verse-limit, as the hold on the end of a choral verse indicates.

Work rhythms, dance measures, choric utterance, these are some of the influences that formed music out of the sounds that are natural to man, that he utters at work, or in festal excitement, or in imitation of the world's sounds—the cuckoo's cry, the owl's hoot, the beat of hooves, feet, drums, or hammers.

All such noises are incipient "themes," musical models which artistic imagination may seize upon to form tonal ideas. But they do not themselves enter into music, as a rule; they are transformed into characteristic motifs; intervals, rhythms, melodies, all the actual ingredients of song are not supplied but merely inspired by sounds heard in nature. The auditory experiences which impress us are those which have musical possibilities, which allow themselves to be varied and developed, expanded, altered, which can change their emotional value through harmonic modifications. Ernst Kurth, in his excellent Musikpsychologie, has made a searching study of these proto-musical elements, which he calls Ursymbole: his words are the best statement I can find of the way familiar sounds are transformed into music, so I quote them here:

"In investigating the thematic roots of folksong, one soon comes upon psychological roots as well; among all races there appear certain recurrent, simple idioms that are really nothing but ultimate symbols of their vital consciousness: calls, chimes,

[footnote 1] Karl Bücher, Arbeit und Rhythmus (Leipzig, 4th ed. 1908; first published in 1896).

[page 201]

cradle-rhythms, work-rhythms; dance-forms, often intimately related to certain bodily movements and steps; shouts, hunting-calls and military signals, highland themes (Alphornweisen) and tallyhos (symbols of popular humor persisting even in high artistic composition); also plenty of borrowings from the national liturgy; in short, all sorts of motifs in which an undercurrent of popular imagination reveals itself.

"Especially impressions from the first phases of childhood leave their imprint here; hence the fondness for (hidden) cradle-rhythms in folktunes, for certain beckoning calls, furthermore for religious motifs and the many clear or merely suggested bell sounds. . . .

"All these themes are easily detected in folksongs, either frankly or obscurely present, sometimes clearly interpretable, sometimes of indeterminate symbolic character. They are by no means simply expressive of the momentary literal meaning of the text, but rather may be said to emanate directly (and sometimes even in defiance of the text) from musical reflection and formulation in its own right. . . . They can hardly be discerned as separate motif-values in the general easy flow of the tune; neither musically nor ideationally can a folksong ever be schematically analyzed as a sheer synthesis of such ultimate symbols."

All these sounds which meet our alert and retentive ear in the course of the day's work become fixed forms for our minds, because they are heard over and over again in nature, industry, or society; but they give rise to music because they are intrinsically expressive. They have not only associative value, but value as rhythms and intervals, exhibiting stress and release, progression, rise or fall, motion, limit, rest. It is in this musical capacity that they enter into art, not in their original capacity of signs, self-expressions, religious symbols, or parrot-like imitation of sounds.

There is a widespread and familiar fallacy, known as the "genetic fallacy," which arises from the historical method in philosophy and criticism: the error of confusing the origin of a thing with its import, of tracing the thing to its most primitive form and then calling it "merely" this archaic phenomenon. In a philosophy of symbolism this mistake is particularly fatal, since all elementary symbolic forms have their origin in something else than symbolistic interest. Significance is always an adventitious value. Words were probably ritualistic sounds before they were communicative devices; that does not mean

[footnote 2] Kurth, Musikpsychologie, p. 291.

[page 202]

that language is now not "really" a means of communication, but is "really" a mere residue of tribal excitement. Musical materials, likewise, presumably had other uses before they served music; that does not imply that music is "really" not an intellectual achievement, and expression of musical ideas, at all, but is in reality a mere invocation of rain or game, or a rhythmic aid to dancers, or what not.

But just as it is a mistake to reduce music to its origins, so it is, I think, to elevate primitive emotional sounds, like bird-songs or the sing-song speech of sentimental persons, to the dignity of music. They are musical materials, but their unconscious use is not art. This is true even of certain tunes. "The Old Gray Mare" was made for marching, and is a real aid to rhythmic tramping, but its musical function is quite secondary. Certain spinning songs are musically just bad. They have been developed in order to carry the words of a ballad, and no one cares about the melody. The same is true of drummed dance-rhythms interspersed with shouts or verses. Tonal forms arise casually in answer to practical demands, just as architectural, ceramic, and pictorial forms do, and attain some degree of conventional development before anyone sees them as artistic forms at all.

The plastic arts find natural models everywhere. Nature is full of individual, beautiful, characteristic forms, and anyone molding clay or marking with his finger in the sand naturally recalls some object to give sense to the shapes that produce themselves under his hand. It is so easy to achieve organic unity in a design by making it represent something, that even when we would experiment with pure forms we are apt to find ourselves interpreting the results as human figures, faces, flowers, or familiar inanimate things. Geometric forms require purely intellectual and original organization to recommend themselves to the eye as sensible Gestalten, and must be relatively simple to be handled by their inventor or beholder as beautiful forms. But natural objects, by virtue of their practical significance, carry a certain guarantee of unity and permanence, which lets us apprehend their forms, though these forms would be much too difficult to grasp as mere visual patterns without extraneous meaning. An artistically sensitive mind sees significant form where such form presents itself. The profusion of natural models undoubtedly is responsible for the early development of plastic art.

But there is a danger in that asset, too; for the purely visual arts very easily become model-bound. Instead of merely pro[page 203]viding artistic ideas, a model may dictate to the artist; its practical functions, which served to organize the conception of it as a form, may claim his attention to the detriment of his abstractive vision. Its interest as an object may conflict with its pictorial interest and confuse the purpose of his work.

For the average beholder judging an artistic work, this confusion is inevitable. The first naive comment is always apt to be that the picture is, or is not, quite accurate; next, that the subject is or is not worthy of being represented; and then, probably, that the work is "pleasant" or "unpleasant." All three of these comments are based on standards which have nothing to do with art; all three place a premium on qualities which usually detract from "significant form." The first demands that the artist should be primarily interested in the object—as a storekeeper might be, who was to judge it for his stock. The second concerns the object, not in relation to the picture—not its visual virtues or failings—but in relation to everything else in the world but the picture. Its practical, moral, or historical significance is the criterion of value here. The third treats the picture in what is really an "aesthetic" capacity, its power to excite or soothe our senses, to effect either annoyance or repose, as the colors of a living-room do; or, if the "pleasure" derives from the theme of the picture (a pastoral landscape being "pleasant," a St. Sebastian full of arrows "unpleasant" art), it is expected to stimulate the imagination in agreeable ways.

But all these virtues may belong to mediocre pictures; they are, in fact, usually exemplified in the landscapes, marines, and genre paintings that serve as covers for magazines whenever the pretty-girl-portrait is not appropriate. A painter of no insight, judgment, or imagination worth mentioning might follow Goethe's suggestions for a picture, find a graceful and perfect model to impersonate a noble character, and depict it with skillful accuracy—"getreue Nachahmung der Natur," as his mentor called it—in colors chosen with faultless taste; and produce a picture that might hang in every parlor, but mean exactly nothing to the sensibilities of any real artist. All these factors may, indeed, be materials for artistic conception; but they are not the conception itself, they offer no criterion of excellence. A subject which has emotional meaning for the artist may thereby rivet his attention and cause him to see its form with a discerning, active eye, and to keep that form

[footnote 3] See "Zu malende Gegenstände" and "Maximen und Reflexionen über Kunst." In Werke (Cotta ed.), vol. XXXV.

[page 204]

present in his excited imagination until its highest reaches of significance are evident to him; then he will have, and will paint, a deep and original conception of it. That is why men long in love or in religious fervor are inspired to produce great, convincing works of art. Not the importance of the theme, nor the accuracy of its depiction, nor the fantasies stirred in the beholder, make a work of art significant, but the articulation of visual forms which Hoeslin would call its "melody."

If the origin of art had to wait on somebody's conception of this inner meaning, and on his intention to express it, then our poor addle-brained race would probably never have produced the first artistic creation. We see significance in things long before we know what we are seeing, and it takes some other interest, practical or emotional or superstitious, to make us produce an object which turns out to have expressive virtue as well. We cannot conceive significant form ex nihilo; we can only find it, and create something in its image; but because a man has seen the "significant form" of the thing he copies, he will copy it with that emphasis, not by measure, but by the selective, interpretative power of his intelligent eye. A savage may have this insight; in fact, Bushmen and Indians, Polynesians and Indonesians, seem to be prone to it, sensitive to forms as the early Egyptians and the nameless cave-dwellers of paleolithic ages were. Apparently primitive mankind has a "vegetative" period of artistic activity, as he has of linguistic and mythological and ritual growth. A crude pre-Athenian peasant makes a Herm for the protection of his home, and produces a statue of archaic beauty; an Indian carves a totem-pole, and achieves a composition; he fashions a canoe or molds a water-jar, and creates a lovely form. His model is the human body, the treetrunk, the curled dry leaf floating, the shell or skull or cocoanut from which he drinks. But as he imitates such models for practical ends he sees more than the utilitarian import of their shapes; he literally sees the reflection of human feeling, the "dynamic" laws of life, power, and rhythm, in forms on which his attention is focussed; he sees things he cannot name, magical imports, rightness of line and mass, his hands unwittingly express and even overdraw what he sees, and the product amazes and delights him and looks "beautiful." But he does not "know," in discursive terms, what he is expressing, or why he deviates from the model to make the form more "significant." When he emerges from his savage state and takes discursive reason seriously he tries to

[page 205]

copy more accurately; and the ambition for naturalistic, literal representation, for rational standards of art, moral interpretations, and so forth, confuse his intuition and endanger his visual apprehensions.

It has often been remarked that music as we know it, i.e. as an artistic medium, is of very recent date. William Wallace was so impressed with the lateness of its evolution that he attributed this sudden growth to the emergence of a new faculty of hearing, a neurological development which man was supposed to have just attained. In The Threshold of Music, he asserted that the Greeks, and even our ancestors of five or six hundred years ago, could not hear what we can; they could not distinguish consonance from dissonance. He points out some interesting facts in support of this theory, notably that to the Greeks, as to the Chinese before them, music was essentially an intellectual exercise. Instrumental music was practiced only as a craft supplying one of the physical pleasures of life, like catering or massage, and had none of the prestige of the true arts; wherefore musical instruments were few and crude, and the ingenious Greeks who could cast all sorts of delicate sculptured forms in bronze did not use that same skill to make even the most obvious improvements in the flute and the lyre. So he concludes that ancient musicians simply had not the "inner ear" that is normal, now-a-days, not only for gifted persons, but for the average man, who quite naturally hears melodies in the context of some harmonic structure. "While the Greeks had reached the highest attainments in eye-training and mind-training," he concludes, "as shown by their works of art, by their dialectics and their poetry, the existing records of their music go to prove that their sense of hearing lacked the faculty of discerning the finer shades and subtleties of sound."

Since the professional Greek rhapsodists prided themselves on singing quarter-tones accurately on pitch, this statement is certainly open to doubt. Yet it is indeed remarkable that, although the organ existed throughout the Middle Ages, no one discovered the possibilities of simultaneous tonal combinations; and also that the great classical period of music is centuries later than that of the other arts—drama, sculpture, or painting. If we reject Wallace's hypothesis, that "musical sense" evolved only with a recent neurological development, we assume the burden of a better explanation. This lies, I think, in the fact that music has very few natural models. Bird songs, cries, whistles, traditional cattle-calls,

[footnote 4] William Wallace, The Threshold of Music (London, 1908), esp. pp. 35-42.

[page 206]

and metallic clangs are scant materials; even the intonations of the human voice, whether purely emotional (as with us), or semantic (like the Chinese speech-tones), are indefinite, elusive, hard to hold in memory as precise forms. There are hardly any given musical configurations in nature to suggest organized tonal structures, and reveal themselves as significant forms to a naive, sensitive, savage ear.

The molds and scaffoldings in which music had to take shape were all of extraneous character. Pictures have visual models, drama has a direct prototype in action, poetry in story; all may claim to be "copies," in the Platonic sense or in the simple Aristotelian sense of "imitations." But music, having no adequate models, had to rest on the indirect support of two non-musical aids—rhythm, and words.

Rhythms are more fixed and stable, more definite than intonations. That is probably why the rhythmic structure is the first aspect of music to become formalized and precise. Rhythm can be simultaneously expressed in many ways—in shouts, steps, drum-beats, by voice, bodily motion, and instrumental noises. Words and acts and cries, whistles, rattles, and tomtoms, may all be synchronized in one single rhythm; no wonder the rhythmic figure is easily abstracted, when it is rendered in such multiple modes! It is obviously one and the same metric pattern, a general dynamic form, that may be sung, danced, clapped, or drummed; this is the element that can always be repeated, and therefore traditionally preserved. Naturally it offers us the first logical frame, the skeletal structure of the embryonic art of music.

The most obvious tonal material is, of course, the human voice; and the spontaneous function of the voice is natural utterance—cry or speech. In adults, speech has become such a dominant habit that even our purely emotional exclamations tend to verbal forms like: "Alas!" "Ach!" "Tiens!" And Bücher has shown how meaningless vocables carrying out rhythms are gradually replaced by assonant words, without any particular regard to meaning. Tennyson's farmer heard his horse's hooves say: "Property, property, property," which made sense enough to his mind; but the fisherman who hears the sails say: "Jerry and Josh, Jerry and Josh," or the child who listens to the train's wheels repeating: "Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Jerusalem," is simply yielding to the force of linguistic habit. This sort of mental formulation seems to underlie the construction of occupational songs, and probably of many

[footnote 5] Cf. R. Wallaschek, "On the Origin of Music," Mind, XVI (1891), 63: 375-386.

[page 207]

festal songs. The adjustment of speech-impulses to the demands of rhythmic tonal figure is the natural source of all chanting, the beginning of vocal music.

Since singing aloud requires some resonant, sustained vowel sounds, one cannot help singing syllables, and their suggestion of words makes the opportunity for poetic expression too obvious to be missed. But as soon as the silly random verbiage first dictated by rhythmic figures and tonal demands is imbued with poetic sense, a new source of artistry has been created: for the poetic line becomes the choral verse, which determines the elementary melodic form, the musical phrase. Patterns of pitch follow patterns of word-emphasis, and melodic lines begin and end with propositional lines. This is the second extraneous "model" for musical form.

For a long age music was dependent on these two parents, dance and song, and was not found without them. As ritual dancing disappeared, and religion became more and more bound to verbal expression, to prayer and liturgy, occupational and secular festive music became wedded to dance forms, sacred music to the chant; so that Goethe, reviewing the history of the art, and mistaking its guide-lines for its intrinsic characteristics, was led to say: "The holiness of sacred music, the jocund humor of folk-tunes, are the pivots round which all true music revolves. . . . Worship or dance." But the folksong is by no means restricted to jocose sentiments nor always based on dance-rhythms; it derives from sacred sources as well as from secular excitements, and very soon abstracts from both the first independent musical product—the "air." Old airs, like our modern hymn tunes, are neither sad nor gay; any words in the proper metrical pattern may be sung to them. Such melodies belong to no special occasion, no special subject-matter, but are merely used for the purpose of singing a variety of poems. Thus airs themselves often acquire names, after places, composers, saints, as well as after their original words. Airs are national possessions; they

[footnote 6] Bücher, Arbeit und Rhythmus, p. 380.

[footnote 7] Cf. the observation of Kathi Meyer: "In antiquity, ritual was a cult act, a genuine sacrifice which was really carried out. Prayers and songs were mere accompaniments and remained secondary matter, hence the low development of these parts of the rite. Now, in the Christian service, the actual sacrifice is no longer really performed, it is symbolized, transcendentalized, spiritualized. The service is a parable. So prayers and chants became the realities which had to be emphasized more and more; they too served ultimately the process of spiritualization. If, in the past, a symbol was needed for the cult, one could replace the act or even the god by an image, in painting or sculpture. Now, with the conceptualizing of religion, one can spiritualize only the psychic processes, the 'anima.' That is effected by the word or better yet in music." Bedeutung und Wesen der Musik (Strassburg, 1932), p. 47.

[footnote 8] Goethe, "Maximen und Reflexionen über Kunst."

[page 208]

may convey ballads, or find their way into semi-religious settings, solemn graduations, patriotic exercises and the like, creep into revivalist meetings, and end up in the most dignified hymnology. If their rhythmic accent is light and definite they are more apt to have a career on the village green, the barn floor, the dance hall, sung to endless silly words and played on fiddles or bagpipes without any words at all. The dance seems to be their excuse for being; but presently they are played or whistled on the street where no one requires their rhythmic measure for any but musical purposes. At this point music stands without its poetic or terpsichorean scaffolding, a tonal dynamic form, an expressive medium with a law and a life of its own.

Because its models are non-musical, they are not as vital to its mature artistic products as the models of pictures, statues, plays, or poems are apt to be. Of course a certain dance has left its stamp on all Mozart's minuets, and another on Chopin's waltzes; yet the musical works called minuets and waltzes do not represent those respective dances as pictures represent objects. They are abstracted forms reincarnated in music, and we can take the music and forget the dance far more easily than we can take a painting and forget what it portrays. The dance was only a framework; the air has other contents, musical characteristics, and interests us directly, not by its connotation of a "step" which we may not even know.

The same is true of words that have served to frame a tune. The melody, heard by someone who does not hear or understand the words, recommends itself as a tonal pattern on its own merit, and makes perfectly good sense when it is played instead of sung. Music dispenses easily with its models, because it could never really do them justice as a representative; they are merely its foster-parents, and it was never their true image anyway. This orphan estate belated its growth as an art, and kept it long in a merely auxiliary, even a utilitarian position; but it has the compensating virtue of making music more independent of its natural models than any other art when it does attain its selfhood. We perceive it as "significant form," unhampered by any fixed, literal meaning, by anything it represents. It is easier to grasp the artistic import of music than of the older and more model-bound arts.

This artistic import is what painters, sculptors, and poets express through their depiction of objects or events. Its semantic is the play of lines, masses, colors, textures in plastic

[footnote 9] Cf. Bücher, Arbeit und Rhythmus, p. 401.

[page 209]

arts, or the play of images, the tension and release of ideas, the speed and arrest, ring and rhyme of words in poetry—what Hoeslin calls "Formenmelodie" and "Gedankenmelodie."

Artistic expression is what these media will convey; and I strongly suspect, though I am not ready to assert it dogmatically, that the import of artistic expression is broadly the same in all arts as it is in music—the verbally ineffable, yet not inexpressible law of vital experience, the pattern of affective and sentient being. This is the "content" of what we perceive as "beautiful form"; and this formal element is the artist's "idea" which is conveyed by every great work. It is this which so-called "abstract art" seeks to abstract by defying the model or dispensing with it altogether; and which music above all arts can reveal, unobscured by adventitious literal meanings. That is presumably what Walter Pater meant by his much-debated dictum, "All art aspires to the condition of music."

This does not mean, however, that music achieves the aim of artistic expression more fully than other arts. An ideal condition is its asset, not a supreme attainment, and it is this condition for which the other arts must strive, whereas music finds it fulfilled from the first stage in which it may be called an art at all. Its artistic mission is more visible because it is not obscured by meanings belonging to the represented object rather than to the form that is made in its image. But the artistic import of a musical composition is not therefore greater or more perfectly formulated than that of a picture, a poem, or any other work that approaches perfection as closely after its kind.

Whether the field of musical meanings, over which its unassigned symbols play—the realm of sentient and emotional experience—is ultimately the subject-matter of all art, is a moot question. In a general way it probably is so; but within this very great and uncharted domain there may well be many special regions, to one or another of which the medium of one art is more suited than that of another for its articulate expression. It may well be, for instance, that our physical orientation in the world—our intuitive awareness of mass and motion, restraint and autonomy, and all characteristic feeling that goes with it—is the preeminent subject-matter of the dance, or of sculpture, rather than (say) of poetry; or that erotic emotions are most readily formulated in musical terms. I do not know; but the possibility makes me hesitate to say categorically, as many

[footnote 10] Walter Pater, The Renaissance. Studies in Art and Poetry (New York, 1908; 1st ed. 1873), p. 140.

[page 210]

philosophers and critics have said, that the import of all the arts is the same, and only the medium depends on the peculiar psychological or sensory make-up of the artist, so that one man may fashion in clay what another renders in harmonies or in colors, etc. The medium in which we naturally conceive our ideas may restrict them not only to certain forms but to certain fields, howbeit they all lie within the verbally inaccessible field of vital experience and qualitative thought.

The basic unity of all the arts is sometimes argued from the apparent beginning of all artistic ideas in the so-called "aesthetic emotion" which is supposed to be their source and therefore (by a slightly slipshod inference) their import. Anyone who has worked in more than one medium probably can testify to the sameness of the "aesthetic emotion" accompanying creation in the various arts. But I suspect that this characteristic excitement, so closely wedded to original conception and inner vision, is not the source, but the effect, of artistic labor, the personal emotive experience of revelation, insight, mental power, which an adventure in "implicit understanding" inspires. It has often been stated that it is the same emotion which overtakes a mathematician as he constructs a convincing and elegant proof; and this is the beatitude which Spinoza, who knew it well, called "the intellectual love of God." Something like it is begotten in appreciation of art, too, though not nearly in the same measure as in producing: but the fact that the difference is one of degree makes it plausible that the emotion springs from the one activity which the artist and the beholder's share in unequal parts—the comprehension of an unspoken idea. In the artist this activity must be sustained, complete, and intense; his intellectual excitement is often at fever pitch. The idea is his own, and if he loses his command of it, confused by the material or distracted by pressing irrelevancies, there is no symbol to hold it for him. His mind is apt to be furiously active while an artistic conception takes shape. To the beholder the work is offered as a constant source of an insight he attains gradually, more or less clearly,

[footnote 11] Cf. S. T. Coleridge's essay, "On the Principles of Genial Criticism Concerning the Fine Arts, More Especially those of Statuary and Painting," appended to Biographia Literaria, in the Oxford ed. of 1907; also D'Udine, L'art et le geste, p. 70.

[footnote 12] Cf. Clive Bell: "The starting-point for all systems of aesthetics must be the personal experience of a peculiar emotion. . . . This emotion is called the aesthetic emotion; and if we can discover some quality common to all and absent from none of the objects that provoke it, we shall have solved what I take to be the central problem of aesthetics." (Art, p. 6.) Mr. Bell forgets the logical rule that such a discovery would prove nothing, unless the quality in question were also peculiar to aesthetic objects; any quality common to all objects whatever would fulfil the condition he states.

[page 211]

perhaps never in logical completeness; and although his mental experience also wakens the characteristic emotion, variously called "feeling of beauty," "aesthetic emotion," and "aesthetic pleasure," he knows nothing like the exhilaration and tense excitement of an artist before his pristine marble or clay, his unmarked canvas or paper, as the new work dawns in his brain.

Perhaps it is inevitable that this emotion which one really has in producing or contemplating an artistic composition should become confused with the content of the work, since that content is itself emotive. If there is feeling in the work, and both artist and spectator experience a feeling, and moreover the artist has more of a feeling than the spectator, would it not take a very careful thinker to refrain from jumping to the conclusion that the emotion embodied in the form is felt by the artist before he begins his work, is "expressed" in the process of creating as it might be in shouting or weeping, and is sympathetically felt by the audience? Yet I believe the "aesthetic emotion" and the emotional content of a work of art are two very different things; the "aesthetic emotion" springs from an intellectual triumph, from overcoming barriers of word-bound thought and achieving insight into literally "unspeakable" realities; but the emotive content of the work is apt to be something much deeper than any intellectual experience, more essential, pre-rational, and vital, something of the life-rhythms we share with all growing, hungering, moving and fearing creatures: the ultimate realities themselves, the central facts of our brief, sentient existence.

"Aesthetic pleasure," then, is akin to (though not identical with) the satisfaction of discovering truth. It is the characteristic reaction to a well-known, but usually ill-defined, phenomenon called "artistic truth"—well-known to all artists, creative or appreciative, but so ill-defined by most epistemologists that it has become their favorite aversion. Yet truth is so intimately related to symbolism that if we recognize two radically different types of symbolic expression we should logically look for two distinct meanings of truth; and if both symbolic modes are rational enough, both senses of truth should be definable.

Here it must be noted that the distinction between discursive and presentational symbols does not correspond to the difference between literal and artistic meanings. Many presentational symbols are merely proxy for discourse; geometric relations may be rendered in algebraic terms—clumsy terms perhaps, but quite equivalent—and graphs are mere abbreviated descriptions. They express facts for discursive thinking, and

[page 212]

their content can be verbalized, subjected to the laws of vocabulary and syntax. Artistic symbols, on the other hand, are untranslatable; their sense is bound to the particular form which it has taken. It is always implicit, and cannot be explicated by any interpretation. This is true even of poetry, for though the material of poetry is verbal, its import is not the literal assertion made in the words, but the way the assertion is made, and this involves the sound, the tempo, the aura of associations of the words, the long or short sequences of ideas, the wealth or poverty of transient imagery that contains them, the sudden arrest of fantasy by pure fact, or of familiar fact by sudden fantasy, the suspense of literal meaning by a sustained ambiguity resolved in a long-awaited key-word, and the unifying, all-embracing artifice of rhythm. (The tension which music achieves through dissonance, and the reorientation in each new resolution to harmony, find their equivalents in the suspensions and periodic decisions of propositional sense in poetry. Literal sense, not euphony, is the "harmonic structure" of poetry; word-melody in literature is more akin to tone-color in music.)

The poem as a whole is the bearer of artistic import, as a painting or a drama is. We may isolate significant lines, as we may isolate beauties in any work, but if their meaning is not determined and supported by their context, the entire work, then that work is a failure despite the germ of excellence it contains. That is why Professor Urban's restatement of T. S. Eliot's cryptic lines:

"And I see the damp souls of the housemaids
Sprouting disconsolately at area gates,"

namely: "That housemaids' souls are damp and sprout," and his demand for a more adequate rendering of this assertion by way of philosophical interpretation, seems to me a fundamental misconception of poetic import. A "more adequate rendering" would be more, not less, poetic; it would be a better poem. "Artistic truth" does not belong to statements in the poem or their obvious figurative meanings, but to its figures and meanings as they are used, its statements as they are made, its framework of word-sound and sequence, rhythm and recurrence and rhyme, color and image and the speed of their passage—in short, to the poem as "significant form." The

[footnote 13] Urban, Language and Reality, see passage quoted p. 234, above. To anyone who cannot grasp the poet's meaning and vision here, Professor Urban's "interpretation" certainly would make matters worse rather than better.

[page 213]

material of poetry is discursive, but the product—the artistic phenomenon—is not; its significance is purely implicit in the poem as a totality, as a form compounded of sound and suggestion, statement and reticence, and no translation can reincarnate that. Poetry may be approximated in other languages and give rise to surprisingly beautiful new versions revealing new possibilities of its skeletal literal ideas and rhetorical devices; but the product is new, like an orchestral scoring of an organ-fugue, a piano version of a string quartet, or a photograph of a painting.

An artistic symbol—which may be a product of human craftsmanship, or (on a purely personal level) something in nature seen as "significant form"—has more than discursive or presentational meaning: its form as such, as a sensory phenomenon, has what I have called "implicit" meaning, like rite and myth, but of a more catholic sort. It has what L. A. Reid called "tertiary subject-matter," beyond the reach of "primary imagination" (as Coleridge would say) and even the "secondary imagination" that sees metaphorically. "Tertiary subject-matter is subject-matter imaginatively experienced in the work of art . . . , something which cannot be apprehended apart from the work, though theoretically distinguishable from its expressiveness."

"Artistic truth," so called, is the truth of a symbol to the forms of feeling—nameless forms, but recognizable when they appear in sensuous replica. Such truth, being bound to certain logical forms of expression, has logical peculiarities that distinguish it from propositional truth: since presentational symbols have no negatives, there is no operation whereby their truth-value is reversed, no contradiction. Hence "the possibility of expressing opposites simultaneously," on which Mersmann commented. Falsity here is a complicated failing, not a function of negation. For this reason Professor Reid calls it not falsity but inexpressiveness; and Urban, in a moment undisturbed by epistemology, abandons not only the term "falsity," but also "truth," and suggests that artistic forms should rather be designated as adequate or inadequate to the ideas they embody. Perhaps he did not see that this shift of terminology belies his doctrine that all art makes assertions which must ultimately be paraphrased in language; for assertions are true or false, and their adequacy has to be taken for granted before we can judge them as assertions at all. They are always debatable and may be tested for their truth[page 214]values by the nature of their explicable consequences. Art, on the other hand, has no consequences; it gives form to something that is simply there, as the intuitive organizing functions of sense give form to objects and spaces, color and sound. It gives what Bertrand Russell calls "knowledge by acquaintance" of affective experience, below the level of belief, on the deeper level of insight and attitude. And to this mission it is either adequate or inadequate, as images, the primitive symbols of "things," are adequate or inadequate to give us a conception of what things are "like."

[footnote 14] "Beauty and Significance," p. 132.

[footnote 15] Urban, op. cit. See pp. 439-442.

To understand the "idea" in a work of art is therefore more like having a new experience than like entertaining a new proposition; and to negotiate this knowledge by acquaintance the work may be adequate in some degree. There are no degrees of literal truth, but artistic truth, which is all significance, expressiveness, articulateness, has degrees; therefore works of art may be good or bad, and each must be judged on our experience of its revelations. Standards of art are set by the expectations of people whom long conversance with a certain mode—music, painting, architecture, or what not—has made both sensitive and exacting; there is no immutable law of artistic adequacy, because significance is always for a mind as well as of a form. But a form, a harmony, even a timbre, that is entirely unfamiliar is "meaningless," naturally enough; for we must grasp a Gestalt quite definitely before we can perceive an implicit meaning, or even the promise of such a meaning, in it; and such definite grasp requires a certain familiarity. Therefore the most original contemporary music in any period always troubles people's ears. The more pronounced its new idiom, the less they can make of it, unless the impulse which drove the composer to this creation is something of a common experience, of a yet inarticulate Zeitgeist, which others, too, have felt. Then they, like him, may be ready to experiment with new expressions, and meet with an open mind what even the best of them cannot really judge.

Perhaps some very wonderful music is lost because it is too extraordinary. It may even be lost to its composer because he cannot really handle his forms, and abandons them as unsuccessful. But intimate acquaintance with all sorts of music does give some versatile minds a power of grasping new sounds; people so inclined and trained will have a "hunch," at least,

[footnote 16] Lord Russell fails to appreciate, I think, the logical, formulative mission of sense, or else he evades it because it has kept company with idealism. But to see in certain forms is not to create their contents, though it is a source of that relativistic character of "data" which makes them less final and absolute than his empiricism lets him admit.

[page 215]

that they are dealing with true "significant form" though they still hear a good deal of it as noise, and will contemplate it until they comprehend it, for better or worse. It is an old story that Bach, Beethoven, and Wagner were "hard to hear" in their own time. Many people today, who can follow Rimsky-Korsakoff or Debussy as easily as Schumann, cannot hear music in Hindemith or Bartok; yet the more experienced probably know, by certain signs, that it is there.

On the other hand, artistic forms are exhaustible, too. Music that has fulfilled its mission may be outgrown, so that its style, its quality, its whole conception, palls on a generation that is ardently expressing or seeking to express something else. Only very catholic minds can see beauty in many styles even without the aid of historical fancy, of a conscious "self-projection" into other settings or ages. It is probably easiest in music, where typical forms are not further bound down by literal references to things that have a transient and dated character.

The worst enemy of artistic judgment is literal judgment, which is so much more obvious, practical, and prompt that it is apt to pass its verdict before the curious eye has even taken in the entire form that meets it. Not blindness to "significant form," but blindedness, due to the glaring evidence of familiar things, makes us miss artistic, mythical, or sacred import.

This is probably the source of the very old and widespread doctrine that the so-called "material world" is a curtain between humanity and a higher, purer, more satisfying Truth—a "Veil of Maya," or Bergson's false, "spatialized" Reality.

Is it conceivable that mysticism is a mark of inadequate art? That might account for the fact that all very great artistic conceptions leave something of mysticism with the beholder; and mysticism as a metaphysic would then be the despair of implicit knowledge, as skepticism is the despair of discursive reason.

To us whose intelligence is bound up with language, whose achievements are physical comforts, machines, medicines, great cities, and the means of their destruction, theory of knowledge means theory of communication, generalization, proof, in short: critique of science. But the limits of language are not the last limits of experience, and things inaccessible to language may have their own forms of conception, that is to say, their own symbolic devices. Such non-discursive forms, charged with logical possibilities of meaning, underlie the significance

[footnote 17] Cf. Hanslick, Vom Musikalisch-Schönen, p. 57.

[page 216]

of music; and their recognition broadens our epistemology to the point of including not only the semantics of science, but a serious philosophy of art.
