More Praise for The Symbolic Species


“This superb and innovative look at the evolution of language could only have been written by the one person with the range, depth and sheer competence to incorporate linguistics, ethology, developmental biology, paleontology, and evolutionary biology: Terrence Deacon. An extraordinary achievement!”

—David Pilbeam, professor of anthropology, Harvard University

“[This book] should transform the foundations of the human sciences…. Deacon combines the precision of a neurosurgeon with the rigor of a philosopher…. The Symbolic Species is not another grandiose lyric about the global properties of the brain. When this author finds ‘nascent heart and mind’ where most fear clockwork, he doesn’t persuade his readers to believe; he shows them where to look.”

—A. Edward Manier, professor of philosophy and of the history and philosophy of science,

University of Notre Dame

“This book helps us understand why we are so remarkably different from other species in terms of learning the kinds of language systems that we do—and yet not all that different from the apes in terms of basic organization and function of our primate brain. Written in a highly engaging style…. An outstanding product of a gifted scholar.”

—Duane M. Rumbaugh, professor of psychology,

Georgia State University

“A wonderful book—a classic. Far more profound than most work on the subject, this book blends the rare qualities of scholarship, originality, and depth. Deacon has quietly thrown a bombshell into the conceptual foundations of developmental psychology and consequently we will be rethinking development and growth of human intelligence for some time to come.”

—Sheldon White, professor of psychology, Harvard University

“Essential reading for anyone interested in what makes us human.”

—Merlin Donald, professor of psychology, Queens University, Ontario





The Symbolic Species


THE CO - EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE AND THE BRAIN





Terrence W. Deacon


W. W. NORTON & COMPANY NEW YORK LONDON





Copyright © 1997 by Terrence W. Deacon

All rights reserved

First published as a Norton paperback 1998

For information about permission to reproduce selections from this book, write to Permissions, W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10110.

BOOK DESIGN BY BTD / ROBIN BENTZ.

The Library of Congress has cataloged the printed edition as follows:

Deacon, Terrence William.

The symbolic species: the co-evolution of language and the brain / by Terrence W. Deacon.

p. cm.

Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN: 978-0-393-31754-1

1. Neurolinguistics. 2. Brain—Evolution. I. Title.

QP399.D43 1997

153.6—DC20 96-31115

CIP

ISBN 978-0-393-34302-1 (e-book)

W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.

500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110

www.wwnorton.com

W. W. Norton & Company Ltd.

Castle House, 75/76 Wells Street, London WIT 3QT





In memory of Harriet Deacon, my grandmother and first mentor, who taught me to recognize the miraculous in everyday things.





Very special thanks are due to my family, Cris, Anneka, and John, who supported me even as I stole precious time away from them to complete this work, and to my parents, whose encouragement I could always count on. Thanks are also due to many who have directly inspired, assisted, and endured this project. These include: Joseph Marcus, who read, edited, and commented extensively on earlier drafts and who has consistently held me to the high standards he expects from a mentor; my own mentors, who have knowingly or unknowingly contributed their insights and valuable criticisms, but who are far too numerous to list; my former student Alan Sokoloff, whose Ph.D. research on oral tract innervation underlies my thoughts on vocal evolution; David Rudner, Sandra Kleinman, Alan Aronie, and many other friends whose feedback has helped clear away some of the fog; my colleagues in the lab, who understood and picked up more of the load as my attentions were diverted from the lab bench; Robyn Swierk and Julie Criniere, who helped enter the endless corrections, and copyeditor Ann Adelman; Hoover the seal, who opened my ears to the mystery of speech; and my editor, Hilary Hinzmann, who was patient through my long spells of writer’s block and overcommitment, and who helped nurse a rough collection of ideas and notes into a narrative. I can never adequately repay these many gifts.





Contents


Preface





Part One: Language



1. THE HUMAN PARADOX



An Evolutionary Anomaly



Technical Difficulties and Hopeful Monsters



The Missing Simple Languages



2. A LOSS FOR WORDS



Gymnastics of the Mind



In Other Words



The Reference Problem



3. SYMBOLS AREN’T SIMPLE



The Hierarchical Nature of Reference



The Symbolic Threshold



Unlearning an Insight



4. OUTSIDE THE BRAIN



Chomsky’s Handstand



The Other Evolution



Emerging Universals



Better Learning Through Amnesia





Part Two: Brain



5. THE SIZE OF INTELLIGENCE



A Gross Misunderstanding



Brains in Bodies



Thinking Your Own Size



6. GROWING APART



The Chihuahua Fallacy



Using Fly Genes to Make Human Brains



The Developmental Clock



7. A DARWINIAN ELECTRICIAN



Musical Chairs



Displacement



An Alien Brain Transplant Experiment



Beyond Phrenology



8. THE TALKING BRAIN



Hoover’s Brain



Visceral Sounds



Why Don’t Mammals Sing Like Birds?



A Leveraged Takeover



9. SYMBOL MINDS



Front-Heavy



Making Symbols



10. LOCATING LANGUAGE



Forcing Square Pegs into Round Holes



The Illuminated Brain



Where Symbols Aren’t



Taking Sides





Part Three: Co-Evolution



11. AND THE WORD BECAME FLESH



The Brain That Didn’t Evolve



Language Adaptations



Homo symbolicus



The Co-Evolutionary Net



The Writing on the Wall



12. SYMBOLIC ORIGINS



A Passion to Communicate



Why Human Societies Shouldn’t Work



A Symbolic Solution



Ritual Beginnings



13. A SERENDIPITOUS MIND



The Fail-Safe Computer



The Sphinx



No Mind Is an Island



14. SUCH STUFF AS DREAMS ARE MADE ON



Ends



To Be or Not to Be: What Is the Difference?



Reinventing the Mind





Notes



Additional Readings



Bibliography



Index
