CHAPTER FOUR


Outside the Brain


Nothing that is worth knowing can be taught.

—Oscar Wilde





Chomsky’s Handstand


Over the last few decades language researchers seem to have reached a consensus that language is an innate ability, and that only a significant contribution from innate knowledge can explain our ability to learn such a complex communication system. Without question, children enter the world predisposed to learn human languages. All normal children, raised in normal social environments, inevitably learn their local language, whereas other species, even when raised and taught in this same environment, do not. This demonstrates that human brains come into the world specially equipped for this function. Few would argue with this sense of the term innate.

But many linguists and psychologists propose a more thoroughly preformationist interpretation of this same phenomenon. They argue that the child’s remarkable feat of learning a first language is the result of an innate “language competence.” When we say that people are competent at a skill, for example, typing, we generally mean that they possess some proficiency in it, and not just a potential or talent that might be realized under the right conditions. A competence is an available skill, normally one learned or acquired previously. So by analogy an innate language competence is an ability to perform certain language tasks as though they had previously been learned. If language competence is innate in this sense, then language knowledge itself, in some form, is already present in the human brain prior to gaining knowledge from any experience with language. But is it really?

There is, without doubt, something special about human brains that enables us to do with ease what no other species can do even minimally without intense effort and remarkably insightful training. We not only have the ability to create and easily learn simple symbol systems such as the chimps Sherman and Austin struggled to learn, but in learning languages we acquire an immensely complex rule system and a rich vocabulary at a time in our lives when it is otherwise very difficult to learn even elementary arithmetic. Many a treatise on grammatical theory has failed to provide an adequate accounting of the implicit knowledge that even a four-year-old appears to possess about her newly acquired language. No wonder so many linguists have thrown up their hands, exclaiming that “language must be unlearnable” and claiming that it is all a magician’s trick, that the rabbit (grammatical knowledge) must have been in the hat (the child’s brain) from the beginning. But in what form? And how could it have gotten there? Unfortunately, as we have seen, the theory that innate knowledge of grammar is the heritage of all human children simply asserts the answers to these messy questions, and leaves it to evolutionary biology and neuroscience to explain how the answers are to be derived. Before scientists in these fields commit their experimental resources and theoretical modeling efforts to exploring this theory’s claims, it may be worth asking if they are biologically plausible and if there really are no alternatives.

The idea that an innate Universal Grammar is the only way to account for language abilities was first argued by the MIT linguist Noam Chomsky.1 Three insights originally motivated his claim. First, he showed that the logical structure of grammars was more complex and difficult to specify than anyone had previously suspected, and yet that normal speakers of a language seem to know an enormous number of complex grammatical rules and applications without an explicit knowledge of what they know. Second, he argued that although languages appear incredibly variable on the surface, they share a common deep logic, or “deep structure,” from which the specific rules used by each can be derived by a sort of deductive logic. This, however, further complicates the discovery of the rules, because what is presented to the language learner is only the surface consequences of applying these rules. The rules have to be inferred from this indirect representation. Third, he argued that to learn a logical system of such subtlety and complexity should require extensive trial-and-error experience with explicit feedback, and yet young children rapidly develop a sophisticated knowledge of grammatical rules and their applications in the absence of these.

Many have taken this last point one step further. They argue that even much more extensive experience of the type that children do not get might still be insufficient to allow one to discover the abstract rules that constitute the grammar of a natural language. To put it another way, no one could learn a language in the same way that one learns the names of the presidents, the letters of the alphabet, or the rules of long division. Grammar is too complex, and the rules exhibited by spoken examples only obliquely reflect its logic. Some researchers have argued that even a scientist or logician would be unable to discover the rules of grammar inductively from texts of a language, except by reference to some previously known grammar.2 This difficulty of discovering the rules, even in theory, is epitomized by the fact that modern linguists still disagree about what is the most appropriate formal description of natural grammatical rule systems. So how could very young children, who are apparently far less sophisticated in their analytic abilities, nevertheless become rapidly competent language users? In essence, then, the argument supporting the existence of an innate Universal Grammar is an argument from incredulity. How is it possible otherwise?

The conclusions appear inescapable. If grammatical knowledge cannot be acquired by inductive learning in childhood, then knowledge about the rules of grammar (that we all end up possessing after just a few years) must come from somewhere else. And if acquiring this knowledge does not depend on experience, then paradoxically the knowledge must already be present in some form prior to experience. It must be available as a corpus of already assumed (innately known) rules that need only to be compared to the available input. Those innate rules which predict the structure of the experienced language are adopted; the remainder are ignored.

This is a compelling argument, but innate Universal Grammar (UG for short) is a cure that is more drastic than the disease. It makes sweeping assumptions about brains and evolution that are no less credible than the claim that children are super-intelligent learners.

The critics of the UG theory mainly take issue with what they claim are straw-man assumptions about the language-learning context: a restricted conception of learning as induction, and the claim that language experience provides no feedback. Children are not just fed a sequence of speech inputs and forced to discover the abstract rules of their production. Children’s language experiences are embedded in a rich and intricate social context, which provides them with multiple routes to pragmatic social feedback. Moreover, the language interactions that young children engage in are often simplified by the adults, and certain features are exaggerated to make them more salient. In short, the critics argue that no paradox needs explaining, that a general theory of learning may be enough. It is demonstrably true that children learn language in a rich social context, but the claim that learning alone can account for this ability begs as many questions as the innate knowledge theory. We cannot discount the obvious and immense gap that separates what children accomplish easily from what otherwise highly intelligent species and even sophisticated inductive-learning algorithms cannot. This is especially compelling since young children are quite limited in other aspects of their learning abilities. We need to confront the paradox directly. Some kind of prior preparation for language must be present. But what kind, and where? These are questions that must be answered, not avoided, by either gambit.

There is another possibility that has been almost entirely overlooked, and it is the point of the remainder of this chapter to explore it. I think Chomsky and his followers have articulated a central conundrum about language learning, but they offer an answer that inverts cause and effect. They assert that the source of prior support for language acquisition must originate from inside the brain, on the unstated assumption that there is no other possible source. But there is another alternative: that the extra support for language learning is vested neither in the brain of the child nor in the brains of parents or teachers, but outside brains, in language itself. To explain what I mean, let me begin by offering a couple of extended analogies that I think portray a similar problem. I’ll start with a computer analogy.

“…And you’ll see why 1984 won’t be like 1984.” Thus ended an award-winning television commercial seen by millions of Americans watching the Super Bowl in January 1984. It was the commercial for Apple Computer Inc.’s new personal computer, the Macintosh, aired just once during the big game then retired to history, its message sent. Apple depicted a hypnotically transfixed audience of human drones staring, mouths agog, at a huge screen on which the image of George Orwell’s “Big Brother” intoned his propaganda about world domination and the good of all mankind. Then, through the high-tech corridors and the numbly nodding masses, chased by uniformed techno-storm troopers, an athletic young woman ran, carrying a large hammer. In the midst of the chanting mass she whirled around and let the hammer fly into the screen, shattering the image of the face of Big Brother, and breaking the hypnotic spell.

What Apple was announcing was not just a new computer but a new way of thinking about computing. The company that brought computers from the tinkerer’s garage into the average home was unveiling a computer that was “user-friendly.” Before this, computers were machines that you had to figure out. To get them to do what you wanted, you had to use their logic—the logic of program codes, I/O functions, and endless varieties of commands and names, some of which were acronyms like “DOS,” “bios,” and “CD” or truncated words like “txt,” “cmd,” and “bak,” but many of which were just programmers’ syntactic operators, such as “…” and “\\” And if you didn’t type the code line just right, or didn’t quite know the right spacing, order, or sequence of commands, you were stuck, left trying to figure out what happened to the previous day’s work.

In 1984, everyone knew that computers were very complicated machines that only engineers and technicians really understood, and so in order to use them it was inevitable that you needed training or experience or a lot of time to read stacks of manuals. But the gurus at Apple had a different idea—an idea they borrowed from a group of computer visionaries assembled years earlier in a Xerox research project. The idea was to make interacting with a computer intuitive. Instead of having to figure out how to get a program or data file to do what you wanted, why not represent them with the images of familiar objects, virtual objects on a screen made into a virtual desk top? And instead of using commands and codes to control what happens to programs and data, why not just arrange the system so that by manipulating these virtual objects, as you might think of doing if they had been out there on your real desk top, you were activating programs and modifying your data? This, of course, was the birth of personal computers with “object-oriented” interfaces. Instead of having to page through a stack of unreadable manuals, it was possible to experiment, to learn by trial and error, in an environment where your intuitive guesses were likely to be good ones. Apple may not have banished Big (Blue) Brother, but today few personal computers and work stations lack for icons, windows, and pointing devices. Computer operations have been adapted more to people so that people need to adapt less to computers.

Given the complexity of language and its evolutionary novelty, one might imagine that every two-year-old faces an incredibly complicated set of syntactic rules and thousands of words like a computer novice facing an unforgiving “C>,” and without technical manuals to help in sorting them out. This seems to be the implicit assumption behind the claims of the proponents of theories of innate grammatical knowledge. If language were invented and just thrust upon us poor users, we might be justified in thinking of it as not very “user-friendly,” in which case a built-in on-line instruction manual might be a necessity. But this inverts the actual relationship. The engineering constraints of computer operations are quite unlike any information processes we normally engage in. Operating systems and programming languages are limited by the requirements of the machine architecture more than by the requirements of learnability. But languages have evolved with respect to human brains, not arbitrary principles or engineering constraints. There need be few compromises. The problem faced by a child learning a first language should not be analogous to the problem faced by a computer neophyte trying to learn to use an unforgiving mechanism. Instead, we should expect that language is a lot more like an intuitive and user-friendly interface. Over countless generations languages should have become better and better adapted to people, so that people need to make minimal adjustments to adapt to them. With this alternative model in mind, let’s compare the typical competing explanations of language acquisition.

Chomsky argues that much of the child’s knowledge of grammar and syntax is not learned in the way words are. I agree. It is discovered, though not by introspection of rules already available in the brain. On the surface, it simply appears that children have an uncanny ability to make “lucky guesses” about grammar and syntax: they spontaneously anticipate the ways words work together. I think this appearance of lucky coincidence accurately captures what happens, though it is not luck that is responsible. The rules underlying language are acquired by trial-and-error learning; but there is a very high proportion of correct trials. Why are kids such “lucky” guessers? Turning this observation around, we might notice that children do not sample the full range of possible alternative ways of organizing words. They are strongly biased in their choices. If language were a random set of associations, children would likely be significantly handicapped by their highly biased guessing. But language regularities are not just any set of associations, and children’s guesses are biased in a way that usually turns out to be correct. How else could this happen except by endowing children with some foreknowledge of what constitutes a likely correct guess? I think the object-oriented computer operating system example suggests the alternative. Things could be arranged so that intuitive guesses are more likely to work.

Let me illustrate the logic of this alternative answer to the riddle with another story. Imagine a gambling establishment and the following ingenious scheme to defraud it. A disgruntled casino employee has decided that he wants to get back at the owners by making them lose big. He does not want to leave any way for the owners to get back their losses even if they catch him. So instead of stealing or embezzling the money, he decides to help an unsuspecting gambler break the bank. In order to accomplish this he needs to find a gambler who has characteristic betting habits, or superstitions—for example, someone who always places large bets on numbers containing the digit 5. If the employee can rig the Roulette wheel so that fives appear far more often than chance, he can turn the unsuspecting gambler into a millionaire. The gambler has no special knowledge of the future numbers that will turn up, even though the games have been rigged to conform to his biased guesses. His lucky guesses are not based on innate knowledge about the wheel or about the future. It appears as though the gambler has foreknowledge of the outcomes, but in reality he has only a sort of “virtual knowledge,” as seen in hindsight. He might even come to believe that he has a clairvoyant ability to see into the future, but irrespective of what he thinks he knows, he is simply being fooled. The point is that one cannot always be sure that apparent knowledge, inferred from successful predictions and guesses, is really what it seems.

Finally, let me offer an analogy that every clever teacher or animal trainer will find familiar. The first time I visited an aquarium where trained dolphins performed, I was astonished by the way they had been taught to jump high out of the water, turn somersaults in midair, and “stand” on their tails. Later, when I had become acquainted with some of the staff, I asked if dolphins could be trained to do this because they were particularly smart. No, they said, dolphins spontaneously produce similar behaviors in the wild and the trainers simply taught them to exaggerate and modify things that they already tended to do naturally. If the trainers had tried to teach them to perform a completely novel behavior, without considering the dolphins’ innate predispositions, the trick would have been very difficult if not impossible to train. Successful animal trainers carefully select the tricks they attempt to train their subjects to perform to fit with their subjects’ spontaneous behavioral tendencies. What learning psychologists call “shaping” of an operant behavior must begin with a spontaneous behavior to be shaped. Even very unusual and exotic behaviors can be taught, if one begins with what an animal already tends to do, then step by step extrapolates and generalizes to new variations on the theme. The training will be minimized because the animal already “knows” what to do to please its trainer and receive a reward.

Each of these examples offers a twist on the Macintosh (and Windows) strategy. The learning is not so likely to fail if what needs to be learned is “user-friendly,” organized in a way that the learner is predisposed to thinking and working. One way to facilitate children’s inspired “guessing” about language, and thus spare them countless trials and errors, would be to present them with a specially designed language whose structure anticipated their spontaneous guesses. If we could study children in “the wild” to discover their natural tendencies, we could then design the perfect language that took advantage of what kids do spontaneously. Learning this artificial language would then be more like trying on new clothes and discovering that they just happen to fit, as opposed to going on a diet in order to fit into clothes that don’t. Children’s minds need not innately embody language structures, if languages embody the predispositions of children’s minds!

Okay. Although this is a very interesting fantasy, we are not brilliant language trainers with complete insight into our children’s minds. We have few enough insights into our own minds. And we don’t consciously tailor language for children, except for the rather lame simplifications and exaggerations we call “baby talk” and “motherese.” We don’t design language at all. It “designs” itself. Languages just change spontaneously over the course of many generations. Every effort to design a language has flopped. If no one ever studied children in order to design language for them, then how could any sort of “preestablished harmony” between language and children ever get set up? It seems as if we have to postulate the same kind of miraculous accident for language as has been suggested for explaining the origins of a language organ. Do we gain any more explanatory credibility by postulating infant-friendly languages as opposed to language-savvy infants? How could such a preestablished harmony arise if no one is “throwing the game”?

Someone or something is throwing the game, and I don’t mean a divine designer. Languages don’t just change, they evolve. And children themselves are the rigged game. Languages are under powerful selection pressure to fit children’s likely guesses, because children are the vehicle by which a language gets reproduced. Languages have had to adapt to children’s spontaneous assumptions about communication, learning, social interaction, and even symbolic reference, because children are the only game in town. It turns out that in a curious sort of inversion of our intuitions about this problem, languages need children more than children need languages.

In short, we failed to notice that a flurry of adaptation has been going on outside the brain. The reason we haven’t considered the relevance of this process before is that we tend to think on a human scale. Focusing on a lifetime scale and the rapid changes that take place in the few years in which a child learns a first language, we naturally think of this as the flexible half of the equation and of language as though it is some fixed entity. But from an evolutionary perspective, the situation is just the reverse. Biological change is vastly more slow and inflexible than language change. Brain evolution takes place on a geological time scale. Even slight changes probably take hundreds of thousands of years to become widely represented in a species, and the basic architecture of brains has been remarkably conserved since the origins of vertebrates. Languages, on the other hand, can become unrecognizably different within a few thousand years. Language evolution is probably thousands of times more rapid than brain evolution. Such a vast difference in evolutionary mobility suggests that we may have assumed that the wrong half of the evolutionary equation contained the critical variables.





The Other Evolution


The world’s languages evolved spontaneously. They were not designed. If we conceive of them as though they were invented systems of rules and symbols, intentionally assembled to form logical systems, then we are apt either to assign utility and purpose where there is none, or else to interpret as idiosyncratic or inelegant that for which we cannot recognize a design principle. But languages are far more like living organisms than like mathematical proofs. The most basic principle guiding their design is not communicative utility but reproduction—theirs and ours. So, the proper tool for analyzing language structure may not be to discover how best to model them as axiomatic rule systems but rather to study them the way we study organism structure: in evolutionary terms. Languages are social and cultural entities that have evolved with respect to the forces of selection imposed by human users.

The structure of a language is under intense selection because in its reproduction from generation to generation, it must pass through a narrow bottleneck: children’s minds (a relationship depicted in cartoon fashion in Figure 4.1). Language operations that can be learned quickly and easily by children will tend to get passed on to the next generation more effectively and more intact than those that are difficult to learn. So, languages should change through history in ways that tend to conform to children’s expectations; those that employ a more kid-friendly logic should come to outnumber and replace those that don’t. From this perspective, children don’t have to be particularly smart, and parents don’t have to be particularly gifted teachers. The limitations of the learners and the teachers are an unavoidable part of the ecology of language transmission. Language structures that are poorly adapted to this niche simply will not persist for long.

If, as linguists often point out, grammars appear illogical and quirky in their design, it may only be because we are comparing them to inappropriate models and judging their design according to functional criteria that are less critical than we think. Instead of approximating an imaginary ideal of communicative power and efficiency, or following formulae derived from an alleged set of innate mental principles, language structures may simply reflect the selection pressures that have shaped their reproduction.



Figure 4.1 Cartoon suggesting the possibility that languages must go through the “filter” of children’s reduced associative learning and short-term memory constraints in order to be passed on most effectively from one generation to the next with any degree of fidelity. Children selectively hear some structures and ignore others, and so provide a major selection force for language structure that is “child-friendly.”

In some ways it is helpful to imagine language as an independent life form that colonizes and parasitizes human brains, using them to reproduce. Versions of this idea have been independently proposed by many thinkers over the years. My own view is probably closest to that proposed in a recent paper by Morton Christiansen.3 The key ingredient that unites our approaches is the recognition of a co-evolutionary dynamic between language and its host. By imagining language as a parasitic organism, we can come to appreciate the potential for conflicting reproductive interests, where some language features might occur at the expense of the host’s adaptations, and the possibility that many features may have more to do with getting passed on from generation to generation than with conveying information.

Of course, languages are entirely dependent on humans, and are not separate physical organisms, replete with their own metabolic processes and reproductive systems. And yet their very different form obscures deep similarities to living processes. They might better be compared to viruses. Viruses are not quite alive, and yet are intimately a part of the web of living processes. Viruses are on the liminal border between the living and nonliving because they lack organs in any normal sense, including any vestige of metabolic or reproductive systems. They are minimally packaged strings of DNA or RNA that regularly happen to get themselves insinuated into cells that mistake them for their own nucleotides and haphazardly replicate them and transcribe their base sequences into proteins. Though relatively inanimate collections of macromolecules in and of themselves, the information implicit in them nevertheless evolves and adapts with frightening efficiency, as recent epidemics so vividly illustrate.

From this perspective it is not so far-fetched to think of languages a bit as we think of viruses, neglecting the difference in constructive versus destructive effects. Languages are inanimate artifacts, patterns of sounds and scribblings on clay or paper, that happen to get insinuated into the activities of human brains which replicate their parts, assemble them into systems, and pass them on. The fact that the replicated information that constitutes a language is not organized into an animate being in no way excludes it from being an integrated adaptive entity evolving with respect to human hosts.

The parasitic model is almost certainly too extreme, for the relationship between language and people is symbiotic. There are many familiar examples of parasitic symbionts in nature. Two well-known examples are the microorganisms that colonize human and termite digestive systems. Both aid their host’s digestive processes and neither parasite nor host could survive without each other. The endosymbiont in termites secretes an enzyme that helps break down cellulose, a trick no eukaryotic organism seems to have evolved on its own. Such useful parasites are not just passively replicated. Because of its critical importance to termite life, termites have even evolved ways to ensure their symbiotic parasite’s reproduction and passage into other hosts. When a growing termite molts and sheds its old exoskeleton, this infected shell is immediately eaten either by its owner or by other members of the colony, passing on copies of the parasite in the process. Symbiotic relationships naturally evolve to bring the reproduction of the two organisms into closer alignment, since this is the best way to insure the success of both.

In the case of language and human beings, by analogy, we should not be surprised to find complex human adaptations to language on the one hand, whose purpose is to ensure that language is successfully replicated and passed from host to host, and language adaptations to children on the other, whose purpose is to make languages particularly “infective” as early as possible in human development. Modern humans need the language parasite in order to flourish and reproduce, just as much as it needs humans to reproduce. Consequently, each has evolved with respect to the other. Each has become modified in response to the peculiar constraints and requirements of the other. The adaptation of the parasite to its hosts, particularly children, provides the basis for a theory of prescient language learning. Though this is a caricature, it is no less so than the nativist and empiricist alternatives, and it captures much more accurately the dynamic push and pull of biases that have shaped both languages and the human brain.

Of course, the analogy with an organism treats language as far more autonomous and individuated than is warranted, since any particular language is at most a fuzzy statistical entity and language as a whole is even less well defined. Yet there are a number of useful parallels. For example, the words and rules that constitute a language are not simply members of a collection, they are highly organized and interdependent as are the genes and organs of an organism. From a single individual’s perspective, the analogy is even stronger. The logical structure of languages is replicated (acquired) and passed on as a complete system, not just a collection of words. Even though it may be learned word by word and phrase by phrase, what is acquired only becomes a language when the prescribed ways of using these words have been internalized to the point that one is theoretically capable of knowing how to phrase all thoughts for which words are available and able to determine the grammaticality of any novel sentences of known words. Though children may take years to develop an extensive vocabulary, they quickly master the central core of rules, which will give all new words a predefined grammatical function. We might think of this self-sustaining core, consisting of a grammar and syntax and a sufficient number of words to determine all critical word classes, as the completed organ system of an embryonic organism. Additional vocabulary items enlarge the whole, cause it to grow and mature, but do not alter its basic organization.

Languages are abstractions. They are fuzzy collections of behaviors that happen to be reasonably well described by logical rule systems. And although what one person knows about his native language may in some large measure be describable this way, what an entire population of English or Japanese speakers shares in common is only statistically clustered. Like most characteristics of biological species and social groups, the common language that links a social group might be described as a collection of similar but not identical languages. Like a species, then, the language of a whole society is a natural reservoir of variation, with some features becoming less diverse and others becoming more diverse over time.

Variation in language use points to the final and most relevant parallel: languages evolve. As a language is passed from generation to generation, the vocabulary and syntactic rules tend to get modified by transmission errors, by the active creativity of its users, and by influences from other languages. Isolated language communities which begin with a common language will follow divergent patterns of spontaneous change. Eventually words, phraseology, and syntax will diverge so radically that people will find it impossible to mix elements of both without confusion. By analogy to biological evolution, different lineages of a common ancestral language will diverge so far from each other as to become reproductively incompatible. This immiscibility is reflected in the brains of fluent bilingual speakers, who tend to have different neural localization for the two languages they know. This is demonstrated by the fact that in such individuals stroke, electrical stimulation, and other neuropsychological disturbances can affect each language independent of the other. The physical separation is almost certainly dictated by the fact that the two languages would otherwise compete for use of the same neural systems and so interfere with each other (see Chapter 10). At the level of what an individual knows, a language is very much like one’s own personal symbiotic organism.

Similar analogies have been suggested as a way to describe the dynamical interdependence between many biological and social evolutionary processes. Although evolutionary models are not new to the social sciences, and have an even longer history in linguistics than in biology, only recently have researchers begun to conceive of this relationship as though artifacts, techniques, customs, and even ideas and beliefs were separate organisms. This is more than just a metaphor. There is an important sense in which artifacts and social practices evolve in parallel with their living hosts, and are not just epiphenomena. They must be reproduced from one generation to the next and replicated as each new person learns them, copies them, emulates them, or is forced to conform to them. But because of this there is a potential for innovations and errors like recombinations and mutations in biological evolution, that introduce new variety into the process over time. Biases can creep into the process and affect what does and does not get reproduced, just as natural selection favors certain genetically specified traits. Those bits of copied cultural information (Richard Dawkins has dubbed them “memes” as a cultural analogue to genes) which happen to lead to an increased probability of being reproduced will persist longer, and spread over time to be used by more individuals, than those that don’t potentiate their own reproduction. Sources of selection that determine what does and does not get passed to future generations not only include the utility of these memes and their consequences, but also the biases imposed by their mode of transmission (human minds) and the peculiarities of their cultural ecosystems (systems of other memes).

Language is a social phenomenon. To consider it in purely formal, psychological, or neurobiological terms is to strip away its reason for being. Social phenomena like language cannot be adequately explained without appealing to a social evolutionary dynamic as well as a biological one. The source of information that is used to “grow” a language lies neither in the corpus of texts and corrections presented to the child, nor in the child’s brain to begin with. It is highly distributed across myriad interactions between children’s learning and the evolution of a language community.

The key to understanding language learnability does not lie in the richly social context of language training, nor in the incredibly prescient guesses of young language learners; rather, it lies in a process that seems otherwise far remote from the microcosm of toddlers and caretakers—language change. Although the rate of social evolutionary change in language structure appears unchanging compared to the time it takes a child to develop language abilities, this process is crucial to understanding how the child can learn a language that on the surface appears impossibly complex and poorly taught. The mechanisms driving language change at the sociocultural level are also responsible for everyday language learning.





Emerging Universals


I believe that recognizing the capacity of languages to evolve and adapt with respect to human hosts is crucial to understanding another longstanding mystery about language that theories of innate knowledge were developed to explain: the source of language universals. Grammatical universals exist, but I want to suggest that their existence does not imply that they are prefigured in the brain like frozen evolutionary accidents. In fact, I suspect that universal rules or implicit axioms of grammar aren’t really stored or located anywhere, and in an important sense, they are not determined at all. Instead, I want to suggest the radical possibility that they have emerged spontaneously and independently in each evolving language, in response to universal biases in the selection processes affecting language transmission. They are convergent features of language evolution in the same way that the dorsal fins of sharks, ichthyosaurs, and dolphins are independent convergent adaptations of aquatic species. Like their biological counterparts, these structural commonalities present in all languages have each arisen in response to the constraints imposed by a common adaptive context. Some of the sources of universal selection on the evolution of language structures include immature learning biases, human mnemonic and perceptual biases, the constraints of human vocal articulation and hearing, and the requirements of symbolic reference, to name a few. Because of these incessant influences, languages independently come to resemble one another, not in detail, but in terms of certain general structural properties, and any disruption that undermines a language’s fit with its hosts will be selected against, leading to reconvergence on universal patterns. The forces of selection should be most intense at the level of the logical structure of a language (grammar and sytax), because features at this level are most critical to its successful replication, but less intense converging forces should also influence features as apparently fluid and culture-specific as word reference and sound-meaning relationships.

In fact, probably the best understood example of this co-evolutionary convergence process, though seldom recognized as such, is a case of convergent word reference: the evolution of color terms in different languages and different societies. This is an ideal example because it combines the apparently complete arbitrariness and idiosyncrasies associated with assigning a name to a position on a qualitative continuum, on the one hand, with a well-understood human neurobiological universal, on the other. The assignment of color term reference is essentially unconstrained because: (a) the name of a color can be any combination of human vocal sounds; (b) the human eye can see every gradation of color between certain limits of wavelength; and (c) people can assign any term to any point on the visible light spectrum. So any association between utterable sound and perceivable light frequency is possible, in principle. Surprisingly, in the real world’s languages, the mappings of color terms to light frequencies are not only limited, they are essentially universal in many respects. In this regard, they are a lot like other language universals. But does this mean color terms are built into the brain as an intrinsically modular and categorical form? Or have all the color terms in the world derived by diffusion from a single parent language? Though these answers are logically possible, the evidence does not support either. The answer is far more interesting and sheds important light on other language universals.

Interest in this problem was sparked by the work of Brent Berlin and Paul Kay, who in a series of cross-cultural comparisons demonstrated an interesting regularity in the presence or absence of terms for different colors in different societies.4 What they showed was a hierarchic sequence in the order in which color terms were included or not in different languages. In societies where they found the fewest terms for colors, there were at least three terms: the equivalents of black (dark), white (light), and red. In languages where there were only two color terms in addition to black and white, these always were red and green. In languages where there were three or four color terms, either yellow or blue or both were added. The pattern became progressively less predictable as languages with more terms were considered, but in general, additional color terms were acquired in complementary pairs fitting between prior color terms, with the “primary” colors (e.g., red, green, blue) leading the pack (see Figure 4.2). Of course, the fewer the terms, the more broadly they are applied, so that societies lacking a term for “blue” might refer to blue objects as “dark green.” This, however, brings up an additional finding discovered subsequently by Elenor Rosch and her colleagues.5 The best physical exemplars of particular color terms, irrespective of how many are present in the language, are essentially the same when chosen from an arbitrary set of color samples. In other words, though the boundaries between one color and the next for which one has a term tend to be graded and fuzzy, i.e., not categorical, color terms do apparently have something like a category center; a best red or best green. Surprisingly, the best red and the best green, whatever the terms used, are essentially agreed upon by people from around the world. Though the words themselves are arbitrary and the colors continually grade into one another, words are not arbitrarily mapped to points on the color spectrum. They are universally constrained.



Figure 4.2 The factors underlying the evolution of near universality of color naming. Correspondences between neural and linguistic coding of color. (A) Response characteristics of neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus (LGN), the first central nervous system relay for visual inputs, in response to different wavelengths of light. Different neurons respond preferentially to different wavelengths with essentially no overlap in response to opposite colors (e.g., red vs. green, blue vs. yellow). (B) When presented with color samples that span the visual spectrum and asked to rank them according to closeness to four primary colors, English speakers also show nearly categorical separation of opposite colors and close correspondence to neural response patterns. (C) Wavelengths of samples chosen by informants that “best” correspond with each of twenty languages’ primary color terms. The exemplars of these category centers for each primary color term map across languages, are categorically distinct from one another both across and between languages, and correspond with neural category centers. Their categorical distinctness is more pronounced than is the neural distinction that underlies it. (D) Sequence from left to right in which languages tend to add new color terms.

To understand why this might be so, we need to consider two things: the way the brain transforms light frequency into the subjective experience of color, and the way this might influence the nongenetic evolution of color-word/color-perception associations in a society. The important fact about color perception is that color is in a sense a feature that is created by the brain as a means of maximizing distinctive experiences of photons striking the cones of the retina in blended streams of different wavelengths. The neural computational logic of this enhancement process is called opponent processing because it pits the signals from each of the three different types of cones (photoreceptors in the retina with different wavelength sensitivities) against one another, to derive a difference signal. This second-order signal best corresponds with the color discriminations we actually see (which often do not correspond to specific matching frequencies of incoming light). It is this oppositional sampling process that determines color complementarity (i.e., that red is opposite green and yellow is opposite blue on a color wheel representing all the colors).

It is also the source for biases that underlie the universality of color naming. Not that we see these colors as discrete, or even that we are biased only to name certain points on the spectrum (the advertising and paint industries have proven that thousands of color distinctions can be given individual names), but rather that this will bias the co-evolution of color names. The patterns of errors in use and transmission of color terms will be biased like a loaded die, so that over time the linguistic references will converge to match the neuropsychological foci of perceptual experience. It is a case of neurological bias acting as a relentless selective force in social evolution.

To show how this biasing of language change might work, consider the thought experiment of coining a new name for the color of a specific object, say the color of a kind of moss. Let’s call this color “grue.”6 Assume also that there is no color term other than red preexisting in the language. Since the moss is unlikely to be exactly the same green as is perceptually opposite to the category center for red, this new term will begin with a reference that is idiosyncratic and specific to that object. But it is unlikely to stay that way if it persists for very long in the language. This is because both the memory of the color of the moss and the ability to communicate exactly what color is meant by “grue,” particularly in the absence of the original moss, are prone to error and imprecision. In the absence of any biases these errors would be random, and we would expect that over time the reference of grue would drift away at random from the original reference. But since the perceptual spectrum has high and low points, so to speak, the drift will not be entirely random. Errors in remembering and communicating the original reference of grue will tend to be biased toward the perceptually most salient and the pragmatically most contrasting opposite color to red: green. These errors in transmitting the precise color reference are the social and psychological analogues to mutations. The biases our brains introduce in the way we remember and reproduce the reference are the analogues to natural selection favoring some variants, but not others. As a result, the reference will tend to evolve in adaptation to human nervous systems and to the pragmatic constraints of human uses. Grue will eventually evolve to refer to green if there is no term for green, or blue if there is, or to refer to the most salient intermediate if both already exist.

In summary, the universality of color term reference is an expression of shared neurological biases, but—and this is a crucial point—the translation of this biological constraint into a social universal is brought about through the action of nongenetic evolutionary forces. In the absence of a social evolution process, color term references would remain forever idiosyncratic to individual users and brief historical epochs in each society. The mediation of this relationship by evolutionary tendencies amplifies the effects of slight biases in much the same way as a statistical analysis amplifies our ability to identify small biases affecting large samples. Because both errors of indicating exemplary objects and ambiguities of describing what is meant are biased in similar ways, they each amplify the other in tens of thousands of repeating sampling errors from generation to generation.

In many ways, primary color term reference relationships are as invariant and universal in character as is any aspect of the deep logic of human grammars, and yet it is clear that color terms themselves are not built into the brain, and that choice of what color to designate with a particular word is not dictated by any mental compulsion. What is universally built into the brain is a rather subtle set of perceptual biases that have none of the categorical and symbolic properties of words. Now, this may at first appear to be a comparatively trivial example of some minor aspect of language, but the implications for other aspects of language evolution are truly staggering. It demonstrates that even weak biases, if constantly and invariably present, can produce social evolutionary consequences that appear so ubiquitous as to be considered completely determinate. Consider the subtlety of the differences in perceptual salience of colors and how little constrained we are in assigning names to colors. Such slight biases in the introduction and retention of naming errors can hardly be a source of intense selection pressures. Yet consider the effect: nearly universal consistency of color reference. Phenomenologically, this qualifies as a true linguistic universal, even though it is neither a necessary design feature of language nor even an innate linguistic category.

If tiny biases can produce near-universal language features, then imagine what strong biases might do! How much more powerful might the selection pressures be for some of the more limiting constraints on human attention, working memory, sound production, and automation of functions? The effects of such fundamental and universal cognitive boundary conditions on the social selection of syntactic habits must be profound. And what about biases from our visual-manual-dominated primate heritage? Is it any wonder that so many descriptive and explanatory devices in languages throughout the world borrow heavily from visual and manipulative analogies? Some have even suggested that these ubiquitous patterns of expression, such as using spatial metaphors to refer to semantic dimensions (e.g., “higher truth,” “further developed,” “distantly related”) are the result of innate cognitive concepts.7 But once we recognize this evolutionary process as the primary source behind the universality of linguistic features, and abandon the assumption that to be universal a feature must be hard-wired into the brain, it becomes evident that we may have vastly underestimated the range and variety of language universals, or near universals. Benjamin Lee Whorf suggested that different languages might be so radically divergent that many basic modes of thinking expressed in one might be found to be utterly untranslatable. I think, in contrast, we should not be surprised by the extent to which even high-level conceptual patterns of linguistic representation and discourse share near-universal features in most languages, simply because we are all members of the same species, sharing many common perceptual, behavioral, and emotional biases.

Whether or not we can draw an exact parallel for all aspects of the universal features of grammars, it is clear that no matter which formal, cognitive, or phonological universals of language we consider, they probably arose as a result of biases affecting nongenetic evolutionary processes of language in a manner that is similar to the way that the designation of colors in different languages tends to converge on the same referents and multiply color terms along parallel lines. There is nothing necessary or predetermined about such a process. It is just exceedingly unlikely that, even if introduced, any exceptions to these tendencies will survive for more than a very brief period of time. Language universals are, in this interpretation, only statistical universals, but supported by the astronomical statistics of millions of speakers over tens of thousands of years. They are, despite their almost epiphenomenal origin, for all practical purposes categorically universal.

The theory that there are innate rules for grammar commits the fallacy of collapsing this irreducible social evolutionary process into a static formal structure. It not only ignores the effect of forces that could modify word formation and syntax over time, and of factors promoting converging or parallel trends, it also ignores the forces that stabilize language structure and are thus responsible for maintaining concordant use among contemporary individuals. All this is “given” without explanation if we assume universally fixed instructions for deriving language structures. My point is not that these instructions are located outside the child in the language community, but that there are no instructions (except in the imaginations of those who write texts on innate or “proper” grammar and syntax). A set of basic design rules or principles is simply superfluous. Once we accept the fact that the link from psychological universals to linguistic universals is exceedingly indirect at best, it becomes evident that the explanation for language structure will require that we broaden the search to include a wide variety of biasing factors. Language structures at all levels are the products of powerful multilevel evolutionary processes, to which innate mental tendencies contribute only one subtle source of the Darwinian selection biases.

Thus, even if all the paradoxical problems posed by Universal Grammarians—the theoretical unlearnability of grammars, the apparently miraculous acquisition abilities of children, and the universality of often illogical abstract rules of grammar and syntax—are real, we nevertheless do not need to turn to a theory of innate linguistic knowledge to explain them. They can be understood as the products of convergent social evolutionary trends, as spontaneous parallel adaptations of language structure to the unavoidable and ubiquitous limitations and biases provided by human brains, especially children’s brains. Languages have adapted to human brains and human brains have adapted to languages, but the rate of language change is hundreds or thousands of times more rapid than biological change. The underlying architecture of all languages remains highly conserved across great distances in space and time, and despite modifications and corruptions remains learnable, because the less learnable variants—less well adapted to human minds—are continually selected against. Even if the syntax of some natural language was once as “unhuman” as the syntax of low-level computer languages, it would not have persisted long. Slow learning rates and high error rates during use would have slated it for rapid extinction or selected for variants in its structure that eased the burdens. Human children appear preadapted to guess the rules of syntax correctly, precisely because languages evolve so as to embody in their syntax the most frequently guessed patterns. The brain has co-evolved with respect to language, but languages have done most of the adapting.





Better Learning Through Amnesia


The paradoxical ease with which young children acquire their knowledge of language is not the only aspect of children’s behavior that has seemed to offer support for the concept of a language instinct. An apparently equally compelling reason for an innate, highly specialized, and modular acquisition mechanism is that children seem to do a lot better than adults at acquiring language. They appear to learn it in a very different way. In fact, even before Chomsky, researchers had suggested that there was a “critical period” for acquiring language. This concept has old roots. Sigmund Freud’s theories of the formative influence of very early sexual and socialization experiences on adult personality patterns and disorders have long provided a precedent for theories about the special nature of early experiences. Students of natural animal behaviors (ethologists) have provided numerous examples of special learning patterns in very young animals. One of the founding fathers of the field, Konrad Lorenz, demonstrated, for example, that newly hatched geese exhibited a very specialized rapid learning of the features of their caretaker, whether goose or human. This was called “imprinting,” and after they imprinted on a caretaker shortly after hatching, the birds exhibited an intense emotional attachment and would stay as close to the imprinted animal, person, or object as possible at all times. A more relevant example, discovered subsequently and still the subject of intense study, is the acquisition of local “dialects” of birdsong. Young songbirds learn the sound of their local variant of the species’ song shortly after hatching, and appear to use this as a sort of perceptual “template” against which to compare and match their own singing when they finally begin singing at puberty. Like imprinting, the acquisition of this perceptual exemplar of the local song occurs rapidly and during a specific brief stage of development. If no appropriate inputs are presented during this period in their lives, songbirds lose the ability fully to supplement what was not acquired, and their later behavior is significantly affected. They are sensitive to a very restricted class of inputs during a critical period when their ability to learn those details is greatly amplified. For this reason it is often called “prepared learning” or even “superlearning.”

The similarities to how children acquire language are obvious. In the context of otherwise poorly developed learning abilities, children show one glaring, time-dependent, island of competence for learning language. The ages that children tend to pass through corresponding stages of pre-language and language development are remarkably similar from individual to individual, despite very different rearing contexts, and young children’s acquisition of a second language tends to be more rapid and more complete than what most adults achieve. Children’s perceptual responses to speech sounds appear to become “committed” to features that are present in their first language by as early as the first year of life, and this tends to produce a permanent difficulty in distinguishing phonemes (individual sound elements of syllables) that they did not hear or produce during their childhood. Children who for some reason were deprived of the opportunity to learn a language when young, such as so-called feral or wild children raised in contexts with minimal human contact, appear to demonstrate considerable difficulty acquiring a normal language facility at older ages and tend to exhibit permanent language deficits. Finally, there have been numerous reports which demonstrate the difference in the effects of brain damage on the language abilities of younger versus adult patients. Even surgical removal of most of the left hemisphere, including regions that would later have become classic language areas of the brain, if done early in childhood, may not preclude reaching nearly normal levels of adult language comprehension and production. In contrast, even very small localized lesions of the left hemisphere language regions in older children and adults can produce massive and irrecoverable deficits. All these facts seem to provide powerful arguments for the existence of a specialized language acquisition device (LAD) deployed during a critical period in children’s development and later shut off. This seems like the obvious human counterpart to a songbird’s instinct to sing a particular type of song and rapidly acquire information about how to modify it during a special window of opportunity in early development.

However, the significance of these patterns may not be quite what it seems. We have seen how the grammatical and syntactic structures most commonly represented in languages may have been selected with respect to the constraint of children’s brains. Could a parallel inversion of the classic interpretations of these patterns of children’s development shed new light on this apparently critical period? A new clue to an alternative approach has again been provided by efforts to teach a languagelike communication system to chimpanzees.

The most advanced symbolic capabilities demonstrated by any nonhuman species to date appear to have developed almost by accident in a very young chimp named Kanzi.8 Kanzi, who is a bonobo or pygmy chimpanzee, as opposed to a common chimpanzee, joined the chimp language studies of Sue Savage-Rumbaugh and Duane Rumbaugh a few years after the studies involving the common chimps Sherman, Austin, and Lana summarized in Chapter 3. Kanzi developed the ability to communicate using the same visual lexigram system that Sherman and Austin were trained to use. But Kanzi has far outshined his predecessors. He is now capable not only of communicating symbolically with a lexigram keyboard but has also demonstrated sophisticated comprehension of normal spoken English, including the ability to analyze a variety of grammatical constructions. For example, Kanzi has demonstrated nearly 90 percent correct responses to novel, pragmatically anomalous, but syntactically correct requests to manipulate foods, object, or tools (“Put the soap on the apple”). This demonstrates that he is not merely using semantic analysis to guess at the meaning of the sentences. He even appears to have spontaneously regularized lexigram combinations to produce a minimal but consistent syntactic order in his output.9 These abilities alone pose a significant challenge for theories which argue that language abilities are unattainable without some innate knowledge to jump-start the analysis of grammar. But this is not what I want to focus on and is not the most devastating challenge Kanzi offers to the nativist, Chomskyan perspective. Although we might suspect that Kanzi’s more sophisticated abilities are a result of continual improvements in training methods as the experimenters have become more savvy at training chimps, in fact, Kanzi’s success cannot be attributed to experimental sophistication. Kanzi learned to understand speech and use lexigrams symbolically without explicit training.

Kanzi was raised by a foster mother, Matata. It was Matata who was the subject of the experimenters’ training efforts, while Kanzi was clinging to her and climbing on her during the process. In the end, Matata was a good foster mother but a very poor language learner. Kanzi, on the other hand, surprised everyone by demonstrating that all the while his mother was struggling in vain to figure out what these experimenters were on about, he was spontaneously, even vicariously, picking up on the game while playing and crawling about his mother and generally being more of a distraction than a participant. When the experimenters decided to turn their attention to him, at a point when they assumed he might now be old enough to be trainable, he showed them that he already knew most of what they were planning to teach him and more. The incidental student was far more adept than any previous chimpanzee at the language tasks explicitly posed to him for the first time, and he has continued to develop and use these abilities in the years since. So, whereas Sherman and Austin required very explicit and carefully structured training to overcome natural learning predispositions that worked against their discovery of the symbolic reference associations of the lexigrams they were taught, Kanzi avoided these cul-de-sacs and crossed the same cognitive threshold supported mostly by his own spontaneous structuring of the learning process.

There are two possible interpretations of Kanzi’s success. One is that it derives from a species (or subspecies) difference. Perhaps bonobos are just innately better at language-type tasks. Sue Savage-Rumbaugh has even suggested that bonobos in the wild might engage in spontaneous symbolic communication of a sort, though nothing quite so sophisticated and languagelike has yet been demonstrated. There is, however, a somewhat more conservative, easier to defend, and to my mind far more intriguing possibility. Kanzi learned better simply because he was so immature at the time. This possibility is more intriguing because of its implications for human language development and evolution. It forces us to turn our attention away from an essentialist perspective, focused on the contribution of something intrinsic to the species (i.e., an innate language competence or predisposition), and to pay attention to the relevance of maturational factors. If Kanzi benefited in symbol acquisition and in the development of speech comprehension as a result of his youth at the time of exposure, then he appears to exhibit a critical period effect, as though some special language-learning mechanism is activated at this time of life.

It is not surprising that the other chimps who have been trained in languagelike communication were not quite so immature. Compared to human infants, chimps are relatively mature at birth, roughly equivalent to a human child of one year of age, so the comparable age of peak acquisition in children would be just shortly after birth for a chimp. But like a human toddler, young chimps need to be constantly in the care of their mothers (or a very good substitute). There is another pragmatic reason why slightly older chimps were preferred. Previously, chimpanzee infants have been found to be rather poor at learning to perform complicated tasks, and so were assumed to be poor candidates for language training as well. Just like young children, they have poor memories for details, are extremely distractible and difficult to motivate, and they get bored easily. Of course, for children, this parallels an apparent advantage when it comes to language learning, and this seems to be the case for Kanzi as well. There are other ways in which Kanzi’s abilities resemble the patterns that children exhibit and which are characteristic of what we would consider to be critical period effects. Sue Savage-Rumbaugh notes (in personal communication) that Kanzi seems to have a far better sense of what is and is not relevant to symbolic and linguistic communication. He attends to the appropriate stimulus and context parameters whereas other chimps, trained at older ages, seem to need a lot of help just recognizing what to pay attention to. Lake a child attuned to the phonemes of the local language, Kanzi’s whole orientation seems to have been biased by this early experience.

But observing an apparent critical period effect in Kanzi and then inferring that some special language-learning mechanism is activated at this time of life ignores a troubling contradiction. The glaring problem with this explanation as applied to Kanzi is that chimps in the wild do not learn a language. So, there is no reason why Kanzi’s brain should have evolved a language-specific critical period adaptation. If the critical period effect is evidence of a language acquisition device, then why should an ape whose ancestors never spoke (and who himself can’t speak) demonstrate a critical period for language learning? Kanzi’s example throws a monkey wrench into the whole critical period argument as it applies to language acquisition in children. If early exposure to language is even part of the explanation for Kanzi’s comparatively exceptional language acquisition, then it must be attributable to something about infancy in general, irrespective of language. And, if some nonspecific feature of immaturity accounts for Kanzi’s remarkable success, then it must at least in part also account for human children’s abilities as well. But how?

In a famous paper produced shortly after Chomsky suggested that grammars might be unlearnable, a linguist-philosopher named Gold tried to provide a more rigorous proof of Chomsky’s argument.10 He provided a logical proof which concluded that, without explicit error correction, the rules of a logical system with the structural complexity of a natural language grammar could not be inductively discovered, even in theory. What makes them unlearnable, according to this argument, is not just their complexity but the fact that the rules are not directly mapped to the surface forms of sentences. They are instead embodied in widely distributed word relationships, and are applied to them recursively (i.e., rules are applied again and again to the results of their application). The result is that sentences exhibit hierarchic syntactic structures, in which layers of transformations become buried and implicit in the final product, and in which structural relationships between different levels can often produce word-sequence relationships that violate relationships that are appropriate within levels. From the point of view of someone trying to analyze sentence structure (such as a linguist or a young language learner), this has the effect of geometrically multiplying the possible hypothetical rules that must be tested before discovering the “correct” ones for the language. Without explicit error correction, an astronomical number of alternative mappings of word relationships to potential rules cannot be excluded, especially in the limited time that children appear to take to master their first language. Few contemporary theories rely on this argument alone to support claims of innate grammatical knowledge, but it has provided one of the clearest formulations of why natural language grammar should be exceedingly difficult to learn.

A critical factor in this argument is the way that learning is understood. Learning is construed in its most generic sense as logical induction. An induction process begins with a set of positive instances (a set of grammatical sentences) and derives the general rules that produce them by comparing their similarities. The hypothesized rules are thus only constrained by the statistical relationships implicit in the input strings.11 This logic has also been adapted to the language-learning problem in an intriguing discussion by the philosophers William Ramsey and Stephen Stich, who argue that even an empirical scientist with all the reasoning and analysis tools of modern science would be unable inductively to determine the rules of a language by analyzing a finite set of grammatical utterances.12 The number of possible variants of rule systems that could be induced from this sampling of utterances, even under a variety of simplifying conditions, makes it hopeless to test each in a limited time frame. They conclude that only by comparing against some independent and limited set of grammatical rules (such as the scientist’s own knowledge of Universal Grammar) would the scientist be able to succeed. But this logical problem may not quite match the pragmatic problem faced by real language learners. Grammatical rules allow one to predict which word combinations are and are not likely to convey unambiguous symbolic propositions in a language. To be able to do this is essential to successful communication. But inductively deriving grammatical rules isn’t the only way to arrive at this competence without relying on preformed hypotheses. Despite the statement that it applies to any empirical induction method, this way of posing the problem of what must be learned and how it may be learned is still overly restrictive.

Learning is not one process, but the outcome of many. The efficiency with which one learns something depends in part on the match between the learning process and the structure of the patterns to be learned. What provides efficient learning in one situation may be very inefficient in another. In the last chapter I argued that symbolic relationships themselves are difficult to learn because their structure violates expectations that are appropriate for more typical learning paradigms. Individual symbols are markers for points in a global pattern of relationships that are only quite indirectly reflected by individual instances. Consequently, attending to the surface details can actually be a disadvantage. The problem is similar for learning the logic of grammar and syntax, in large measure because these facets of language are also surface expressions of the deep web of symbolic relationships.

Recently, researchers from a number of cognitive science labs have taken a novel approach to the language-learnability problem, by exploring our assumptions about the kind of learning processes that are best suited for developing a skill as complex as using syntactically structured speech. The most fruitful approach to this seems to have come again from a somewhat counterintuitive inversion of common sense thinking about learning. This approach is summed up by the phrase “less is more,” suggested by Elissa Newport as a possible clue to an explanation of the paradoxical nature of child language learning.13 Like the innate grammar theorists, she was struck by this savantlike ability to learn something that seemed on the surface to be far more difficult than other things that children are unable to learn. For example, the younger the child, the more difficulty he or she has with tasks that require conscious memorization of novel associations. Not only is memory consolidation itself apparently less efficient in younger compared to older children, but both their distractibility and the brief span of their working memory contribute additional handicaps to explicit learning. This is reflected by our common sense practice of keeping children out of school until they are at least four to six years of age, because they are just not ready for explicit classroom instruction. Rather than concluding that this paradoxical ability proved that learning couldn’t account for children’s language acquisition ability, Newport wondered instead whether children’s learning limitations might actually be advantageous when it comes to language.

In this regard, Newport’s theory shares a similar logic to the language evolution arguments sketched above. Just as constraints affecting the sorts of errors in transmitting and reproducing bits of language can powerfully shape the patterns of language structure, so can constraints and biases in learning shape what is and is not learnable. In designing a learning device capable of learning the widest possible range of arbitrary associations, there might be an advantage in making it unbiased. But language is not just any system of association. As we have seen, its deep logic of associations, which derives from the indirect systemic logic of symbolic reference, is highly distributed and nonlocal, and the syntactic implementation of these relationships tends to form complicated hierarchic patterns. Computer and cognitive scientists have both come to recognize that this sort of distributed pattern recognition problem is easily capable of defeating “brute force” learning approaches, and requires, instead, some special tricks to focus learning at the right level of analysis and avoid cul-de-sacs created by false leads. Starting small and simple, with a learning process incapable of tackling the whole problem, might offer this sort of learning constraint. Following these clues, Newport and others have attempted to find independent support for the less-is-more intuition about language learning.

In a series of efforts to model the effect of different learning biases on language learning, many researchers have turned to neural network simulations. To understand these approaches, it is necessary to know at least superficially the way that neural networks “learn,” as well as a few details about the design of the specific type of neural network architectures that are most successful at language-learning simulations. Calling these model systems neural networks (neural nets, for short) is at best a very loose analogy. As the term implies, these computer models borrow some design features that we imagine to be crucial to information processes in brains. In fact, however, the vast majority of neural nets are programs that are “run” on the usual sorts of large, fast digital computers. It is the “virtual architecture” of the way these programs handle information that gives them their name and their interesting characteristics.



Figure 4.3 The basic logic of neural network simulations. A neural network can be a real electronic circuit made of physical nodes and connections, or, more often, a computer simulation of the behavior of such a device. A basic neural network consists of three “layers” of nodes (input, output, and hidden units) and the connections between them.

A. In this diagram circles represent nodes, lines represent connections between nodes, and the thickness of the lines represents differing connection strengths. Input values on input nodes (Is and Os) cause them to send an “on” or “off” signal to all hidden unit nodes (nodes with no direct links to input or output) they are connected to, which affect the values on these units according to the strength of the connection. Training a network requires using output consequences to strengthen or weaken connections (shown by different thickness lines) between nodes in such a way that it correlates with success or failure to predict “correct” associations.

B. In order to produce predictions of future sequences, a recurrent network design can be used which reenters previous values of the hidden units into subsequent stages of processing. This was the sort of network design used by Jeff Elman for a grammar-predicting network (see text). Elman’s “simple recurrent net” design includes multiple levels of hidden units, as well as feedback of past hidden unit information which provides a sort of “memory” input to modulate the immediate input.

Neural nets are composed of simple elements (nodes) that respond in simple ways (e.g., turning on or off) to their inputs, and connections between nodes that convey signals indicating the states of other nodes (see Figure 4.3). The nodes are the analogues of neurons and the connections are the analogues of the axons and dendrites through which neurons are linked. The operation of a neural net is determined by each node’s “reading” the signals on its input connections from other nodes, and, using some very simple input-output transformation rule, producing a signal that is sent out through its output connections to other nodes. To create a network capable of interesting behaviors, a large number of nodes are connected together, often in semi-randomly specified and highly interconnected patterns. In addition, some nodes are connected to external input signals and others to external output registers. Those not connected directly to either inputs or outputs are called “hidden units.” The function of the net is determined by the global patterning of signals from output nodes with respect to the patterns presented to input nodes. These input-pattern to output-pattern relationships are thus mediated via the patterning of signals distributed through the web of interconnections that link output to input nodes, by way of the intervening hidden nodes, and not by the state or activity of any individual node.

What makes the behavior of such nets interesting, and similar to their biological counterparts, is that they can be set up so that all connections between nodes can be modified with respect to their correlation to certain input-output patterns. If individual “connection strengths” can be adjusted to weaken or strengthen the effect of one node on another, the net’s behavior can be progressively adapted to fit a given rule linking input patterns to output patterns. This is the analogue to training and learning. There is an almost unlimited range of possible strategies for organizing and training nets. All share the common logic of modifying the local connection with respect to some index of global behavior. Over the course of many trials with many inputs, the performance of a net can thus be trained to converge on a given target set of input-output relationships. The network becomes progressively adapted to produce a given set of behaviors as a result of an incremental and indirect selection of certain minimal design elements.

Trained neural networks exhibit remarkable pattern recognition abilities, something that is difficult to program digital computers to do using top-down approaches with step-by-step instructions for analysis. Networks trained to “categorize” one set of stimuli (i.e., respond similarly to them) will often also produce this response when presented with novel stimuli similar to those on which they were trained. In other words, they are capable of (susceptible of) something like stimulus generalization. This property is also reflected in their response to “damage.” If one were to cut a handful of connections or pull a chip out of a digital computer at random, or even just insert nonsense strings into a program running on it (as periodically happens when disk information gets corrupted), the inevitable outcome is catastrophic failure: a “crash,” as computer vernacular describes it. In contrast, if a trained network is damaged by randomly eliminating nodes or connections, its behavior seldom fails in an all-or-none fashion. Instead, the performance of a damaged neural net degrades incrementally as the extent of the damage is increased. This, too, is reminiscent of the way nervous systems appear to behave in response to damage, and demonstrates that the analogy is not entirely superficial.

The essence of these behaviors lies in the way these nets distribute the information they embody within all parts of the whole. Such a global representation of information has often been compared to a hologram (a laser-light interference “photograph” that produces a three-dimensional image when viewed from different angles, examples of which can now be found on most credit cards). Holograms “contain” multiple views of a three-dimensional image. Which perspective is visible depends on the angle at which the hologram is viewed. Even when only a fragment of the original remains, there is some angle at which it can be viewed to see the imaged object, though the smaller the fragment, the more limited the perspectives viewable.14 In a neural network, the relationship that maps input to output is decomposed into minute facets of the whole that are distributed throughout the net and are literally embodied in its connectional logic. Since the input-output relationship is in effect computed by the whole network, it is called parallel distributed processing (PDP) of information.

One of the pioneers in applying this approach to language learning problems is Jeff Elman of the University of California at San Diego.15 He and his colleagues used a modification of neural net design in order to create a net that was able to learn to predict sequentially presented patterns, not just categorize static ones. For this, his nets needed something analogous to short-term memory in order to represent the immediate past and future states to the present state of the net. He accomplished this using an architecture called a recurrent net, in which the past states of the hidden units were reentered as additional inputs to these same units at subsequent stages of processing. This allowed him to translate the syntax-learning problem into a predictive mapping of past sequences to future sequences of inputs. Given an incomplete series of inputs, the net would be required to predict which output should most likely follow; more specifically, given a partial sentence, it would predict which word should most likely follow according to English grammar and syntax. The inputs he fed into the net consisted of a corpus of simple sentences, in which different words were encoded as distinct strings of 0s and 1s (in other words, meanings were treated as irrelevant). The training consisted in comparing predicted next “words” with actual next words, and then modifying network connection strengths according to how each contributed to correct predictions.

A fully trained net that could make correct predictions for novel sentences (analogous to stimulus generalization) would necessarily embody aspects of the statistical structure of English grammar and syntax in its architecture, even though it would not contain any semantic information.16 If a net could be trained to do this as well as a person, it would indicate two things: (1) that the statistics of the relationships between grammatical classes of words in the training strings contained sufficient structure from which to recover grammatical regularities; and (2) that these regularities were learnable in some form without explicit (rule-based) error correction.

Elman showed that recurrent nets were indeed capable of extrapolating what they learned from a set of kernel sentences used in training to novel kernel sentences composed of the same words.17 However, when trained with sentences that were only a bit more complicated, the recurrent nets failed to learn. As soon as recursive structures were introduced (e.g., embedded clauses or structural transformations), which had the effect of separating and inverting simple contiguity relationships between words as found in kernel sentences, no amount of training seemed to converge towards predictability. Up to this point, the experiment exemplified Gold’s theorem.

Elman realized that this problem was a variant of something commonly observed in other neural net experiments. Neural nets often tend to converge on suboptimal solutions to complex mapping problems that provide only weak predictability, because they get attracted by local patterns that “obscure” more global ones. They can get stuck in suboptimal response “basins” (sort of like statistical potholes in the learning landscape) because training produces only incremental changes, which can only converge on a solution if closer approximations provide ever-increasing predictive accuracy. Learnability, then, depends on a certain match between the learning algorithm and the structure of the problem, so that optimal solutions are found in the “vicinity” of local solutions. Apparently, natural language syntax and simple conditional learning processes don’t match in this way. Indeed, a variety of learning problems show this same nonlocality feature, and thereby defeat many otherwise powerful learning paradigms. In general, solving them requires recoding the inputs in such a way as to reduce the distributed character of the associations.18 Preventing neural nets from getting trapped in learning potholes can sometimes be accomplished by introducing “noise” into the net to disrupt convergence toward weakly predictive states, and forcing a wider “sampling” of possible solutions, or else by introducing biases against features that are common only to suboptimal solutions, if there are any.

Elman employed both strategies to aid his nets in overcoming this difficulty. First, he found that staged training, starting with an initial set of simple sentences followed later by training with sets of more complex sentences, could produce nets eventually able to predict complex syntax. The early restricted training essentially provided enough of a biased sample of within-clause relationships to minimize the training influence of exceptions produced by higher-order between-clause relationships. Second, he found that by randomly disrupting recurrent inputs (essentially degrading the short-term memory) during early training, then gradually decreasing this “noise,” the net could learn complex syntax from a corpus of complex sentences presented right from the beginning. At early stages of learning, the net would essentially be unable to retain a trace of local regularities long enough to produce any persistent changes in structure; but more global regularities of the input would be more redundantly represented throughout the net, and so would produce weak but consistent changes in structure. When the net eventually was made capable of retaining a trace of local associative relationships, it was already biased against incorporating information from those that violated the large-scale statistics of word associations. Though Elman describes this pattern of learning as “starting small,” it is probably more accurate to describe it as “starting crude”; it is more like interpreting a visual image by starting with a very blurred version of the whole and then progressively resolving individual details, than like trying to assemble many independent close-up views of the image at fine detail into a complete picture. Both of Elman’s incremental learning strategies effectively partitioned the learning processes so that learning to predict patterns at one level of structure was partially decoupled from learning to predict patterns at other levels. By structuring the learning process so that certain aspects of the problem could not be learned from the outset, he prevented the learning of relationships that are employed at different levels of language structure from interfering with one another.

This simulation thus demonstrated that it was possible to design a device that could learn to predict grammatically correct sentence structure in a purely inductive fashion, given nothing more than a corpus of positive examples of allowable texts—exactly what the UG theorists had said was impossible. The key to accomplishing what many had “proved” was impossible was to structure the learning process differently at different stages of learning. What was available for learning at early stages was “filtered” (either by the training sequence or by the competence of the net), so that only some aspects of the input were available at any time. This set up learning biases that just happened to correspond with crucial structural features of the problem space. Although the information embodied in this incremental learning strategy was extrinsic to the language data presented to the net, it was far less explicit than a Universal Grammar, or indeed any specific grammatical information. There is no difficulty imagining how such generic constraints could happen to be available to support the learning of grammatical speech. Although critics might argue that such a simulation hardly demonstrates the ability consistently to generalize this finite statistical “knowledge” of grammar to the theoretically infinite variety of possible grammatical sentences that would be specifiable by a set of grammatical rules, and indeed that it doesn’t demonstrate induction of rules of grammar at all, it does show how important the structure of the learning process is to what can and cannot be learned. More important, it suggests that the structure of language and the way that it must be learned are linked. What may be essentially inaccessible under quite general learning conditions may become more accessible under more limited conditions.

This provides some novel clues about why children might be more facile language learners than adults and why early language experience might have aided Kanzi’s access to language as well. Being unable to remember the details of specific word associations, being slow to map words to objects that tend to co-occur in the same context, remembering only the most global structure-function relationships of utterances, and finding it difficult to hold more than a few words of an utterance in short-term memory at a time may all be advantages for language learning. This is the proposal that Elman and Newport each offers to counter the strong nativist alternative. Precisely because of children’s learning constraints, the relevant large-scale logic of language “pops out” of a background of other details too variable for them to follow, and paradoxically gives them a biased head start. Children cannot tell the trees apart at first, but they can see the forest and eventually the patterns of growth within it emerge.

The co-evolutionary argument that maps languages onto children’s learning constraints can be generalized one step further to connect to the most basic problem of language acquisition: decoding symbolic reference. Symbolic associations are preeminent examples of highly distributed relationships that are only very indirectly reflected in the correlative relationships between symbols and objects. As was demonstrated in the last chapter, this is because symbolic reference is indirect, based on a system of relationships among symbol tokens that recodes the referential regularities between their indexical links to objects. Symbols are easily utilized when the system-to-system coding is known, because at least superficial analysis can be reduced to a simple mapping problem, but it is essentially impossible to discover the coding given only the regularities of word-object associations. As in other distributed pattern-learning problems, the problem in symbol learning is to avoid getting attracted to learning potholes—tricked into focusing on the probabilities of individual sign-object associations and thereby missing the nonlocal marginal probabilities of symbol-symbol regularities. Learning even a simple symbol system demands an approach that postpones commitment to the most immediately obvious associations until after some of the less obvious distributed relationships are acquired. Only by shifting attention away from the details of word-object relationships is one likely to notice the existence of superordinate patterns of combinatorial relationships between symbols, and only if these are sufficiently salient is one likely to recognize the buried logic of indirect correlations and shift from a direct indexical mnemonic strategy to an indirect symbolic one.

In this way, symbol learning in general has many features that are similar to the problem of learning the complex and indirect statistical architecture of syntax. This parallel is hardly a coincidence, because grammar and syntax inherit the constraints implicit in the logic of symbol-symbol relationships. These are not, in fact, separate learning problems, because systematic syntactic regularities are essential to ease the discovery of the combinatorial logic underlying symbols. The initial stages of the symbolic shift in mnemonic strategies almost certainly would be more counterintuitive for a quick learner, who learns the details easily, than for a somewhat impaired learner, who gets the big picture but seems to lose track of the details. In general, then, the initial shift to reliance on symbolic relationships, especially in a species lacking other symbol-learning supports, would be most likely to succeed if the process could be shifted to as young an age as possible. The evolution of symbolic communication systems has therefore probably been under selection for early acquisition from the beginning of their appearance in hominid communication. So it is no surprise that the optimal time for beginning to discover grammatical and syntactic regularities in language is also when symbolic reference is first discovered. However, the very advantages that immature brains enjoy in their ability to make the shift from indexical to symbolic referential strategies also limit the detail and complexity of what can be learned. Learning the details becomes possible with a maturing brain, but one that is less spontaneously open to such “insights.” This poses problems for brain-language co-evolution that will occupy much of the rest of the book in one form or other. How do symbolic systems evolve structures that are both capable of being learned and yet capable of being highly complex? And how have human learning and language-use predispositions evolved to support these two apparently contrary demands?

Elissa Newport was one of the first to suggest that we should not necessarily think of children’s learning proficiency in terms of the function of a special language-learning system. She suggests that the relationship might be reversed. Language structures may have preferentially adapted to children’s learning biases and limitations because languages that are more easily acquired at an early age will tend to replicate more rapidly and with greater fidelity from generation to generation than those that take more time or neurological maturity to be mastered. As anyone who has tried to learn a second language for the first time as an adult can attest, one’s first language tends to monopolize neural-cognitive resources in ways that make it more difficult for other languages to “move in” and ever be quite as efficient. Consequently, strong social selection forces will act on language regularities to reduce the age at which they can begin to be learned. Under constant selection pressure to be acquirable at ever earlier and earlier stages in development, the world’s surviving languages have all evolved to be learnable at the earliest age possible. Languages may thus be more difficult to learn later in life only because they evolved to be easier to learn when immature. The critical period for language learning may not be critical or time limited at all, but a mere “spandrel,”19 or incidental feature of maturation, that just happened to be coopted in languages’ race to colonize ever younger brains.

So immaturity itself may provide part of the answer to the paradoxical time-limited advantage for language learning that Kanzi demonstrates. Kanzi’s immaturity made it easier to make the shift from indexical to symbolic reference and to learn at least the global grammatical logic hidden behind the surface structure of spoken English. But equally important is the fact that both the lexigram training paradigms used with his mother and the structure of English syntax itself had evolved in response to the difficulties this imposes, and so had spontaneously become more conducive to the learning patterns of immature minds. The implications of Kanzi’s advantages are relevant to human language acquisition as well, because if his prodigious abilities are not the result of engaging some special time-limited language acquisition module in his nonhuman brain, then such a critical period mechanism is unlikely to provide the explanation for the language prescience of human children either. The existence of a critical period for language learning is instead the expression of the advantageous limitations of an immature nervous system for the kind of learning problem that language poses. And language poses the problem this way because it has specifically evolved to take advantage of what immaturity provides naturally. Not being exposed to language while young deprives one of these learning advantages and makes both symbolic and syntactic learning far more difficult. Though older animals and children may be more cooperative, more attentive, have better memories, and in general may be better learners of many things than are toddlers, they gain these advantages at the expense of symbolic and syntactic learning predispositions. This is demonstrated by many celebrated “feral” children who, over the years, have been discovered after they grew up isolated from normal human discourse. Their persistent language limitations attest not to the turning off of a special language instinct but to the waning of a nonspecific language-learning bias.

This may also be responsible for another curiously biased language phenomenon that linguists have taken as evidence for innate knowledge of language structure: the transition from pidgin languages to creole languages. Pidgins are forced hybrids of languages that have arisen in response to the “collision” of languages, typically arising as a result of colonization or trade relationships. They are not the primary language of anyone and often have enjoyed a very transient history, typically disappearing within a generation or so. They are like makeshift collections of language fragments from both languages that are used as a common translation bridge that is mutually understandable. But during recorded history, a number of populations have also evolved new languages directly from pidgins, which differ from either “parent” language. Such “creole” languages appear to be able to originate quite rapidly—within as little as one or two generations—especially when a population finds itself transported and isolated in a new context, such as periodically occurred as a result of the slave trade of the past few centuries. What is even more remarkable, according to the linguist Derek Bickerton, is that the syntactic structures of different creole languages often appear to be more similar to one another than to the languages that spawned them, despite being isolated in different parts of the world.20 For example, they all tend to be minimally inflected, use particles to replace tense markers, use repetition in place of adjectives and adverbs, and have restricted word order.

Historically, linguists dismissed such similarities as a result of comparing simplified languages, like comparing the syntax of newspaper headlines, or as a result of coincidental similarities between the languages involved, or just coincidences resulting from the limited numbers of major syntactic alternatives available. But most contemporary comparative linguists have come to recognize that the coincidences are real and too numerous to be explained by spontaneous parallelisms. This has suggested to some that these similarities are evidence for a single historical origin (possibly from the early Mediterranean pidgin, Sabir, carried by the first Portuguese explorers). This explanation seems no less incredible to other linguists, however, because of the separate eras and great distances involved, the lack of Portuguese contact in many cases, and the fact that the local pidgins and creoles exhibit specific roots directly traceable to the colonial English, French, Spanish, Portuguese, etc., spoken by colonists in these areas. Moreover, pidgins and creoles that have developed without European influence also appear to share these features.21 In response to the implausibility of both alternatives, Bickerton interprets such similarities as evidence for an innate grammatical template reasserting itself in each case. But I think there is an intermediate alternative suggested by the co-evolutionary approach, which parallels Bickerton’s approach in the same way that the co-evolutionary theory of child language acquisition parallels the UG approach.

Creolization occurs when children are exposed to a pidgin as their first and only language and so reflects the ways that these young minds reinterpret a partial symbolic system as though it were complete. In this regard, I follow Bickerton in suggesting that the similarities between creoles reflect how children spontaneously fill in what is missing and recategorize what is given. As such, these similarities provide a special opportunity to view the distorted mirror through which children view language, and so offer an insight into what children normally bring to the problem. Instead of reflecting a built-in knowledge of grammar, however, I think the similarities between create generic learning constraints that nonetheless strongly bias what is learned and what is spontaneously “invented.”

Given children’s constrained learning abilities, which force them to employ a top-down global-to-specific reconstruction of the language presented to them, they are initially forced to ignore many details present in the input in their effort to decode the basis of its symbolic reference—the first and most basic demand they face. This may help to explain certain biased choices that seem to be consistently made in creolization, as well as in normal language development. For example, early recognition of global representational relationships, necessary to discover the symbolic reference of words and phrases, and an inability to track local word-association patterns, lead young children to initially treat many phrases as unanalyzed wholes or else to ignore all but the most salient elements relevant to their symbolic analysis of meaning and reference. Normally, subsequent maturation of learning abilities enables children to later pick up the word-association patterns buried within phrases that previously escaped their notice, and this forces a recoding with respect to within-phrase structure. This is constrained, however, by their previous symbolic commitment to global phrase relationships, and biases them to seek out subordinate symbolic functions for these later combinatorial patterns. This may be the bias that favors the hierarchic phrase structure reflected in both acquisition and evolution of languages. So, how might this also help to explain commonalities in creolization? The constraints of the acquisition process are similar irrespective of whether the input is a full-blown language or a pidgin, except that in the latter case there will be insufficient variety of phrase structures to force within-phrase dissection of elements. As a result, whole phrase units may become crystallized as wordlike units, modifiers will be minimally dissected from phrases, and the lack of grammatical morphemes that ensues will tend to be compensated by syntactic operations instead. These limitations would naturally lead to a minimally inflected, constrained word-order language, as is characteristic of most creoles and well-developed pidgins. So we have come full circle. Not only does it appear that languages have evolved to take advantage of the learning biases of children, but to whatever extent prior language input is impoverished, it appears that these learning biases tend to reshape language to fit. Universal (i.e., convergent) trends emerge either way in the absence of a specific preexisting plan, whether in the input or in the mind.

This strategy of employing learning handicaps as a means of overcoming certain learning difficulties also has considerable generality beyond symbols, grammar, and syntax. It may, for example, offer an insight into the remarkable sparing of certain special learning abilities exhibited by so-called idiot savants. Individuals who may be mentally handicapped in other ways sometimes show geniuslike abilities in very restricted domains of cognition—often quite specific “talents,” such as lightning calculation abilities, prodigious musical talent, or artistic-spatial skills. This has led some to speculate that these individuals possess some special modular “organ” or “instinct” for such talents. Brains have evolved to be able to employ many different learning strategies at different times and in different circumstances and these strategies are often competitive with one another in their recruitment of neural resources. This is why a severe impairment affecting one learning strategy can inadvertently provide a release of resources to some other complementary, or mutually exclusive, learning strategy.

In summary, I have argued that the underlying source of each of the apparent paradoxes of language learning is a misleading assumption that learning is a one-dimensional process, in which a collection of individual memories is built up bit by bit, like adding items to a list, and in which general rules can only be derived by inductive generalizations from a finite set of instances. This blinkered view of learning has limited both our understanding of the nature of symbolic reference and our analysis of how children acquire competence in producing a symbolic system that is structured like a hierarchic rule-governed logical system. Both what is learned and the context in which something is learned may have characteristic invariant features that can be incorporated into learning strategies to increase the compatibility between the learning and the learned. Specific learning handicaps are examples from this more general class of learning biases. Biases affecting how often and when different learning strategies are employed or withheld can radically change what can be learned and how easy or difficult it is to learn it.

Immaturity of the brain is a learning handicap that greatly aids language acquisition. Despite its counterintuitive symbolic basis, however, immaturity is not the whole explanation for the human language capacity. It is only, in a way, an evolutionary afterthought that has arisen as languages have adapted to take advantage of their host organisms’ natural biases. The simple fact that other species experience nearly insurmountable difficulties with even simple language learning, and even when immature, demonstrates that significant modifications of the human brain during our evolution additionally enable us to overcome these same difficulties. One might be tempted to call such neural predispositions a “language instinct,” as Steven Pinker suggests, because these predispositions are both innate and universal, and because they determine that we alone find linguistic communication natural. But this tends to be interpreted in terms of a false dichotomy that has deeply confused research into the basis for language. It is misleading to imagine that what is innate in our language abilities is anything like foreknowledge of language or its structures. Rather than a language organ or some instinctual grammatical knowledge, what sets human beings apart is an innate bias for learning in a way that minimizes the cognitive interference that other species encounter when attempting to discover the logic behind symbolic reference—a bias that is far more intense and ubiquitous than mere immaturity.

Thinking of our mental difference in these terms provides a crucial clue to the mystery of human brain evolution. Just as incomplete differentiation of neural circuitry can be responsible for the helpful learning biases of young children, and congenital brain abnormalities are likely responsible for the learning biases of idiot savants, differences in the global organization of human brains are likewise responsible for the more extensive learning biases that help human children alone among species surmount the symbolic threshold and learn an immensely complex language. So instead of looking for neural language modules, or postulating some global increase in general learning abilities, we need to begin to think of human brain evolution in terms of changes that could have produced certain biases in how we tend to learn. But the relevant biases must be unlike those of any other species, and exaggerated in peculiar ways, given the unusual nature of symbolic learning. Such unprecedented differences in human brain function must be supported by equally unprecedented differences in human brain structure. Discovering how these two radical departures from the general pattern correspond to one another will likely provide important insights concerning the design principles behind global brain functions.
