CHAPTER FIVE


The Size of Intelligence


When an idea is wanting, a word can always be found to take its place.

—Goethe





A Gross Misunderstanding


Having identified a previously unrecognized cognitive problem that is the cause of the language-learning barrier, we can now turn our attention back to the mystery of human evolution charged with a new aim: to determine what happened to human brains to make it possible for our ancestors to break through this barrier. If the symbol-learning problem is the threshold that separates us from other species, then there must be something unusual about human brains that helps to surmount it. This one-of-a-kind difference ought to be readily apparent, but only if we know what to look for. Part of the problem is that something else which appears more obviously relevant has captured our attention, and like the too obviously guilty suspect in a murder mystery, this one fact about human brains is the perfect distraction causing us to miss the pattern of more subtle clues.

Despite the glaring fact that the relationships between brain structure and brain function are still poorly understood, many feel that the explanation for the exceptional nature of human mental abilities is known—in fact, that it has been known for a century! The answer can be found in almost every textbook on human origins and in most popular books and magazine articles about the mind and brain. According to these sources, it is a well-established fact that the human brain is a better, more powerful computing device than any other species’ brain because it is proportionately bigger and can process and retain more information. As a result of this greater mental capacity, humans can build more sophisticated mental models of the world, solve more complicated social and survival problems, and learn to communicate with more complicated signal systems (e.g., language). The idea that human beings’ encephalization—the extent to which we have large brains for a primate our size—is so much a part of our culture that it has essentially achieved the status of unquestioned fact. It has become synonymous with the definition of what it means to have humanlike mental abilities to the extent that even science fiction caricatures of “advanced” alien species are portrayed with oversize brains.

The accepted view can be reduced to a simple phrase: “Bigger is smarter.” Well, almost. Researchers do not all agree on how best to measure the effective size increase—whether absolute size or some measure of relative size is most relevant (a problem we will return to shortly)—but there is broad agreement that some measure of human brain expansion will be found to be the primary correlate of our increased mental abilities. All that seems left to determine is exactly how the increase in the one translates into increase in the other. Most researchers believe that they know what the answer should be; it’s just that they are not quite sure how to derive it from the evidence.

Though there is undoubtedly some correspondence between the size of a brain and its capabilities, I suspect that it is far less obvious than we tend to imagine. There are two critical errors hidden in these flattering assumptions. First is the notion that either brain size or intelligence can be usefully treated as a unitary linear trait, and second that the relative quantity of brain tissue compared to nonbrain tissue in the body somehow correlates with something like the relative amount of uncommitted computational power. Together, these presumptions have blinded us to innumerable other features of brain evolution and differences in brain function related to issues of scale. An understanding of the relationship between human brain size and language abilities has been one of the major casualties.

The presumed relationship between brain size and intelligence is an intuitively compelling idea. It has produced a century of ideologically motivated studies of the relationship to genius and criminality, ignited acrimonious debates about how best to measure these variables, and generated hundreds of papers examining the potential behavioral and ecological correlates of brain size from every conceivable aspect. Still, after more than a century of rethinking the possibilities, theories about the function of brain size remain in a state of continuous flux. This is not because we haven’t yet discovered what intelligence is good for. Everyone agrees that more intelligence should be good for any number of things, and almost every conceivable use for more intelligence has been suggested in some theory to explain why human brains are large. But that’s just the trouble. With such a vague and general answer already assumed, it is hard to phrase the research question clearly enough to be able to rule out spurious correlations. What if brain size is not a single trait, but a reflection of many possible complex internal changes in brain organization, each of which has quite different functional consequences? And what if mental functions reflect a delicate balance of many complementary and competing learning, perceiving, and behavioral biases, not just a single “capacity”?

Indeed, we shouldn’t be surprised to find out that nature has not been straightforward in its design of brains. The brain is by far the most complex organ of the body, and one whose outward appearance provides little hint of its functional organization. Brains don’t do only one thing, and different brain functions are not uniformly distributed throughout the brain. If human brain size is a complex trait, enfolding numerous deeper changes in brain structure and function, then all the correlative studies looking for what might have caused brains to grow may be pointless mathematical exercises, and the differences in neural architecture that make the difference in human cognitive abilities will continue to elude us. We can’t afford to assume that the human brain is just bigger, and put all our efforts toward discovering what selected for its size. We need to look deeper.

My own perspective has also been well stated by Ralph Holloway of Columbia University, one of the pioneering figures in the analysis of fossil hominid brain casts. He wonders in dismay at the forest of comparative brain size studies that seem oblivious to the likely possibility that neither intelligence nor brain size is a simple trait. How can we imagine, he asks, that the brain is some “unitary organ with a simple behavioral task to accomplish such as ‘intelligence,’ ‘language,’ ‘adaptive behavior,’ or any other such pedagogical fig leaf to cover our ignorance about how the brain evolved?”1 If a unique function (language), global assessment of function capacity (intelligence), and the crudest possible measure of brain structure (size) have anything to do with each other, it will probably be discovered in the neurobiological details and not in global extrapolations from these most superficial features.

In the preceding chapters we encountered a series of paradoxical results suggesting that the language-learning problem is not just difficult, it is counterintuitive, in the deepest sense of that word. Both the hierarchic-recursive logic of sentence structure and the distributed multilevel associative relationships that support symbolic reference are essentially unlearnable by “brute force” information-processing approaches. This explains why even simple languages are nearly impossible for nonhuman brains to learn—not because of other species’ limited learning abilities, but because their intrinsic learning biases undermine the process before it can even get started. The point was driven home by the fact that the learning handicaps of immature brains may actually be beneficial for some aspects of language learning. But these odd results do not fit easily into a bigger-is-smarter interpretation of the crucial human mental difference. Evolving a more powerful learning device is not the solution to the language-learning problem. This suggests that some critical distinctions may have been missed by assessing the evolution of human intelligence in global terms.

And yet there is no escaping the fact that human brains are unusually large, in both absolute and relative terms. Any story about human brain evolution that does not incorporate this fact ignores a major clue to the mystery of the human difference. The question is not whether brain size is an important correlate of human brain evolution. It is. It is not whether our unusually large brains and the differences in our cognitive abilities are somehow linked. They undoubtedly are. The question is: What other changes in brain organization correlate with this global change in brain size, and what are their functional consequences? We can be certain that something having to do with the sizes of brain structures is central to the origins of the human mind, but what? To answer this, we need to get some general idea of how quantitative changes affect brain functions.

There are two aspects of the size question that need to be addressed. First, exactly how is this change in size distributed within the human brain? Is it global, like enlarging a photograph; is it an extrapolation from a more complicated trend exhibited in many other species as well; does it only include certain limited parts of the brain? Determining which of these options is the case is more difficult than one might suspect. Second, what are the possible ways that differences in the size of the brain or its parts can influence its functions? For this we have little more than crude analogies to go on. Few neuroscientists have seriously investigated this question, except in the most general way. There are many dimensions of size-correlated effects that we might need to consider before we determine that we understand the significance of the human example. Larger brain structures may mean more storage capacity or discriminatory ability, but they may also mean changes in rate of processing, changes in relative excitatory or inhibitory influence over other linked systems, or a difference in intrinsic signal production tendencies (like longer periodicity of cyclic activities). How can we be sure we know which is most relevant? But there is an even more basic problem: size is not so simple as it appears. The question is always “large or small with respect to what?”

As large-brained apes on the top rung of the ladder of biological progress and perfectibility—or so we like to think—we habitually rank people’s mental abilities for various purposes, in work, school, and casual conversations. We naturally feel comfortable ranking other species this way as well. Assessing intelligence has become a widely used tool for deciding who should and should not be able to do all manner of things, from play quarterback to enter medical school. We assume that we all have a certain amount of intelligence, like height, and that it can be measured and compared from person to person. Since intelligence seems to change little if at all over one’s lifetime, we assume that it has a fixed value determined very early in life. We have devised tests to measure this computational power, IQ tests, and we encourage the gatekeepers in our society—school administrators and employers, among others—to wield them freely. We cannot begin to measure what we gain and lose thereby, just as we cannot isolate exactly what intelligence is. But the comparatively large size of human brains seems to provide a satisfying confirmation that the amount of mental ability one has is related to the amount of tissue one devotes to producing it.

Assessing the human brain size difference is not just a matter of comparing weights, volumes, or even neuron numbers. The question is, what do we want to know about this difference? Just size? Our brains are not the biggest, nor do they have the most neurons or connections. Elephants and whales are vying for that honor. We do have large brains for our bodies, but in simple ratio terms mice are more brainy. Exactly how most usefully to assess brain size is not obvious, and it turns out that the same problems surface in this analysis whether we are considering the brain as a whole or the sizes of its parts. Perhaps we can gain a clearer idea of the problem by considering some less complex organ system as an analogy. A good candidate is body musculature.

Larger muscles are capable of generating more force, a larger heart is capable of pumping more blood per minute, and a larger gland is able to synthesize more hormone in a given period of time. By analogy, a larger brain should be capable of greater computing power, of processing more information per second, and of producing more complex mental representations and communications than smaller brains. If the brain secreted thought as a gland secretes hormones, then this might make sense, but it doesn’t. There are some ways in which such quantitative analogies can help make sense of differences in brain functions, but also many ways in which they can be misleading.

Even though a large animal with greater total muscle mass can exert more force with its limbs than a smaller one, it may not be able to jump proportionately higher or run proportionately faster as a result. Larger bodies need more muscle mass to move them with the same facility as smaller ones. This is essentially the difference between gross strength and net strength. Gross strength probably correlates well with total muscle mass, but net strength depends on many other factors. The amount of weight one can lift is a fair predictor of gross muscle mass. Larger bodies with larger muscle mass can lift heavier weights. Certain athletic performances and exercises—the standing broad jump, pull-ups, and push-ups, for example—provide indices of net strength of certain muscles with respect to body mass as a whole. The number of sit-ups or pull-ups one can perform does not favor large over small individuals, but rather those whose abdominal or arm muscles, respectively, are most developed in comparison to the rest of their bodies.

This emphasizes one crucial difference between gross and net strength. There is only one measure of gross strength, but there are innumerable different measures of net strength, even for a single individual. This is because net strength is a comparison of part to whole. Any particular measure of net strength depends entirely on what part is being compared to the whole. Having greater net leg strength for body mass might produce a longer long jump, while having greater arm strength might produce a greater number of pull-ups. But these two net results are to some extent mutually exclusive. Increasing the one decreases the other. And even though by combining results from a large number of diverse physical tests, one might be able to arrive at a single value with which to compare individual athletes (which might provide an assessment of muscle to fat content), it would miss most of the relevant and interesting aspects of net strength and would have only modest predictive power for sports abilities.

Analogous arguments apply to size-function relationships of the brain. The amount of brain tissue an animal posesses is probably proportional to something like gross information storage and processing capacity, but assessing net brain power is far more problematic, and there may be no one best measure. Psychologists have long argued over this implicit problem with respect to intelligence tests. But the problem reappears in only slightly modified form for brain size issues or brain structure size comparisons. Something about human brain size almost certainly is the clue to the human cognitive difference, so to solve this mystery we must first sort out this gross/net problem, even if in the end we conclude that, like muscle strength, there is no single answer possible.

Whether gross or net strength is important depends on the context. Often both are important in different aspects of an activity and both may interact to determine performance in complicated ways. For most behavioral purposes net strength is probably more significant than gross strength, since it correlates with locomotor capabilities and postural support. Nevertheless, there will be some adaptations for which gross strength will be far more important. It is crucial for certain kinds of foraging where some threshold amount of force is necessary to gain access to food. Some nuts and seeds, for example, are protected by strong shells; only species with jaw muscles of sufficient gross strength (and appropriate teeth) will be capable of cracking them. Physical combat can also select for increasing gross strength with respect to net strength. Highly sexually dimorphic species, in which (typically) males physically compete with one another for territories or mates, are good examples. The more intense the physical combat, the greater the disparity in physical size between males and females. Selection for greater gross strength can be achieved by increased total size, if the costs in net strength are of less importance. So extending this analogy to the problem of brain size, we first need to understand the difference between gross and net information processing.

The idea that natural selection is driven by use or disuse of an organ has a long and influential history in evolutionary thinking. Nineteenth-century evolutionists took it for granted that habitual use of an organ, over many generations, could bring about evolution to develop and enlarge it, and that organs that were not used would eventually become reduced or vestigial. The presumed correlation of use with the evolutionary enlargement or reduction of organs is, even now, seldom questioned. Large size means more used; small size means less used. Obvious examples spring to mind in the shapes of animal bodies. A kangaroo’s large hind limbs reflect selection for their specialized form of locomotion, whereas its small forelimbs reflect their evolutionary disuse as a means of support. The analogy between the effects of exercise on muscle size during the lifetime and during evolutionary time appears to be straightforward. Indeed, natural selection theory borrowed this conception of use and disuse from Lamarckian theories, based on the inheritance of acquired characteristics, where exercise was thought directly to alter genetic transmission. The Darwinian reinterpretation of the role of use and disuse in evolution replaced exercise as the cause of variation in organ size, with differential selection for spontaneous variations in organ size. Nevertheless, the size-use correlation has become an almost axiomatic rule for analyzing morphological evolution.

In terms of the musculo-skeletal system, a Darwinian interpretation of this rule might be phrased as follows: “Larger, more robustly reinforced bones can endure greater stresses and larger muscles can generate greater forces. Therefore, in an environment in which a particular part of the skeletal or muscular system is habitually subjected to unusual stresses, generation after generation, those individuals that tend from birth to grow more robust muscles and bones will tend to thrive and reproduce better than those who do not. These individuals will tend to pass on this propensity to a greater percentage of offspring, resulting in an increasing prevalence of increased muscle and bone mass in future generations.” Parallel arguments can be made for any number of organs that appear subject to size variation in response to the stresses or demands of use, including glands and digestive organs. But it is important to understand how size contributes to the function under consideration, and to know whether this factor is free to vary independently of other features of organism design, before assuming that this logically reasonable argument applies across the board to all organs.

In the case of muscles, bones, and glands, we have a relatively unambiguous correlation between functional demand and size as a result of physiological changes during a lifetime. Physical exercise can cause muscle mass to increase and inactivity can cause muscles to atrophy. Changes in hormonal demand are often associated with increase or decrease in the size of endocrine glands, as in gonad enlargement at puberty or adrenal hypertrophy under conditions of chronic stress. The analogy between changes in a lifetime and changes in evolution appears to work in this case. The size-use rule seems naturally to extend from physiological arguments to evolutionary arguments. In evolutionary theories, however, the order of the argument tends to be reversed from consequence to antecedence. When we infer an evolutionary cause for large muscular limbs, it is like guessing that a person with large arm muscles must have been doing a lot of weightlifting. An animal with an atypically enlarged or reduced organ is automatically suspected of having evolved under conditions where more or less was required of that organ, respectively. We tend to feel quite confident of many such extrapolations into the evolutionary past because of the correlations we observe in living species.

The physiological analogy can be both informative and misleading. Evolution has equipped vertebrate bodies so that they are adapted to certain functional demands, but it has also built in some flexibility as well. This allows room for fine-tuning. These mechanisms for physiological fine-tuning can parallel evolutionary mechanisms in some ways but not others. For example, there is more than one way that muscles or glands can appear altered in size. On the analogy of weightlifters versus couch potatoes, one might expect to find comparatively muscle-bound species and comparatively weak species in the world. Surprisingly, differences in the proportions of muscle mass in mammals do not tend to parallel this difference. Larger species have correspondingly more total muscle mass supporting them, but species that are roughly the same size do not run the spectrum from muscle-bound to weakling. The proportion of muscle to body weight in mammals exhibits a remarkably predictable relationship from species to species across the full size range. So the analogy is only provisionally useful, and clearly fails to take some crucial factors into account.

This caveat is particularly relevant for brain evolution. Unlike muscle mass, brain size does not increase or decrease with use during the lifetime, independent of normal growth, aging, and pathological atrophy.2 There is no way to appeal to a physiological adaptation where habitual brain use is associated with enlargement or reduction in brain size. And, whereas we seem to be on pretty solid theoretical footing when we extrapolate changes in force and structural strength from changes in size of bones, teeth, or muscles (because we can appeal to the physics of forces and lever arms), it is not at all clear that we have a corresponding theory that is adequate for predicting changes in information-processing functions from changes in size of the brain. The first step, then, is to see if we can determine what kind of relationship this might be.





Brains in Bodies


To begin this investigation, let’s start with whole brains and bodies and progressively narrow down our search to find exactly what has changed in human brains. In the long history of comparative psychology, a failure adequately to disentangle net and gross brain function has been a consistent source of confusion. Even the most basic questions remain unsettled. At present, there appears to be wide agreement among those who analyze the statistics of comparative brain size that a version of net brain function fits best with our data and intuitions about brain size and intelligence. The basic intuition underlying this interpretation is that some fraction of brain function must always be devoted to handling the information-processing demands of the body, and is therefore unavailable for other cognitive uses. Thus, gross brain function might be partitioned into a visceral and a cognitive fraction as a first step toward analyzing net brain function. If larger brains also have to service the information-processing demands of larger bodies, they will not necessarily offer their possessors any net increase in cognitive power with their greater size. All other things being equal, we might expect that brains will at least keep pace with the demands of the body as bodies get larger, so that degree of neural control over hormonal, digestive, and basic somato-sensory and muscular functions should not distinguish species with different body sizes. But how do we figure out how much information-processing capacity must be dedicated to maintaining somatic functions?

A simple and obvious possibility is that the fraction of brain size that must be dedicated to body maintenance is directly proportional to body size itself. If this were true, then the ratio of brain to body size would reflect the ratio between cognitive and somatic brain functions. Individuals and species with a higher ratio of brain to body size should have more of their brains free for nonsomatic functions—a higher net cognitive capacity.3 Brain weight is a much smaller fraction of body weight in fish, reptiles, and amphibians than in mammals and birds, and we tend to think of these cold-blooded vertebrates as less mentally sophisticated than our warm-blooded compatriots. A low ratio of brain to body size has also been used to argue for low intelligence in large dinosaurs and to explain the apparently greater intelligence of humans compared to larger-brained whales and elephants. Unfortunately, a simple ratio approach fails to make sense of the high ratio of brain to body size in mice (as much as twice the ratio in humans) and other small mammals, since no one seems ready to claim that mice have a slight intellectual edge over humans and a large advantage over other great apes. Moreover, the difference in ratio is not compensated by differences in neuron densities. Small mammals’ brains are more densely packed with neurons because density increases with decreasing size. As a result, the ratio of neuronal number to body size favors small mammals even more than does the brain/body ratio. Neither an appeal to absolutely large size nor to greater size ratio adequately fits with intuitions about comparative intelligence.

Mice are not alone in exceeding the human brain/body ratio. In fact, most very small mammals have comparable brain/body ratios to humans. This reflects the fact that the ratio steadily decreases with increasing body size in most groups of animals. Common experience and intuitions about the mental abilities of animals do not suggest that such abilities decline with increasing size, but by the late nineteenth century, a number of scientists recognized that within this relationship was a hint of a way to salvage the intuition that intelligence increases with increasing brain size. As a result of a somewhat obscure study of an extinct sea cow, which possessed a brain that was absolutely larger than human brains, Alexander Brandt in 1867 speculated that a simple fractional comparison was insufficient for an accurate assessment of intelligence. Instead, he argued that the brain’s size might rather have something to do with its special relationship to metabolism and to the body surface. Brandt suggested that brain size might scale with respect to metabolism (which researchers at the time thought was directly related to heat dissipation by the body surface—this turns out not to be true, but more of that later). He also suggested that the mass of the brain’s sensory and motor systems should be related to the body’s surfaces, not its total size.

The modern era of research on brain size effectively began in 1892, when a German physician named Otto Snell took this analysis to its logical conclusion.4 Snell showed that mammalian brains and bodies were enlarged with respect to one another according to the power function 2/3 (see Figures 5.1 and 5.2). He derived this value by taking the average of log-transformed brain and body weight differences from pairwise comparisons of a number of different species across a range of body sizes. Snell provided compelling, if not systematic, evidence that the relationship of brain to body size in mammals was essentially comparable to a surface-to-volume relationship. The idea that brain and body weights were related by a systematic function begged the question of what this regularity had to do with brain function. But a metabolic interpretation of this pattern, initially promoted by both men, was soon supplanted by alternative interpretations and analyses that attempted to link it with intelligence.

Snell’s finding stimulated a burst of interest in the scaling of brain size and body size that has lasted to the present day. In the century that has followed, this basic insight has been the starting point for dozens of alternative statistical approaches and many hundreds of theoretical analyses of its significance. Differences in numerical methods have suggested alternative scaling exponents. Differences in the pattern among different taxonomic groupings have suggested that there is more than one regularity to explain. But the vast majority of interpretations all share two assumptions in common. First, that comparative intelligence is a function of how much of the brain is left when that fraction which is dedicated to basic body functions is analytically subtracted. Second, that this proportion is somehow directly reflected in the comparative scaling of brains to bodies. The regularity of this relationship offered a frame of reference. It determined a means of predicting what a typical mammal brain or body weight would be, and thereby indicated the outliers. It was natural also to assume that “average mammals,” as predicted by this trend, should also be of average, and therefore comparable, intelligence, and that outliers were of respectively greater or less than average intelligence. In this view, intelligence is construed as the net or surplus brain function left over after the bodily needs of brain processes are subtracted.



Figure 5.1 Plot of brain and body size in a wide selection of mammals a showing the almost linear distribution in log coordinates and the relative position of the human value with respect to the others. Humans show a greater divergence from predicted brain size for our body size than any other species. In general, monkeys, apes, and dolphins occupy the upper left edge of the distribution along its length.

The logic behind this conception found its clearest explanation in a widely cited book on the evolution of intelligence by Harry Jerison.5 Jerison based his assessment of brain evolution on a concept he called “proper mass.” On the assumption that evolution is miserly, and will tend to provide only as much of each tissue as is optimal in the context of the other systems of the body, one might expect that a larger and more costly organ should reflect a greater need for its function, and vice versa. The size of each organ should thus tend toward a proportion that is scaled to its relative importance to the rest of the body. In these terms it seems almost like a tautologous expression of natural selection theory, a sort of metabolic economy argument. Brain size should, on average, tend to reflect the balance between the evolutionary advantages and costs of neural information processing, so that the average mammalian brain size for a given body weight should provide a useful index of the “proper mass” of brain for a given body. From this it should follow that the mammalian trend in brain versus body size should reflect an optimum balance of the costs and benefits conferred by the size of the brain, at least when all other things are equal.

Jerison argued that the fraction of total brain computation that is dedicated to serving the demands of body maintenance and overhead functions should scale to the 2/3 power of body size, because most neural representations of the body reflect maps from the sensory surfaces of the body.6 Basing the assessment of proper mass on this empirical relationship is a powerful simplifying assumption, but is it as straightforward as the trend in mammal brain and body sizes suggests? One problem is that a whole organism economy of proper mass cannot be assessed solely in terms of information-processing capacity; other costs and benefits may scale according to independent factors. For example, one major cost that will scale with respect to the size of the brain is its metabolic demand. The brain is the most metabolically expensive organ at rest, consuming up to ten times more glucose and oxygen for its mass than any other organ.7 Since basal metabolism scales to the 3/4 power of body mass in mammals (not 2/3 as Brandt and Snell and others had predicted from surface-to-volume heat dissipation assumptions), this cost must also be factored into the equation of proper mass. But precisely because such noncognitive costs must be considered, we should not expect that the average scaling of brain size to body size reflects anything like a line of isometric intellectual capacity. Proper mass, assessed in morphological terms, cannot be equated to net computational power, and so equivalent encephalization at different scales is not a reliable index of equivalent cognitive capacity. Indeed, there are many reasons to suspect that it misses some of the most important effects of scale on neural functions.

An assessment of net brain function is further complicated by its nonlinearity. A nonlinear mathematical relationship is one in which some fraction of the result must be figured into the calculation itself. Compounded interest on a debt has this characteristic (a painfully familiar example for many of us). Unpaid interest on a debt adds to the total debt, which increases the debt and so results in higher interest payments, and so on. This kind of relationship exists in estimates of net strength because muscles have to move themselves as well as other structures. Though having greater muscle mass increases the amount of force that can be generated, it also increases the amount of mass that must be moved. This means that when weightlifters put on more muscle mass, they do not get an increase in net strength that keeps pace with their increase in gross strength. This is one reason why most athletes, especially those who depend in significant ways on net strength (e.g., gymnasts), do not merely add muscle bulk as they train. There are clearly diminishing net strength gains with increasing muscle proportion beyond a certain level. (When that level is passed, we say that someone is muscle-bound.)

In terms of brain function, there are probably many counterparts to this sort of nonlinear relationship. Consider an analogy between the information-processing demands of a business and those of a brain. Growth of a business not only increases the need for more workers but also the need for increasing levels of bureaucracy. As the number of workers increases, so must the numbers of managers, administrators, and secretaries. These mid-level workers are necessary to keep track of other workers’ hours, paychecks, duties, and so on. Though managers and secretaries comprise only a modest fraction of the total number of employees, this fraction tends to increase with the size of the business, because such middle-level employees themselves must be managed and paid, and so further contribute to the managerial overhead. As organizations grow, they tend therefore to increase the proportion of employees who handle employees, as compared to employees who directly handle the product or service being offered. Expansion of gross output inevitably demands a slight increase in the net proportion of management to production work in order to break even.

Undoubtedly analogous information-management demands come with increased brain size. Like an expanding business, brains may have to devote an increasingly larger proportion of their information-processing capacity to managementlike functions, just to maintain equivalent levels of functional integration and control in the face of increased size and complexity. The proportion of neural computations that can be devoted to input-output functions may consequently decline with size, leaving larger brains progressively less efficient in terms of the number of computations performed per functional output. Larger brains will thus tend to gain a greater gross computational capacity, but with a decreasing net computational efficiency. A larger body will demand a larger proportional commitment of managerial functions in order to break even. We can consider this managerial work to be analogous to the “higher functions” of a brain, those functions that direct, coordinate, and monitor input-output functions. From this perspective, larger brains will inevitably need to be more and more topheavy, so to speak. More and more will need to be devoted to “middle management,” and the executive hierarchy will need to grow new levels just to deliver comparable performance. With larger size, there will be more computational overhead that must be subtracted with respect to input-output capacity. This is an important figure-background shift in the analysis. It is not at all clear that what we generally mean by net intelligence is something like a surplus capacity, or that any simple analytical “subtraction” will be able to take this into account. More important, it provides a reason to suspect that larger brains will need to be differently organized from smaller brains, with different proper masses required for different component functions, further complicating comparisons across ranges of size.





Thinking Your Own Size


Intuition suggests that small-brained creatures like bats, moles, and mice are less intelligent, or at least less “cognizant” of the many possible options and consequences of their activities, than are large-brained creatures such as horses, lions, and elephants. The differences seem even more obvious when we compare large mammals to lizards, amphibians, and fish whose brains are usually smaller than the smallest mammal brains. And what about the tiny brains of insects? It takes a very big leap of imagination to extend to them even a fraction of the mental representational abilities of the lowliest vertebrates. Very large differences in absolute brain size seem to have an undeniable correlation with some aspects of mental ability that we recognize as intelligence. But is the number of neurons the only relevant factor, or is there more to it?

One facet of the brain size/intelligence problem that has been almost universally ignored is the fact that different-sized animals live in very different worlds. Since the pioneering work of D’Arcy Thompson on the effects of scale on organism design,8 it has been clear that natural forms are subject to quite different types of forces and physical constraints if they differ significantly in size. Change in geometric relationships of body parts in response to size (e.g., surfaces with respect to volumes, forces with respect to support structures) is only one such expression of scale. The old adage about “fleas on the backs of fleas on the backs of fleas…ad infinitum” is not strictly possible, because at each level of scale totally different chemical and structural principles apply. Fleas must be designed very differently from the dogs that they parasitize. Dog-size fleas and flea-size dogs are impossible. Likewise, the bacterial microorganisms that parasitize the fleas are totally different in design from either fleas or dogs. Although the range in sizes is not so extreme among different vertebrates as to require radically different body structure, there is still a range of many orders of magnitude in scale—enough to make a difference. Within mammals we find a range of sizes that is nearly as extreme as that between dogs and fleas, and yet the body plans of all mammals, including their brains, are surprisingly similar. Nevertheless, the information-processing demands of being large as compared to small almost certainly make very different sorts of demands on large and small species’ brains.

A telescoping of time correlates with size. Small animals’ reflexes must be quicker in order to control much smaller limbs and respond to rapid locomotor feedback. Further, decision making must be streamlined in small species because their high metabolic rates and minimal energy reserves offer little leeway in foraging activities, defending against predators, or mating behaviors. And, perhaps most important, a short lifetime offers little time for learning from experience. As a result, being short-lived puts a premium on the effectiveness of preprogrammed behavior patterns that require little in the way of environmental priming or fine-tuning. Large animals, in comparison, can get by with rather slower reflexes, can afford to vary their sexual and foraging behaviors in an effort to better optimize their behaviors, and may have a considerable opportunity to learn by observation and trial and error. Being longer-lived puts a greater premium on learning and memory, and less on automatic preprogrammed behaviors. In addition, living a long time or having the capacity to travel for long distances (which are often though not always linked) is more likely to expose an animal to significant changes in the environment. Consequently, large, long-lived animals must be able to assess the effects of and adapt their responses to changing environmental conditions, whereas small, short-lived species don’t face such changes within a single lifetime. There will be correlated differences in strategies of intergenerational information transfer. Large species will tend to do better by transferring learned information from parent to offspring, and by focusing effort on just a few malleable offspring, whereas small species will tend to do better to sample alternative adaptational strategies by producing large numbers of offspring with different variants of preprogrammed behavior patterns, and leaving the rest to natural selection. Many of these cognitive correlates of scale are schematically summarized in Figure 5.2.



Figure 5.2 A summary of some of the cognitive differences that correlate with differences in scale of brain, body, and lifespan (left to right = increasing scale; vertical thickness of triangular bars indicates extent or importance). Other general body features (shown above the depiction of three different-sized species’ brains) include a reduction in brain/body ratio and reproductive rate with increasing size. A few cognitive correlates are depicted by the triangles below. These include a reduction of integration of functions, due to a more subdivided and less interconnected brain, and a corresponding increase in processing time and reaction times; a reduced reliance on in built responses and an increased reliance on learning, because of a greater tolerance for less efficient but more flexible trial-and-error adaptation; and a shift in learning strategies from highly stimulus-bound learning to learning that is more open to generalization and transfer of information between diverse contexts. For example, transfer of training to conditions where associative relationships are exactly reversed has been shown to correlate fairly well with increased total brain size, but not with encephalization alone (see for example Rumbaugh and Pate, 1984; Rumbaugh et al. 1996), suggesting that this is a correlate of “gross” as opposed to “net” information processing capacity.

Scaling brain functions up or down with size and life span, then, is not simply a matter of more or less computing power. Size changes have inverse consequences in a number of information-processing domains. A small species’ brain simply scaled up for a large body or a large species’ brain simply scaled down for a small body would both be maladapted. Even in the domain of learning, though most species benefit from the ability to learn to adapt to temporary conditions, the emphasis may be on very different learning strategies at different levels of scale. For example, though both large and small species will likely be selected for learning to respond to immediately present noxious or rewarding stimuli, there is likely to be an increasing emphasis on responses to distant stimuli, and those that have merely predictive value, as the species’ size increases. Larger species may also display an increase in the value of the ability to modify learned responses from one situation to fit another, and even a value to learning that is slowed by playful curiosity and exploration. To the extent that size-correlated differences in information processing are reflected in brain structure, we might expect a correlated allometry of brain structure relationships in animals of different size.

Perhaps the most serious problem faced by large brains is due to an inevitable geometric feature of network structure: as the number of neurons increases, the number of connections between them must increase in geometric proportions in order to maintain a constant level of connectional integration. This relationship is generalizable to many information and control processes. In brains that differ by millions or billions of neurons, maintaining a comparable degree of functional connectivity would require astronomical increases in connections, well beyond any reasonable hope of housing in one body. In addition, the metabolic constraints on the size of individual neurons also limit the number of synaptic connections any one neuron can support. So, inevitably, it is impossible to meet this scaling-up demand in any real brain, and a progressive reduction in many dimensions of connectivity is required with increasing size.

In real brains, the connections per neuron increase slightly with size, but the proportion of the brain’s neurons to which any one is linked drops rapidly, decreasing the relative “fan-out” and “fan-in” of connections to and from different areas. Consequently, increasing size means an increasing fragmentation of function. It also means loss of speed, both because of the increased distances and because of the increased numbers of nodes that must be traversed by a signal to reach comparably removed sites in the overall network. Compared to electronic computers, the conduction of impulses along axons and across synapses is very slow. Though long, projecting axons incorporate design features (myelination) that speed and protect the propagation of action potentials, propagating signals over greater distances between brain structures inevitably takes more time in larger brains. This time penalty on larger size will also be amplified by the geometric increase in connections and indirectness of connectivity. Finally, a vastly larger and less integrated network will also tend to be far more susceptible to local perturbations, making the neural activities far more “noisy.” This, too, will slow down recognition and decision-making processes and impede processing efficiency.

Thus, even if size confers greater information-carrying capacity, these gains may be balanced by significant costs in other areas of function. The inevitable information-processing geometry of size determines that bigger brains cannot be just scaled-up small brains, and this makes the brain size/intelligence equation all the more messy and complicated. But reduced processing speeds and loss of integration of function may not be prohibitive prices to pay for increased discrimination and storage capabilities, so long as its larger size also shields the organism from the need to produce rapid learning and responses. Again, it appears that bigger is different as far as cognition goes.

A few functional features do not change much with scale. These tend to be the functions that are more directly determined by molecular and cellular processes. Paradoxically, basic learning may be one such feature. The basic mechanisms that allow experiences to leave their trace in brain structure changes are highly conserved cellular and molecular mechanisms that are shared by most animals, from snails to simians. For example, a cellular-biochemical process known as long-term potentiation allows synaptic connections to be progressively strengthened or weakened in their effective transmission of information from cell to cell. And there appear to be parallel means by which the signals it carries can change a neuron’s capacity to propagate signals through the different sectors of its extensive arbor of input branches (dendrites) and modulate signals down its one output line (axon).

Such processes as these are the basis for transforming patterns of experience to patterns of neural behavior—i.e., learning and memory—and it appears that even very simple nervous systems are built around essentially the same basic learning principles as the most complex ones. In a challenging book on brain size and intelligence, Euan MacPhail has criticized the idea that brain size is correlated with intelligence in any comparative sense, because he finds little evidence that basic learning abilities differ significantly across species of vastly different brain size.9 He documents remarkably sophisticated learning abilities in a wide range of vertebrates not generally assumed to exhibit well-developed cognitive abilities. This could also be expanded to include a wide range of invertebrate learning studies as well. Sophisticated learning in honeybees, for example, has many remarkable parallels with vertebrate learning, in both the rate and complexity of learning.10 At the very least, MacPhail’s analysis offers the caveat that for basic neuronal processes, such as general patterns of simple associative learning, we should not expect brain size to have a very significant effect. Where size should matter most is in terms of differences in reliance on alternative learning strategies and perhaps extent or organization of mnemonic storage. One of the clearest demonstrations of this has come from studies of different species’ abilities to transfer learned information across tasks and stimulus conditions. This second-order learning capacity, which enables animals to produce novel “emergent” responses by reusing information in new contexts, has been shown to correlate with brain size but not encephalization.11

This pattern of size-correlated differences in the relative importance of different learning strategies is of particular relevance to the special learning problems posed by language. Relatively flexible and indirect learning strategies can only be of use if there is sufficient time to employ them. This is even more of a problem for multistage learning-recoding-unlearning processes. Such learning strategies would have little utility for a short-lived, smaller animal. Smaller brains should instead be biased against such learning strategies, since there will not be sufficient time for them to pay off. This may help explain why symbolic communication didn’t evolve until fairly large-brained, long-lived, ecological generalists like apes evolved. Since language learning is an extreme example of a highly distributed learning problem, smaller-brained species would likely be far more biased against the appropriate learning strategies than larger-brained species. Thus, absolute brain size might have played an important limiting role in language evolution irrespective of any increase in computing power.
