CHAPTER SIX


Growing Apart


…nothing is great and little otherwise than by comparison.

—Jonathan Swift, Gulliver’s Travels





The Chihuahua Fallacy


Differences in relative brain and body proportions are not always what they seem. Encephalization—the degree to which an animal’s actual brain size exceeds what would be predicted for a typical animal of its size—is a relationship between the brain and body, and so it can be affected by changes in either. This problem is dramatically demonstrated by a familiar example: the differences in brain and body sizes in domestic dog breeds. An average-sized dog has a brain approximately the size that would be predicted for an average mammal of that size (a bit lower than for feral canines such as wolves), but small dogs have comparatively high ratios of brain to body size and large dogs have comparatively low ratios of brain to body size, because brain size is far less variable than body size between dog breeds. From the point of view of encephalization, very small dogs are among the most encephalized of all mammals, and very large dogs are rather poorly encephalized. Do we generally think of small dogs as being unusually intelligent and large dogs as unusually dull? There isn’t any support for such a pattern of comparative dog intelligence,1 and anecdotal evidence does not indicate that higher relative intelligence is found in smaller breeds.

Body size is far more variable than brain size within a species. Plotting log brain size against log body size for intraspecies samples produces trend lines of a low slope when compared to interspecies brain/body proportions.2 Smaller individuals within the same species have only slightly smaller brains than much larger individuals. Since middle-sized dogs are near the general mammalian prediction, the effect of breeding for large or small size shifts individuals up or down this shallow slope, exaggerating the deviation from the general mammalian trend. Thus, small dogs appear hyper-encephalized and large dogs appear hypo-encephalized compared to typical mammals (see Figure 6.1).

What if anything can we deduce from this about the mental abilities of dogs as a result of breeding? Stanley Coren, who has written a wonderfully informative book on dog intelligence, does not rank chihuahuas or pekinese among the smartest of dogs, even though they are among the most highly encephalized.3 Although there may be variations in the mental abilities and predispositions of various breeds—some of which were intentionally selected by breeders—no one imagines that breeding for smartness would inevitably produce miniaturization or that breeding for dullness would produce giantism. We assume that chihuahua brains are fairly typical dog brains (possibly even deformed by miniaturization), with fairly typical dog abilities. They are just in very small dog bodies. Differences in dog encephalization are the result of breeding for body size effects, as well as for a number of other body proportions (relative leg length, head shape, etc.). There are numerous ways to alter the ratio between brain and body size in dogs that have nothing to do with selection for cognitive traits per se. Comparing breeds only in terms of encephalization obscures all these other possible influences on the statistic of encephalization. Dogs bred for short legs only and dogs bred for generally reduced trunk dimensions could have the same encephalization for very different reasons, and in neither case would it reflect selection operating on brain traits. Natural or artificial selection may favor a variety of combinations of body-segment proportions, and in different cases it is not easy to determine which are the independent and which are the dependent variables—which features constitute the figure and which constitute the stable background. The problems arise from our desire to collapse a multivariate relationship into a bivariate relationship. Since the one variable, body size, is so much more inclusive than the other, it will likely contain the source of much more of the variance in the relationship, all of which will be obscured in an analysis of encephalization. Independent variations in all manner of body proportions are as likely to be evident in nature as in dog shows.



Figure 6.1 The problem with comparative brain size as an index of brain evolution is well demonstrated by the different ways large or small brain size can be achieved.

A. Graphic depiction of the four possible mechanisms that can cause an animal to diverge from the typical scaling of brain and body size of the group to which it belongs (e.g., all mammals, all primates, etc.). These deviations have usually been explained only as relative encephalization (±E), but here it is pointed out that evolutionary change in body size without concomitant change in brain size (somatization; ±S) is at least as likely to be involved.

B. Simplified graph of the relationship between brain and body scaling in domestic dog breeds compared to the trend for carnivores in general. Notice that the smallest dog breeds are above the carnivore trend and the largest dog breeds are below it because of the flatter within-species allometry. The smallest breeds could either be said to be more encephalized or less somatized than the average carnivore. The relative position with respect to the trend does not provide sufficient information to distinguish which, but information about other breeds and dog-breeding history indicates that the apparent encephalization of small dogs was rather an indirect product of selection on small comparative body size irrespective of brain size. The domestic dogs’ trend line is actually below wild canids like wolves, but breeding has produced much greater variation of body size.

Curiously, though we might imagine people having an interest in breeding dogs for superior intelligence, it doesn’t appear that this breeding criterion is the sine qua non of any particular breed. In fact, this should cause us to wonder if any domestic animal is bred for increased general intelligence. This was clearly not the guiding principle in the breeding of small dogs. In fact, it appears that domestic breeds have, on average, smaller comparative brain sizes than their feral cousins. This turns out to be the case for domesticated species of all sorts: horses, cows, pigs, goats, and so on.4 Taking the encephalization argument literally, some brain size researchers have argued that in the process of domestication, we inevitably select breeding stocks for their dullness, not intelligence. But this, too, suffers from the same cephalic bias. Breeding species of farm animals for gross strength, meat production, milk production, and so forth, probably has been a major factor in this trend as well.

The problem with focusing on the brain/body relationship, then, is that it is usually not the brain that makes the difference. How this might affect our interpretation of comparative brain size can be dramatized by a simple thought experiment. Imagine that all other breeds of dogs but the smallest ones had perished at some point in recent prehistory along with supporting fossil evidence. Scientists coming upon one of these miniature dogs for the first time might not see them as miniatures of some larger type, but simply as small carnivores with large brains. Brain and body size statistics would confirm that this is a remarkably encephalized species. Researchers might even be tempted to theorize about the possible cognitive causes for their braininess—complex cooperative hunting, large social groups, and so forth. In the imaginary scenario of the single surviving extreme dog breed, we know that the predisposition to assume brain evolution is unjustified; but, I submit, scientists studying brain evolution have consistently taken this same leap of faith with no more solid justification. Why? What makes selection on brain size a more attractive hypothesis than selection on body size? Is brain evolution a more parsimonious assumption? Is there independent evidence that brain size evolution is far more prevalent than body size evolution? As far as I can tell, there is not. I am afraid that our predisposition to see brain size evolution where there is none mostly grows out of extra-scientific prejudices having to do with the comparatively large size of our own brains.

If the link between encephalization and intelligence is measured in “extra neurons,” then the chihuahua example is hard to explain away. We might try to salvage the theory by introducing arbitrary special conditions with respect to types of encephalization. Chihuahuas and human dwarves are encephalized because their body growth has been stunted. Perhaps we can simply exclude such cases. I think this is on the right track, but a different neural logic must be invoked to explain why this should matter. We could not simply frame the argument in terms of the proportions of neurons to body mass, since by this measure it doesn’t matter whether brain or body proportions are the source of the shift. So why aren’t chihuahuas the darlings of comparative psychology, and why isn’t human dwarfism a source of great genius? The answer must be that, just as encephalization doesn’t carve the body into the appropriate units of analysis, the extra neuron hypothesis doesn’t carve the brain appropriately either.

How can we sort out figure from ground when analyzing body-part growth? When we see a dog like a dachshund, we immediately recognize that it has been bred for short legs with respect to trunk length because we have a frame of reference—an average dog body—to compare it to. Proportional differences between a part of the body and the whole body tend to reflect change in the part with respect to a stable whole, all else being equal, but this is not always a safe assumption. Using dogs as our model, we can see that there are at least two kinds of morphological information that can prevent us from jumping to mistaken conclusions. Selecting a single body part, such as the brain, to compare to the size of the rest of the body introduces an unwarranted bias because it considers this one part out of context. To control for this, the rest of the body needs also to be analytically divided into segmental units that are roughly at the same level of the anatomical hierarchy (e.g., limbs / trunk / head or muscles / digestive organs / cardiopulminary organs /brain). Only in this way can we hope to find unbiased evidence of which is figure and which is ground. In general, I suspect that most of those mammals we determine to be poorly encephalized are analogues of great danes, selected for larger overall body size, and most of those mammals we determine to be highly encephalized are analogues of chihuahuas, selected for small body size. Unfortunately, the multivariate data necessary to pursue this question are unavailable for most species. Fortunately, there is another source of evidence that may help resolve this question for primate and human brain evolution.

One of the least controversial claims about brain size evolution is that primates tend to have larger brains for their size than most other mammals. When seen in terms of encephalization, primates have nearly twice as much brain for their body size as other typical mammals, and humans have almost three times more brain than a typical primate. It would appear that during the primate radiation, there was an increase in brain size over other mammals, and that this trend culminated in human brain size evolution. A great deal has been made of the apparent importance of brain evolution in the primate order. Most researchers take this to mean that primates are on average smarter than other mammals and that humans are the smartest of the primates. Because of the tendency to see evolution from an anthropocentric perspective, and human brain evolution as the culmination of a much larger trend, we tend to view other primates (beginning with our closest relatives, the great apes) as having achieved an intermediate level of “higher intelligence” over and above other mammals. But are the larger proportions of primate brains with respect to their bodies a reflection of more rapid brain growth or reduced body growth? We can determine whether brains increased with respect to bodies or bodies reduced to brains in primate evolution, as we did with dog breeds, by using information about patterns of growth. Since there is a limited set of patterns by which the masses of brains and bodies grow within young mammals, a comparison of growth patterns can help determine which of these two variables is figure and which is background.

One might expect there to be different brain/body growth trajectories with diverse slopes and ratios for each species, owing to their unique adaptational specializations. But, remarkably, the curves that describe brain/body growth for all mammal fetuses tend to cluster along just two parallel trajectories during fetal development: one that includes primates, cetaceans, and elephants, and a second that includes the remainder of the mammals (see Figure 6.2A). During this early phase of growth, individuals’ brains and bodies grow almost in unison, so that enlargement is essentially isometric for all mammal fetuses (like an expanding picture on a balloon being inflated). This suggests that growth rates are likely the same throughout the whole body. Growth is multiplicative: tissue duplicating itself at the same rate will produce progressively more rapid growth. As development proceeds, bodies and brains are growing absolutely faster, but at the same weight most fetal mammals grow at the same rates: a 5-gram cat fetus and a 5-gram cow fetus will add the same amount of new tissue in the same period of time, even though they are at different points along their respective developmental trajectories and headed toward very different end points.

So what accounts for the difference between primates and most other nonprimate mammals? Surprisingly, primate brains grow at essentially the same rate as other mammal brains. Brains that reach the same size at birth take approximately the same amount of time to get there, whether in a primate or nonprimate species (see Figure 6.2B). Primates do not grow their brains faster than other mammals, but they grow their bodies slower. From an early embryonic stage, primates have smaller bodies than expected for their age. The apparent increase of encephalization in primates is then, more accurately, a decrease in somatization. The locus of primate encephalization is not in the head!

This poses a serious challenge to the traditional view of primate evolution as characterized by selection for increased intelligence. If primates were selected for increased intelligence, why should this produce a change in body growth but not brain growth? Shouldn’t we instead consider primates to be examples of phyletic dwarfism, rather than brain hypertrophy? We are faced once again with the chihuahua question: Are we justified in inferring anything about brain evolution from a reduction in body growth with respect to brain growth?



Figure 6.2 The common shapes but different intercepts of developmental brain/body growth curves distinguishing primates and nonprimate mammals are shown in a slightly idealized comparison of mammalian growth. The left graph schematically depicts the general pattern exhibited by brain/body growth throughout life for four mammals, starting from early embryonic stages. Both curves demonstrate a two-phase pattern of brain/body growth caused by the fact that the brain ceases growth earlier than the rest of the body. P stands for the typical primate fetal brain/body growth pattern and NP for the nonprimate pattern. Notice that the primate line is considerably shifted to the left. Comparison of brain-body growth in mammals shows that all anthropoid primates follow the same growth trajectory prenatally and most other mammals follow one other right-shifted parallel trajectory. Adult allometries within these two groupings of mammals are the result of a scalar expansion of the whole growth curve. The leftward shift of the primate growth curves (producing larger brain per body) is evident from the youngest embryos. The graph on the right shows total brain growth rates for two of these species (pig and macaque) as well as for humans. This demonstrates that the left-shifted primate growth is not the result of faster brain growth but reduced body growth. Human brains follow this pattern also.

Perhaps the answer can be approached by determining how primate bodies have been reduced. Is the primate transformation of fetal growth relationships what we should expect for dwarfism? In other words, does primate brain and body growth differ from other mammal patterns the way chihuahua brain and body growth differs from the growth patterns of other dogs? In fact, these two paths to reduced body size without a corresponding reduction in brain are different. Dwarfed animals exhibit slowed body growth in the later phases (late fetal and postnatal), but they track along with more normal members of their species (and order) for most of fetal development. Primates, however, follow a shifted, parallel gestational growth curve compared to that of other mammals from the start. Fetal brain/body growth in primates is isometric, as in other mammals. Within each fetus, brains and bodies are growing at nearly identical rates, yet the whole primate body is smaller at all corresponding stages of gestation, even though primate brain growth keeps pace with other mammals. It is as though a significant fraction of the rest of the body is missing from the very first moment that head and somatic divisions of the body become evident in the embryo. So primates are like chihuahuas only in a superficial sense. Both have relatively big heads and brains due to reduced body growth, but primates start out with small bodies while chihuahuas only end up with small bodies.

What about humans? According to the traditional view of our place among other mammals, primates evolved bigger brains than other mammals as a response to a more cognitively demanding niche, and humans simply carried this trend further than any other primate. But now that it appears that primates did not evolve bigger brains, just smaller bodies, we need to reconsider the view that human brain evolution was simply an extrapolation of the primate trend. A comparison of human and nonhuman primate brain and body growth patterns (see Figure 6.3) shows us deviating from a typical primate trajectory only postnatally. Thus, we have not shifted away from other primates the way primates have shifted away from other mammals, and so have not simply extrapolated the primate deviation. Instead, like dwarves, the difference between human and monkey-ape growth patterns appears to be the result of a truncation of the growth curve. And yet we are not dwarfed primates. We are among the very largest of primates, and our adult brain size is greater in both absolute and relative proportions than in any other primate. Although our growth curve appears to be cut off early, as in dwarfism, our body growth rates are not suddenly slowed immediately after birth as would be the casé in dwarfism. We start out growing according to the standard fetal primate plan, and our brains continue to grow for longer than expected. Further proof that hominid brain size did not arise by somatic miniaturization is provided by fossil evidence. We are among the largest members of our order (the primates), and the fossil record leading up to us suggests that there was an absolute increase—not decrease—of body size, with an even more extensive increase in brain size at a somewhat slower pace. In humans, the locus of the change was indeed the brain.



Figure 6.3 A somewhat idealized graph showing the human brain/body growth curve as compared to other species of primates (H = human, C = chimpanzee, M = macaque monkey). Squares and diamonds indicate average adult values of brain and body weight for selected primates. The gray line is the average adult brain and body size allometric trend for primates. Human fetal growth follows the fetal primate trajectory, but the overall shape of the curve is altered so that the early phase is comparatively extended and the postnatal phase is comparatively truncated. If our body growth followed the pattern indicated by our brain growth, we would grow to be a very large ape (indicated by the dashed line and the upper right triangle). This also contributes to the necessity of giving birth at an earlier stage in the maturation of our offspring. The common trajectory we share with other primate during the fetal phase indicates that increased human encephalization compared to other primates is not an extrapolation of the process that caused primates to diverge from other mammals. Ours is a different mode of encephalization.

Nevertheless, the rate of human brain growth does not distinguish us from other mammals. Differences in adult mammal brain sizes are a function of duration of growth, and our brains reach their large size in about the same amount of time as we should expect to find in a large dolphin or a very large ungulate with a brain this size. Our brains grow as though in a primate with an adult body size that well exceeds 1,000 pounds, and yet our body growth pattern is quite similar to that of a chimpanzee. Both the human brain and the rest of the human body grow according to expected trends for their target adult sizes. These trends just don’t normally belong together in the same individual. It’s as though the “designer” got the parts mixed up.

Our preoccupation with brain size and encephalization has led us to ignore the differences and confuse these three distinct processes: dwarfism in small mammal breeds, embryonic reduction of body growth but not brain growth in primates, and brain growth prolongation in humans without an extension of body growth. To treat them all as reflections of a single progressive evolutionary trend not only equates very different biological phenomena on the basis of superficial appearance, it also leads us to ignore the likely important role of developmental processes on functional outcomes. These three very different modifications of brain and body growth almost certainly have significantly different implications for brain organization, cognitive function, and the selection pressures that produced them. What we need to figure out is just how these differences in means effect differences in ends. The first problem, of course, is to understand how such differences come about, and this is just beginning to be understood.





Using Fly Genes to Make Human Brains


What determines which fractions of a developing embryo will become brain and nonbrain structures of the body and which will become the different brain structures? We owe thanks to the lowly fruit fly for providing the initial clues that are helping to solve this mystery. The position within an embryo where the brain, heart, stomach, limbs, and other organs will develop is controlled by a constellation of genes known as homeotic genes, so named because their expression patterns correlate with the repetition of similarly organized segments along the body axis (homeo meaning “similar;” sharing a common underlying plan). What is most significant about these body-plan genes is their evolutionary conservatism. Corresponding homeotic genes appear to be critical for determining segmental organization in the developing bodies of worms, vertebrates, and insects. A homeotic gene important for the development of the human head and brain has even been transferred to mutant fly embryos whose development is abnormal because the corresponding genes have been inactivated, and this human gene has been able to compensate partially for the fly abnormality. This attests to the miserly nature of evolution, not just in genes but in their functions as well, especially when it comes to the events of early embryogenesis.5

Homeotic genes all tend to all have one thing in common: they each encode a DNA-binding region that enables the protein molecule they produce to bind to other sites on a chromosome and so regulate the expression of other genes. The most common version of this DNA-binding region is termed the homeobox, because of its homeotic functions. Homeobox-containing genes appear to have the ability to control whole suites of other genes, including other homeotic genes. It is probably this hierarchic feedback among different families of homeotic genes that enables them to orchestrate the same sequence of genetic events, with slight variations on the same theme, at different locations along the developing body, and at different stages in development.

Homeotic genes initiate pattern formation in the embryo by virtue of different genes switching on in spatially separated groups of cells in a series of progressively restricted subdivisions of the embryo. Beginning with genes that are differentially activated in the head and tail halves, and the front (belly) and back halves, and progressing to the formation of regular bands of expression down the length of the body, to more complicated combinations of these patterns created by orthogonal and overlapping expression patterns, the cells in the developing embryo inherit developmental fates from their precursors to become distinct adult cell types. At the early stages there is considerable similarity between very diverse species, so that the expression patterns of different homeotic genes in the developing vertebrate embryo produce a series of bands that resemble the segments of a worm or caterpillar. As in such more obviously segmental animals, these vertebrate body segments are each essentially replicas of one another to some degree, containing corresponding parts in corresponding positions. Vertebrae, ribs, and limbs resemble each other because they are corresponding elements in segmental units. Unlike a segmented worm or insect larva, however, the segments in vertebrates become obscured as the fetus develops, both because individual segments grow to differ and because they do not all remain in simple serial alignment. This is particularly the case with the development of the head.

The great German eighteenth-nineteenth-century writer and philosopher of science Johann Wolfgang von Goethe was one of the first to suggest that the serial repetition of vertebrate body segments might be continued in cryptic form in the construction of the head. Later nineteenth-century biologists took up Goethe’s hypothesis, including the influential anti-Darwinist Richard Owen. But determining whether there was such a correspondence was complicated by the large number of structures that are unique to heads (e.g., special sense organs like the eyes and ears). Only after almost two centuries have developmental geneticists uncovered evidence that partially vindicates this insight. In the body of the embryonic fruit fly, where the effects of homeobox genes were first understood, it is easier to find structures of the head that appear homologues to those of the rest of the body. For example, the segmented structure of the antennae resembles the segmented structure of the limbs. Mutations affecting homeobox genes expressed in the head have shown that these similarities are deep. A homeotic mutation called antennapodia actually causes antennae to develop into limbs. This suggests that the same basic program of genetic expression is slightly modified by homeotic controller genes to make both limbs and antennae.

In mammals, too, homeotic genes are expressed in the developing head and brain, and most of these have fly counterparts. But in the vertebrate brain, there is an apparent breakdown of strict serial segmentation of gene expression (and later structure) as compared to the patterns in the brain stem and spinal cord. The early nervous system begins as a long tube running down the back from the head to the tail end of a wormlike, undifferentiated body. A set of homeobox genes, called Hox genes in the mouse (and which correspond to a nearly identical series of HOM genes in flies), are expressed in serial order along this neural tube axis in partially overlapping patterns like tubes in a telescope. This pattern is depicted in Figure 6.4, and can be seen to become active in a nested pattern during development, with the first Hox genes to be expressed occupying the full length of the brain stem and spinal cord, and later Hox genes turning on within progressively more restricted and posterior subsets of the tube. The Hox genes produce a segmental pattern that is nearly as regular as their counterparts in flies, and they are arrayed in roughly the same front-to-back order.6

In the early stages of brain development, the front end of the neural tube enlarges to either side, producing two small, balloonlike bulges. These eventually form the telencephalon, made up of the cerebral cortex, limbic system, and basal ganglia, on either side, which will expand to dominate the cranial cavity. In the middle between them is the front end of the tube, which will become the diencephalons (composed of the thalamus and hypothalamus); behind it is a bent section of the tube that will become the mesencephalon, or midbrain (so named because it is midway between the hindbrain and spinal cord below and forebrain above); and further back is a regular set of bulges that will become the cerebellum, pons, and brain stem. From the midbrain forward, the Hox genes are not expressed, and this corresponds to a transition from relatively simple seriality of organization to a more complicated geometry. This transition occurs roughly at the same point as the front end of the notochord (the mesodermal rod that foreshadows the developing vertebral column and influences the formation of the neural tube), at which point the neural tube appears to curl around the end of the notochord, as though it has lost its linear organizing influence. It is an interesting coincidence that this transition zone roughly corresponds to the point where neural tube formation is initially induced, where major pathways into and out of the brain cross over to opposite sides, and where maturational processes tend to begin and then propagate forward and backward.

Although strict segmentation breaks down forward of this point, a sort of modified segmental gene expression continues to subdivide the head end of the neural tube. The forebrain homeobox genes, whose expression patterns are most similar to the segmental expression patterns of Hox genes, derive from two families of two genes each. These are designated by the acronyms “Emx” and “Otx,” named for their associated mutation effects in the developing fly head (Emx = Empty Spiracle and Otx = Orthodenticle) where their homologues were first identified. Like the Hox genes, these genes are expressed in a nested pattern in the vertebrate brain (Otx2>Otxl>Emx2>Emxl, shown in Figure 6.4), with the largest domain (Otx2) extending from the front of the brain to the back of the midbrain, and the smallest domain centered in the dorsal telencephalon roughly corresponding to the entire isocortex (Emx1).7 The timing of gene expression from largest to smallest expression region is like that of Hox genes, except that the direction of these expression trends is reversed. Hox genes are turned on in a front-to-back order and Otx-Emx genes are turned on in a roughly back-to-front order. One other major difference, however, is that the expression of the Otx and Emx genes is mostly confined to the upper or dorsal part of the forebrain neural tube, whereas Hox genes are expressed in complete cross-sectional segments of the tube. These are only a few of the homeotic genes that are expressed in the developing forebrain and that play major roles in determining its organization, but the segregation of dorsal from ventral gene expression and the back-to-front segmentation appear to be common to most other forebrain genes’ expression patterns.



Figure 6.4 Expression in the developing fly and mouse of three families of homeotic genes (which are presumed to be the same in humans). These include the HOM, orthodenticle, and empty spiracle gene families in flies; and the corresponding Hox, Otx, and Emx gene families in mammals. Each small rectangle on a line depicts the position of a gene on a string of DNA in a chromosome. Vertical arrows indicate probable homologies; also there are many gene duplications in mammals. Note the spatial correspondence of expression patterns along the body axes of both species. The Hox genes are expressed in the brain stem and spinal cord in spatially overlapping segments, with the earliest to be expressed covering the largest portion of the neural tube (indicated by the innermost line curving around the top of the embryonic mouse brain). Each successive Hox gene to be expressed starts a little further down the brain stem (indicated by lines overlapping), creating a segmental expression pattern that plays an important role in determining the segmental positions of the various sensory and motor nuclei of the brain stem and also organizes the segmentation of major body parts (e.g., limbs). The Otx and Emx genes are expressed in the mid-brain and forebrain of mammals and are mostly confined to dorsal structures (i.e., on the outside of the curve of the forebrain). The earliest to be expressed is Otx2, which covers the largest sector of the dorsal forebrain after becoming successively restricted to this region over time from an initial distribution that includes most of the undifferentiated embryo. The last of these to be expressed, Emxl, is almost entirely confined to the region that will develop into cerebral cortex. S = spinal cord, C = cerebellum and brain stem, M = midbrain, D = diencephalon, and T = telencephalon.

The discovery of homeotic genes has initiated a revolution in the study of brain development and brain evolution. Because they determine the boundaries of the major classes of cell lineages and growth fields within the developing brain, they provide an important new source of data about previously cryptic sources of information used to design brains. These correspondences are particularly relevant for understanding how evolution might be able to adjust proportions in bodies and brains, as it has in the human case. Indeed, transgenic embryos of mice, chicks, frogs, and flies in which the expression of homeotic genes has been experimentally modified often exhibit significant changes in body plan, including even the addition or deletion of segmental divisions of the brain. So, the sorts of changes in body plan that are characteristic of both the primate shift and the human shift in brain/body proportions may well be traceable to homeotic gene effects. Unfortunately, although the expression domains of these genes have been well mapped out in developing mouse brains and bodies, there is almost no corresponding information for comparing human and nonhuman primate brains. Though it is almost certain that highly similar patterns of homeotic gene expression will be present, we are not in a position to make the appropriate direct comparisons to decide whether subtle expression differences determine either the primate shift in body development or the human shift in brain development. Nevertheless, because of the incredible conservatism of these developmental genetic mechanisms, some important clues to the genetic basis for these primate and human differences can be extrapolated from experiments involving other species’ embryos, even those of nonmammals.

How might changes in homeotic gene expression affect such global neural proportions? An extreme example is provided by a recently described gene called Lim 1 (the initial version of this gene type was identified in roundworms). In mice, the corresponding gene appears to be critical for initiating head formation. Mouse embryos lacking a working copy of this gene fail to develop heads altogether, though most of the postcranial structures develop relatively normally.8 Though head deletion is hardly a useful adaptation, such independent determination of head and body development suggests that whole suites of other developmental events may also be able to affect heads and bodies differentially. This may help explain the relative ease with which body growth and proportions can be readily affected by selective breeding, while heads and especially brains change comparatively little (as in small and large dog breeds).

An even more relevant experimental manipulation of brain and body proportion has been demonstrated in frogs (see Figure 6.5). The expression of the frog version of the Otx2 gene (X-Otx2; X-for Xenopus, a genus of frog), has been followed from the fertilized egg to the late stage embryo, and has been shown to become progressively restricted over development to the head end of the body, where it is eventually only expressed in the forebrain, as in mice. This narrowing and focusing of expression appears partly controlled by interactions with other genes and gene products in the embryo. The extent to which X-Otx2 becomes restricted to the head end of the neural tube can be experimentally manipulated by bathing the embryo in another differentiation factor (retinoic acid). This decreases X-Otx2 expression levels all over, and causes the head and brain to recruit a much-reduced fraction of the embryonic body as a result. An inverse effect is induced if X-Otx2 expression is artificially increased (e.g., by injecting extra X-Otx2 RNA into the zygote). This causes overall X-Otx2 expression to be higher throughout the embryo, and results in a much-enlarged fraction of the embryonic body becoming recruited to head and brain development. Such experiments suggest that concentration threshold effects may play a crucial role in the global proportioning of these large segmental distinctions during development. Relative timing or rate of gene product production might thus be important factors distinguishing species where these proportions have become modified.

One likely means of increasing levels of expression that seems to be utilized by homeotic gene systems is gene duplication. Gene duplication is a common evolutionary phenomenon that has produced most families of related genes, such as the many variants of hemoglobin genes that are active at different times of mammal development corresponding to different oxygen-transfer requirements (e.g., in the womb as opposed to out of it). Gene duplication is also quite prevalent among homeotic genes, as in the Hox, Otx, and Emx gene families discussed above. There is clearly some degree of redundancy of developmental effect in many of these genes, because it is not uncommon for knockout mutants (missing working copies of a particular gene) to develop relatively normally or with only minor structural modifications, even where ectopic expression (turned on indiscriminately in inappropriate body regions) of the same gene may cause significant structural modifications. Variants of the same gene active at nearly the same time in overlapping domains may contribute to a selective expansion of corresponding segmental expression domains within the neural tube by shifting the relative concentration gradients, where threshold levels produce borders between regions determining different cell fates. Thus, a homeotic gene duplication in evolution might be the genetic equivalent of the experimental introduction of extra gene product in the frog embryos described above.



Figure 6.5 Schematic depiction of the effects on embryonic brain and body proportions of modifying X-Otx2 gene expression in developing frog embryos (X-Otx and X-Hox refer to Xenopus homologues of mammalian Otx and Hox-cluster genes). The normal growth pattern (middle right) is depicted from the stage of initial neural tube formation to the point at which the major forebrain structures are fanned. The top right image depicts the effects of increasing levels of X-Otx2 in the cells (added to embryonic stem cells). The results are a posterior shift of the transition between the expression of X-Otx and X-Hox genes (demarcated by the black arrow), a corresponding increase in the size of the head and brain (beginning at the level of the midbrain), and a corresponding decrease in the postcranial body. The bottom right image shows the reverse effect produced by blocking X-Otx expression. When X-Otx is present in low levels, it becomes restricted to only a very small part of the front of the neural tube, resulting in a greatly reduced midbrain and forebrain. The images graphically summarize experiments described by Boncinelli and Mallamaci (1995). P = prosen-cephalon (early stage telencephalon + diencephalon); M = midbrain; S = spinal cord. Recently the development of a mutant mouse lacking Otx2 has been described by Ang et al. (1996). These mouse embryos are abnormal from the gastrula stage and fail to develop the most forward part of the brain.

Though we are still a ways from proving any clear association between a known homeotic gene difference and any naturally occurring species brain structure difference, the field is still very young. We at least know where we should be looking for the appropriate developmental genetic links. Consider in this context the reduction of the primate body with respect to the bodies of other mammal embryos. The nature of the shift in proportions and the timing of its appearance are important clues about possible developmental genetic correlates. Since this shift in proportions is evident at the earliest point in embryogehesis at which primate and nonprimate brains are distinguishable, it suggests that there has been some change in the expression of some of the very early acting genes responsible for establishing this segmental distinction. The Otx experiments offer a good model for processes that would affect proportions at this stage of development. Comparative neuroanatomical data should be able to guide us to the appropriate juncture in development, to the extent that it can specify exactly where segmental shifts in proportions have occurred. In fact, information about the deviation of human brain growth from other primates may actually be of sufficient resolution to enable us to make a more precise prediction about its genetic correlates.

Large sets of quantitative data comparing human to other primate brain structures have been available for decades, and these have been subject to numerous statistical analyses. To date, none of these analyses has utilized information about the patterns of brain development analytically to carve the brain into the appropriate growth fields and to determine the nature of the underlying segmental shifts in proportions, because until recently such information was unavailable. And this is critical. To measure things appropriately, it helps to know the locations of the natural developmental divisions. If one wanted to study the growth of the human body during childhood, it would not be useful to measure arbitrary divisions (such as the distance from the neck to the middle of the forearm compared to the distance from the middle of the forearm to the first knuckle). It would make better sense to measure body segments that grow separately, for example, long bones as measured from joint to joint. Since the homeobox gene expression boundaries determine the “joints” between brain growth fields, they should be the most useful guides in determining which measurements will be most informative.

The analysis of brain structure allometries, like the analysis of brain/body allometries, has been led down many blind alleys because of this uncertainty about the appropriate units for analysis, and a failure to pay attention to developmental patterns. In addition to a lack of developmental clues, two other analytical problems have complicated the interpretation of quantitative brain data and have led to confusing and conflicting assessments. These have mostly derived from a failure adequately to control for size effects in part/whole comparisons, similar to the brain/body problems we encountered earlier. But unlike the brain and body comparisons, where brains make up a small fraction of the body at best, some brain parts constitute a large fraction of the brain, and so proportional comparisons can misrepresent growth relationships by failing to treat the parts separately.9 This is a particularly thorny problem for brain development and evolution. The size of a body structure (especially a subdivision of the brain, such as a thalamic nucleus or a cortical area) is determined both by the number of cells generated (proliferation), and by nonproliferative processes that carve this field into functional subdivisions (parcellation). Development proceeds via the interactions of both functions at different stages (these processes are discussed in the next chapter). The complication for quantitative analyses is that whereas cell multiplication has a scalar influence on all structures involved, parcellation is a zero-sum process in which enlargement of one structure only occurs at the expense of another. So, failure to distinguish comparisons that are within from those that are between growth fields can produce confusing and misleading results.10

The shift in human brain/body and brain structure proportions inevitably involves both effects. Since proliferative effects are primary, and occur in the context of homeotic segmentation, we should initially try to match the quantitative neuroanatomical analyses to comparisons that roughly correspond to the hierarchy of homeotic segmentation processes in brain development. In general, more global proliferative effects will be expressed earlier and local parcellation effects will be determined later in development. So let’s begin with large-scale size relationships and progressively focus in on more localized effects in the search for what is different about human brains.

The discovery of growth deviations is aided by the fact that in general the relative proportions of different brain structures are predictably scaled with respect to overall brain size. When the volumes of mammal brain structures are plotted, the points marking the volumes of pairs of structures in different species tend to fall neatly along a smooth curve (or a straight line in logarithmic coordinates). These highly predictable relationships between the sizes of major brain structures are a reflection of the fact that brains of vastly different sizes derive from a similar highly conserved homeotic starting point chiefly by extrapolating global proliferative processes. The numerical predictability of brain structures differs somewhat from one mammalian order to another; but within orders, families, and genera there is progressively less individual divergence from the trends.

We have established that the fetal brain/body growth pattern for human development is essentially the same as for any “generic” monkey or ape, so we need to look one level down (and later in development) for what might be the human difference. When comparing such major brain “segments” as the telencephalon, diencephalon, and so on, patterns of deviation begin to emerge, and a clear, regionally correlated shift away from typical primate proportions is evident when we begin to consider major subdivisions of each. When the values for structures in the human brain are added to plots of the corresponding structures of other primate species, the curves extrapolated from other primate data predict the sizes of many, but not all human brain structures. Those major structures that are predictable from typical primate size trends turn out to be located within contiguous segmental divisions of the human brain. Thus, components of the basal ganglia (such as the striaturn and the pallidum) are matched in size to one another according to the pattern typical of primates, and these are also matched in size to major components of the diencephalon (thalamus and hypothalamus). But the human volumetric relationships most consistently deviate from the primate extrapolations only in certain comparisons between separate brain structures. For example, when we compare any of the basal or subcortical forebrain structures (basal ganglia, thalamus, hypothalamus) to the cerebral cortex, or compare the brain stem and spinal cord to the adjacent cerebellum, this predictability breaks down (see Figure 6.6). The nonhuman primate data underestimate how these structures have scaled up in size with respect to one another in the human brain, so that, for example, the cerebral cortex is roughly twice as big as predicted for many other forebrain structures, and three times as big as predicted for the brain stem, spinal cord, and the rest of the body (see Figures 6.6 and 6.7).

The patterning of these deviations is interesting. Two of the most deviant structures, the cerebellum and cerebral cortex, originate from the dorsal (or back) side of the developing neural tube (as does the dorsal midbrain, which also appears enlarged compared to ventral—front oriented—structures). This deviation from primate patterns suggests that the growth relationship between major dorsal and ventral segments of the developing forebrain has been somehow altered, whereas the many relationships within each of these broad divisions have remained relatively constant. Such a general pattern is an important clue. It indicates that the extensive functional interdependence of these dorsally and ventrally derived brain regions is not crucial for determining their respective growth (though one might have predicted that the cerebral cortex would need to be strongly coupled in size with its major sources of inputs and major targets for outputs). On the other hand, the fact that there is growth linkage between major groups of structures that are not so extensively interconnected or functionally dependent suggests that the shift must be determined at a fairly early stage in neuroembryogenesis, when these segmental divisions are just forming. At this stage, only crude divisions of the brain are specified, neural stem cells have not yet given rise to the differentiated neurons and glia (additional support cells around neurons) that will comprise these structures.



Figure 6.6 Two examples of human brain structure proportions showing both proportional and disproportional relationships.

A. Proportional expansion (i.e., predicted by the primate allometric growth pattern for these structures) of the diencephalon and striatum in the human brain (both mostly confined to the ventral forebrain.

B. Deviation from the predicted relationship between the size of the cerebral cortex of the diencephalon, showing increased cortex despite the intimate functional and connectional interdependence between these structures (data from Stephan, Frahm and Baron, 1981).

When we trace back the developmental history of those structures in human brains that are significantly enlarged versus those that are only slightly enlarged, they divide up the neural tube in a pattern that corresponds to the expression domains of distinct groups of homeotic genes. The regions of the embryo that will give rise to enlarged structures in the human brain tend to be on the dorsal surface of the neural tube, and they form an essentially continuous sheet from the cerebellum to the dorsal telencephalon (see Figure 6.7B). This is paralleled by a mostly dorsally restricted sequence of gene expression domains of the Otx and Emx homeobox genes, and matches the general segregation of homeotic gene expression for this dorsal/ventral forebrain distinction. Though we should not simply ascribe the human neuroanatomical divergence to the actions of Emx and Otx genes, their expression matches the entire pattern particularly well, and suggests that the human difference is correlated with their expression in this region.



Figure 6.7 Figure summarizing the size deviation in major structural divisions of the human brain compared to what would be predicted for a “typical” ape brain for human body proportions (i.e., slightly larger than a chimpanzee).

Key. Graphic indicator of brain proportions with lighter shades of gray indicating greater relative expansion.

A. Corresponding regions of the developing human embryonic brain that must have undergone additional early stem cell production to produce the adult pattern of proportions. The expression domains of Otx and Emx genes are superimposed to show the correspondence with expanded regions. The arrow indicates that cerebellar granule cells originate from the midbrain and migrate to the cerebellum so that this structure is a sort of mosaic made up from the combination of developmentally distinct lineages of cells.

B. Schematic depiction of relative proportions in adult human brains compared to what would be appropriate for an ape with our body size (e.g., a large chimpanzee), with proportional deviations indicated by gray levels corresponding to the key.

What can we conclude from this parallel between gene expression domains and growth field differences in the human brain? First, the difference is not the result of a segmental shift at the level of the whole brain and body, as it appears to be in primate evolution, because the whole brain is not uniformly enlarged. Second, the embryological patterning of proliferative differences that produces this proportional shift in structures corresponds with the segmental pattern of certain gene expression domains in the brain. Whether or not these homeotic genes directly contribute to the human shift in cell production in these regions, it seems clear that the effect is restricted to the cell lineages specified by them. Indeed, as we have seen, there are experimental precedents for changes in the expression of one of these gene groups (Otx) affecting brain proportions by a fairly simple concentration effect, so it does not take a great leap of imagination to imagine a mechanism (such as additional gene duplication) whereby the human proportional shift might be produced.





The Developmental Clock


The cells that comprise large and small animals differ only modestly in size. What determines an organism’s size is mostly how many cells are produced. But the signals that tell embryonic mouse cells to undergo a smaller number of cell divisions than embryonic elephant cells has yet to be identified. The number of cell divisions that ensue after fertilization of an ovum is not just the crucial determinant of the size of the whole body; the same mechanism also indirectly specifies the size of each major organ and region of the body. Though there are many tantalizing clues about how this developmental clock is linked to other developmental mechanisms, what we don’t know about this clock has kept one of the most important variables of organism design shrouded in mystery.

The decision about how many cell divisions will be needed to build a mammal body appears to be made quite early in development. Some of the best hints about the size-determination process come from work with early embryos. One of the earliest multicelled stages is called the blastula and consists of a ball of cells that forms from the earliest divisions of the fertilized egg. The ability to separate and manipulate cells from this structure has played a crucial role in genetic engineering. If these cells are removed and maintained in suspension in a culture dish bathed by an appropriate growth medium, they can continue to divide over and over again without beginning the first steps toward differentiation that, in a normal embryo, would eventually lead to a nondividing final form. In this undifferentiated state, they can be placed into another blastula where they will be recruited to differentiate along with its own cells, and there they can come to assume any of the possible cell types of the developing host body. But one feature of their development appears to be invariant: whether placed in an embryonic body or an adult body, they appear to develop on a schedule that reflects the rate at which they would normally develop, irrespective of whether placed in a fetal, adult, or different species context. At the start of the differentiation process, in whatever context this begins, the cells activate an internal developmental clock that determines the number of cell divisions that are allowed before becoming committed to final cell fates and ceasing mitosis.

The regulation of the relationship between cell differentiation and mitosis probably involves an interaction between gene products in the cytoplasm of the cell and the genes within its nucleus. In experiments where the nucleus of a cell destined to become a frog skin cell is reimplanted into a zygote that has had its own nucleus removed, the genes within the skin cell nucleus are able to start the whole embryonic process all over again and produce an entire frog. Presumably, the actions of the genes produce cumulative changes in the contents of the cytoplasm that exert a feedback effect on gene activity. A similar rate-concentration effect also may account for the difference in the setting of the developmental clock in species with different adult body sizes. Slower production or accumulation of these signaling molecules will allow more mitotic cycles to occur between successive transitions to more restricted cell fates. The starting of this clocklike interaction appears to affect numbers of cell divisions primarily by determining when crucial differentiating genes, like homeotic genes, get turned on. Most vertebrate embryos regulate differentiation irrespective of cell proliferation once the process has started. This is demonstrated by removing a significant fraction of the as yet undifferentiated cells from a vertebrate blastula and letting it continue to develop. The result will be a dwarfed but otherwise normal body that develops at a normal rate.

Another clue to this process is provided by species of frogs and salamanders that have enormous amounts of DNA in their genomes (the excess is apparently redundant, noncoding DNA). These species have a few other curious traits in common. They are all very slow-developing dwarves compared to other related species with normal genomes, and they all have very low metabolic rates and very slow cell-proliferation rates. It seems that by forcing the gene transcription and replication processes to sort through reams of superfluous genetic information, the ticking of the developmental clock is slowed, along with metabolism and cell-division rates. Normally, a slowed developmental clock would allow more divisions between sequential stages of development, producing a larger organism. The large genome species are the exceptions that prove the rule. In them, fewer cell divisions take place between the greatly prolonged developmental transitions.

For brain development, the autonomy of the developmental clock means that the number of cell divisions completed by the time the cells of the brain have taken on their final fates is decided before there is any sign of a brain or other body regions in the embryo. From that point on, the size of the brain depends on what fraction of the developing embryo is selected to become neural tissue by the expression of homeotic genes. The relative independence of homeotic parcellation and proliferation processes can be demonstrated by modifying differentiation at the middle stages in development. The induction of neural tube formation11 can be duplicated in a single embryo if another inducer region from another embryo is implanted into the developing embryo. As a result, a second neural tube will be induced to form, and if allowed to mature, it will produce Siamese twins with linked bodies but separate nervous systems. An important feature of Siamese twinning, for questions of brain size, is that although the mass of the whole body is lower than for two separate individuals, the two brains are generally not so correspondingly reduced in size. A similar independence is also demonstrated by cross-species transplantation (or xenotrans-plantation) experiments. In one insightful experiment, whole segments of the embryonic neural tube from Japanese quail embryos were transplanted into embryonic chick brains.12 Japanese quails are much smaller than chickens, and as adults they have much smaller brains. When major parts of the quail brain are substituted for corresponding parts of a chicken brain shortly after neural tube formation, the resulting chimeric birds grow up with quail brain structures that are diminutive compared to the host brain structures. This tendency to grow to appropriate size even when in an inappropriate developmental context applies to other body structures and other combinations of animals as well. In our laboratory, we have transplanted dissociated cells from embryonic pig brains into adult rat brains. Even in this altered context, they still develop on a pig schedule to become pig-size neurons (which are slightly larger, with longer axons and dendrites, than rat neurons; see Figures 6.8 and 6.9).13

These unnatural manipulations demonstrate that early setting of the developmental clock results in a kind of preestablished growth harmony among all subsequent organ systems. The setting of the clock thus appears to differ from species to species, though not from cell to cell within an individual. This explains why the growth of the brains and bodies of different species tends to be so similarly orchestrated and produces almost mathematical regularity in allometries. Embryos that are initially carved up in the same way but whose cells have different settings of the clock follow a common growth plan that is merely extrapolated to produce systematically different end points.

A number of evolutionary theorists in the first half of the twentieth century, noticing that in certain ways human adults resembled ape fetuses (large brains/small faces for our bodies; hairlessness), suggested that this might reflect a sort of arresting or retardation of human development resulting in the retention of fetal-like traits. But the superficial resemblance of human proportions to fetal-ape proportions is no more than a resemblance, because there is no global sense in which humans appear to have slowed development or differentiation of cells. However, there is a more subtle sense in which developmental timing mechanisms may have been reset in human evolution. The rate of human brain maturation is appropriate for the size brain we have, but it is prolonged compared to other primates of our same body size. In this regard, our brain’s developmental clock has been extended, though the effect is not equivalently mapped to cell-proliferation and differentiation processes throughout the body.



Figure 6.8 Results of transplanting a segment of the neural tube from the central nervous system of a developing quail embryo to that of a developing chicken embryo. Since quails are smaller than chickens, by the time the birds hatch the inserted quail region has grown to quail proportions but not chick proportions, indicating that the developmental clock is intrinsic to the cells.



Figure 6.9 Correlations between size and the setting of the developmental clock for brain structures are demonstrated by fetal neural grafting experiments.

A. Transplantation of neural cells from a rat embryo brain into an adult rat brain does not result in full regrowth of long axonal connections because the adult brain inhibits axon extension and thus slows growth so that when the cells reach maturity (after a few weeks at most), the axonal connections have only grown a fraction of a millimeter.

B. Xenotransplantation experiments demonstrate that the prolongation of the developmental clock of larger brains is even reflected in the development of isolated neural cells, irrespective of context. Fetal cells from a larger species (pig) transplanted into an adult brain of a smaller one (rat) actually grow further to reach distant targets (bottom right) than do rat donor cell axons (top right). This appears to be the result of the much longer time (more than 4 months) during which pig axons remain immature and able to grow.

Where does all this leave us in our analysis of the disproportionate growth of the dorsal forebrain of human embryos? At the present time, we have taken this reductionistic analysis down as far as the clues, and our current knowledge of the relevant processes, allow. But now that we know the “signature” of such a segmental change in cell production, we can begin to look for other examples involving other species, other brain structures, and other genes, and to use these as models to investigate the sort of molecular mechanisms that must have been recruited in our own evolution. Despite the lack of a mechanism fully to explain human brain segment disproportions, we have a considerable base of developmental and comparative data at our disposal from which to reconstruct how these changes affected brain evolution, brain structure, and brain function. The critical clues have already been provided by developmental neurobiology. These can help explain why it matters how the human difference in brain size was achieved. So we turn to these other neurodevelopmental processes in the next chapter.
