CHAPTER SEVEN


A Darwinian Electrician


We all agree that your theory is crazy. The question which divides us is whether it is crazy enough.

—Niels Bohr





Musical Chairs


Brain evolution should be impossible! Darwinian explanations require that incremental stages in the evolution of any adaptation always must be ends in and of themselves. Each must be useful. Classic theories of brain evolution have long been haunted by a conundrum posed by this requirement. If brains evolved piecemeal, structure by structure, then how could a new structure be added or modified in any significant way and have any hope of being useful, given that it must be linked up in a highly systematic fashion with hundreds of thousands or millions of other neurons in dozens of other brain regions? This would seem to require the simultaneous occurrence of matching mutations in a large number of independent structures. So many parts of the brain are connected so intricately to so many others that it should be astronomically unlikely that adding new brain regions or even modifying old ones could produce a result that worked well together, much less provide a functional advantage. Even changes in the periphery are difficult to reconcile, since for them to be functional a correlated change must occur in the way the brain handles the input it provides. A mismatch between brain and peripheral organs would be less than useless. In far less complicated mechanisms, like computers or TV sets, slight changes are far more likely to degrade the function of the whole than improve it.

Luckily, brains aren’t designed the way we design machines. Neither incredibly fortuitous and intricate mutations, nor immense amounts of evolutionary time, nor intermediate functions that bridge the gap turn out to be necessary to address this riddle. The reason is that evolution builds brains using evolution itself as a design tool. As it matures, a brain literally adapts to its body.

It would not be too much of a simplification to say that the size and shape of my hand and the types of cells that compose it were mostly determined by processes that took place in my hand during its development. Morphogenesis of most body parts is a result of local cell-cell interactions in which signaling molecules from one cell affect neighboring cells. So that when a genetic accident produces a mutated hand, it is fair to assume that the damaged genes expressed in hand cells produced this effect. Cells are small, so most cellular communications act over short distances. But this model of development is inadequate to explain brain development. It is not necessarily the case that a modification in the size or shape or function of part of the brain is determined by the actions of cells within that region. Indeed, the processes that determine where functions will come to be located may depend more critically on what is going on in a number of other very distinct parts of the brain during its development. This is because the developmental assignment of neural functions to different regions of the brain is in many respects systemically determined. In a very real sense, the brain as a whole participates in designing its parts. The implications of this unusual developmental logic are only beginning to be appreciated for brain evolution.

Unlike other cells of the body, neurons can be in direct contact with many cells that are located quite far apart from one another, by virtue of their long output (axons) and input (dendrite) branches. Because neurons are specialized for cell-cell communication over long distances, they can utilize an additional level of structural information over and above the regional segregation of tissues and cell lineages to help organize their functions. As it matures, a neuron will send out a long axonal process with a specialized tip (a growth cone) that selectively extends the axon to contact cells in other regions guided by molecular signals expressed along the way. Eventually, growing axons will make contact with target neurons, often located in distant parts of the brain. Within target regions, axons establish functional connections (synapses) with target neurons. Such connections are the basis for the specialized form of cellular communication—neurotransmission—that underlies the brain’s information-processing functions.

In the early stages of making synaptic connections, these synaptic links between nerve cells are also a force for structural differentiation. Because axonal extension allows populations of cells located distant from one another in the brain directly to interact and influence one another, it superimposes a nonlocal developmental logic on top of the local regional differentiation that preceded it. This complex interplay of local and distant cell interactions is capable of producing far more cellular heterogeneity, and therefore far more potential for functional differentiation, than is possible in any other organ system. Neurons born in distant regions and following very different developmental trajectories can directly and specifically communicate with each other, and so affect each other’s differentiation. This introduces a whole new level of cell-and tissue-differentiation possibilities that makes brain development particularly complicated and counterintuitive. It makes it possible for the nervous system as a whole to participate actively in its own construction. It also offers an important source of variations and adaptations that can play a role in brain evolution.

Classic neuroanatomical theories assumed that the differentiation of each brain structure was an independent trait, which would mean that different parts of the brain could be subject to independent evolutionary influences. But this turns out to be unlikely. One of the most important insights to come from neurobiology is that nongrowth processes play major roles in determining the size, organization, and function of brain regions. Many of these processes are actively self-destructive. For example, cell death—sometimes spontaneous, and sometimes driven by competition between cells for local resources—turns out to be a very important mechanism for the developmental sculpting of parts of the nervous system, serving to match the proportions of one to another (see Figure 7.1). The logic of this process is essentially a Darwinian logic: overproduction of random variants followed by selective support of some and elimination of most. It is similar to building a door by first building a wall and then later removing the portion of it that will serve as the doorway. Such a strategy, while appearing somewhat wasteful of material, is highly efficient in its use of information. It circumvents the difficulties of planning ahead and allows development to proceed with a minimum of design or regulatory mechanisms.



Figure 7.1 Darwinian processes in development of the peripheral nervous system.

A. During fetal development, axons growing out from spinal cord motor neurons compete for access to synaptic targets on muscle fibers. Initial axonal growth is essentially nonspecific (though constrained by such factors as distance and substrates) and overlaps in its projections. Competition ensues in which only one neuron will occupy synapses on one muscle fiber; those that end up losing all their connections die out. The result is that the neuronal population is matched to the muscle cell population.

B. Motor neuron cell bodies in the ventral horn of the spinal cord are initially produced in greater numbers than will survive to adulthood. But if a supernumerary limb is grafted onto the developing embryo (this can be done with chick and frog embryos), fewer cells are eliminated.

Since distant neuronal structures must engage in complex cooperative interactions in mature brains, the functional matching of cell populations and connections is particularly important. Programmed neuronal death plays a first role in this process by matching different but interconnected cell populations to one another. Some of the first evidence for the role of selective cell death in the nervous system came from studies of peripheral nerves and their external connections. Normally, a significant fraction of the initial population of motor neurons is eliminated from the spinal cord. In addition, animals from which muscles or whole limbs have been experimentally removed early in embryogenesis lose an even larger proportion of the motor neurons of the spinal cord and brain stem that would have projected to these peripheral structures. But in graft experiments where additional tissue is added to a developing embryo (e.g., an extra limb), fewer neurons than normal are lost from the areas connected to these grafts. Extra neurons were not initially produced, but neurons that would normally die were spared by the enlarged target (see Figure 7.1). Nature prefers to overproduce and trim to match, rather than carefully monitor and coordinate the development of innumerable separate cell populations.

This logic also describes the development of connectivity. Fetal axons have only rather general target attraction and avoidance information available to them, and so they don’t “know” with any precision where to grow or on which cells they should terminate (see Figure 7.2). Recent studies have begun to demonstrate that a variety of guidance mechanisms assist a growing axon in locating a target region elsewhere in the brain. Among these are guide filaments extended from non-neuronal cells, regional differences in cell-surface adhesion, spatial patterns of attraction and repulsion molecules, mechanical properties of tissues, and specific growth factors released by cells within target regions which help support axons that have arrived at the correct destination. These mechanisms are sufficient to bias axon growth toward selected general target regions, but they are insufficiently precise to specify any but the most global target distinction. More specific connectivity is instead specified post hoc, so to speak, as many connections become selectively culled in response to functional processes.

One reason for this lack of specificity is that the amount of information necessary to specify even a few percent of neural connections between cells would demand incredible amounts of genetic information. Further evidence that there must be an outside source of brain-wiring information is provided by the relative constancy of genome size across vast differences in brain size and correspondingly astronomical differences in connections. Although the human brain probably possesses hundreds or even thousands of times the number of neurons that are in some of the smallest vertebrate brains and millions of times more connections, it does not appear that this has correlated with a significant increase in genome size.



Figure 7.2 Four kinds of evidence that suggest that different regions of developing cerebral cortex all begin without specific input and output affinities, though cortical layers do show connectional specification, and that spatial position and competitive interactions between axons determine local function and connection patterns that distinguish functional areas.

Left. Normal connection patterns between cortex and other subcortical structures.

Right. In tissue culture (in vitro) experiments, where explanted cerebral cortex and thalamus (the major input nucleus) slices are allowed to grow axons into one another, there are no preferred associations between specific thalamic nuclei and cortical regions. There are, however, other more selective patterns between cortical layers. For example, layers 3 and 5 can connect to any cortical structure (lower left); layer 5 can also project to midbrain tissue, but not to thalamus (top); and layer 6 neurons do not project to cortex, only to thalamus (top). Relationship between thalamus and midbrain is predicted from the other combinations and natural patterns, but has not been demonstrated by experiment. These patterns suggest many predicted patterns that are untested. The figure summarizes studies from Molnár and Blakemore (1991) and Yamomoto, et al. (1989; 1992; 1995), among others who have corroborated these results. Asterisks indicate axons that fail to grow into the co-cultured tissue.

But there is another constraint on the developmental process that has dictated this design strategy. The genetic signaling mechanisms (regulatory genes) that initially partition the neural tube into major regions operate by cell contact and the diffusion of large signaling molecules, and there is an upper limit to the size of the embryo within which such molecular diffusion processes can operate effectively. Since essentially identical molecular processes are involved in establishing the initial brain divisions in animals as different in brain size as mice and humans, the same partitioning of neural segmental divisions must be extrapolated over a vast range of sizes. Larger brains will be less able to rely on genetic mechanisms to determine structural differences and more prone to proportional perturbations due to extrapolated growth processes. The added design information has to come from somewhere else in larger brains, but little of the extra information seems to come directly from genes. In the same sense that Darwinian processes have created new design information for building organisms during the course of the evolution of life, Darwinian-like processes in brain development are responsible for creating the new information required to adapt large brains to themselves and to their bodies.

Striking evidence for the generality of the information involved in specifying connections in the brain comes from neural transplantation experiments that cross species boundaries. It seems reasonable to assume that the determination of circuitry in different species’ brains should rely on different guidance signals for specifying connectional development. For example, it is often assumed that human brains are different because human neurons receive different genetic instructions about where to grow and where not to grow, and which cells to connect with and which not to connect with. Taking a bit of brain tissue from one species and placing it in another species’ brain should therefore mess up the neural “switchboard,” so to speak, by flooding it with misrouted connections. The chimeric brains that result from such interspecies transplantation experiments should be dysfunctional in the extreme, and the greater the species difference, the greater should be the disruption of function.

Surprisingly, this turns out not to be the case. In xenografting experiments (see Figure 7.3) in which fetal neural cells or even whole sections of embryonic brain tissue are transplanted from one species into another, the donor neurons make connections that are not only appropriate but functionally integrated with the host. In one series of experiments, we transplanted cells from selected regions of fetal pigs’ brains into various regions of adult rats’ brains. When we analyzed them later, we discovered that the growing axons of pig cells correctly interpreted the signals provided by their rat host’s brain to grow to regions of the brain that would have been normal targets for corresponding rat neurons.1 They apparently utilized the very same generic connection information that rat axons use during normal rat brain development. So, at this level of target specification, it appears that the signals for guiding the formation of neural connections in rat and pig brains are interchangeable. The implications for brain evolution are challenging. Rat brains are not pig brains, nor are pig brains merely bigger. It is of course possible that there are unique target signals in each, but the similarities suggest that the majority of connectional differences between pig and rat brains mostly emerge without cell-by-cell instruction. When a pig neuron grows up in a rat brain environment, it integrates with other neurons according to rat rules. We must look elsewhere for the source of their differences—to a sort of micro-ecology of axon growth.



Figure 7.3 Experiments implanting embryonic pig cells into rat brains (see also Chapter 6, Figure 6.9) demonstrate that initial axon guidance clues are not highly species-specific, but instead are shared by species as different as pigs and rats. Even though the donor neurons are from a very different species, and are sometimes implanted in places in the brain where such neurons are not normally found, their axons are still able to use the host brain’s signals to guide their growth to appropriate targets (as in A). Neural cells from the embryonic cortex (B), striatum (C), and ventral mid-brain (D) are shown transplanted into the striatum in separate experiments. It even seems probable that many of these guidance signals are shared with non-mammal species. This evolutionary conservatism suggests that species differences in brain design may not be determined by specific “wiring instructions,” but by other less direct mechanisms. The asterisk indicates that the ventral midbrain contains both dopaminergic (light gray) and nondopaminergic (white) neurons, which are transplanted together but whose axons grow to very different targets.



Figure 7.4 Manipulations in developing animals that involve altering normal axonal competition relationships demonstrate how this can alter the wiring pattern of the brain.

A. Normal pattern of connections.

B. Transplantation of the frontal cortical (motor) region to the occipital (visual) region, prior to the development of axonal connections, causes the transplanted sector to develop connections appropriate to the visual, not the somatosensory area (Stanfield and O’Leary, 1985).

C. Removing inputs destined for specific thalamic targets can allow other inputs to take over the vacated region and induce this part of the thalamus to transmit different sensory information to the cortex changing its function (Sur and Benson, 1988; Frost and Metin, 1985). This indicates that the projections to thalamic nuclei also lack specific restrictions as to which specific nuclei they can enter.

So, how do precisely organized neural circuits develop from information that is this generalized and vague, and how do species brain differences arise if not by specific instructions about which connections to change? Neurons overcome the problem of underdetermined target specificity by the same sort of logic that is used to match cell populations: selective elimination. They tend to overproduce branches of their growing axons, and these sample a large number of potential targets during the early stages of development, though only a fraction of these connections are retained into adulthood. The remainder are eliminated in a competition between axons from different neurons over the same synaptic targets (Figure 7.4). This Darwinian-like process is responsible for much of the fine-tuning of neural connection patterns that accounts for the adaptive precision of brain functions.2 Like Darwinian evolution, the adaptive structure of neural circuitry emerges out of the selective promotion and elimination of specific variant patterns. By initially overproducing connections that have been spread to a wide variety of targets, and then selecting from among these on the basis of their different functional characteristics, highly predictable and functionally adaptive patterns of connectivity can be generated with minimal prespecification of the details. This design logic also provides a means by which adaptive structural differences in neural circuitry can evolve in different species with a minimal number of correlated genetic changes. All that is required are changes that bias either the initial growth and variety of axonal connections or changes that bias the selective processes that cull some connections in favor of others.

Biases influencing axonal selection can arise from both functional and quantitative factors. The central rule underlying this selection process is believed to be the degree of temporal correlation of firing patterns of input axons and output neurons. A neuron generally receives hundreds or thousands of inputs from other neurons. No one of these inputs is sufficient to cause the receiving neuron to initiate an output signal; only the near-synchronous firing of many inputs will succeed in activating the recipient to fire. By a simple cellular mechanism (initially hypothesized by the psychologist Donald Hebb),3 axons that regularly release their neurotransmitters in synchrony with the firing of the recipient cell (which indicates synchrony with a large fraction of the other input axons) will tend to have their links to that cell strengthened, perhaps by the release of some growth factors. Those that tend to fire out of synchrony will, conversely, tend to lose support, and eventually may be eliminated. Though initially proposed as a mechanism for learning, this mechanism can account for more than just the strengthening or weakening of connectional influences. In the context of the developing brain, where the numbers of connections are significantly in excess of what will be maintained to maturity, it determines which connections will “win” in a biological variant of the children’s game “musical chairs,” where the numbers of viable targets decrease over time (Figure 7.5A and B).



Figure 7.5 Top: Presumed basis for synaptic competition between axons is the correlation of their firing patterns with other axons synapsing on the same cell. Axons firing relatively more out of sync (°) with the majority (A) will tend to be eliminated (B), probably due to failure to receive growth factors from the receiving cell. Bottom: Development of cerebral cortical projections to the brain stem and spinal cord begins with most areas of cortex projecting nonspecifically to most potential targets (C). During subsequent development, collateral projections that do not both receive and connect to other systems with similar signalling characteristics are eliminated, leaving connections with functionally segregated topographically organized connection patterns (D).

The best illustrations of this competitive determination of connectivity and functional parcellation in brain regions come from studies of cortical development in mammals. Let’s begin by considering the functional and architectural specificity of different sectors of the cortical surface. The adult mammal cerebral cortex is divided into a number of distinct regions, defined in terms of cell structure, functional specificity, and connections to other brain structures. In the rhesus monkey brain, for example, the distinct visual cortical areas alone may number in the dozens. The developmental processes that are responsible for this “parcellation” of cortex involve some genetic specification of regionality, but surprisingly little.

Another fetal transplant paradigm in which fetal cortex from one region is moved to another region has been employed by Dennis O’Leary and his colleagues at the University of California in San Diego in order to probe for factors controlling the establishment of long-distance connections of cortical neurons. These studies have provided some of the most dramatic evidence of nonspecificity and selection processes in brain development. When immature tissue is transplanted from one site to another in the rat cortex—at a stage before any connections have been established—the connections don’t follow the move, but connect as though nothing had happened, apparently uninfluenced by the site of origin of the transplanted tissue (see Figure 7.4B). Related studies by many researchers have demonstrated the mechanism that underlies this flexibility.4 In the early stages of cortical maturation, axons from every region of the cerebral cortex grow to all the potential targets for a cortical neuron. Subsequently, cortical neurons in different regions selectively lose their connections with some target regions but maintain their connections with others, and complementary patterns of retained and lost connections develop in different cortical regions (Figure 7.5C and D). By the later stages of development, strict regional differences in connectivity remain so that cortical efferents from one area project to targets that all have similar modality of function (i.e., all-motor or all-visual structures).

But what biases the competition so that one region of cortex ends up specializing in visual and one in motor outputs? The complementary bias comes from input projections that nearly all arrive by way of the thalamus. But thalamic inputs to cortex also exhibit nonspecificity. This has been shown by growing brain tissues together in a dish (explantation as opposed to transplantation). When randomly chosen chunks of embryonic fetal thalamus and cerebral cortex are grown near to one another in tissue culture, different sectors of cortex and thalamus are equally likely to grow linking connections (see Figure 7.2). This is not totally nonspecific growth because thalamic connections will not grow to most other brain structures in similar conditions. Such growth appears more affected by physical proximity and the physical constraints inadvertently created by neighboring axons than by any spatial signal specificity (see Figure 7.5).

In normally developing brains, however, not every thalamic structure is likely to get an even chance to innervate every cortical structure. Differences in timing of axonal growth, molecular gradients, and proximity may each offer subtle growth biases. The topology (i.e., relative spatial position of points) of connection maps from brain region to brain region tends to be maintained with only subtle variation from individual to individual within a species (and even to a large extent across species); also simply because projections tend to have difficulty crossing through one another in different directions, and tend in most systems to separate into parallel bundles. Nevertheless, this spatial organization is only approximate in the early stages, and many divergent connections are made; but as development proceeds, most of these spatially aberrant projections are culled by competition. Within specific projection areas there is even a further degree of shaping up of connectional specificity. Projections that initially ramify locally over a many-millimeter-wide area eventually become confined to very narrow columns of recipient neurons to create precise maps that exhibit sensory and motor topography. Thus, beginning from crude spatial and temporal gradients which contribute initial biases to global afferent connection patterns, competitive processes at progressively more localized levels amplify these into what eventually become fine-grained, point-to-point maps. Intrinsic factors clearly play a role and may introduce additional functional biases, but these are expressed in the context of many levels of previous biasing and shaping processes that have roughed out what is connected to what.

Cells in different areas of the brain are not their own masters, and have not been given their connection orders beforehand. They have some crude directional information about the general class of structures that make appropriate targets, but apparently little information about exactly where they should end up in a target structure or group of potential target structures.

In a very literal sense, then, each developing brain region adapts to the body it finds itself in. There is a sort of ecology of interactions determined by the other brain regions to which it is linked that selects for appropriate brain organization. This process provides the answer to the problem of correlated adaptations in different parts of such a complex system as brain and body. There need be no “preestablished harmony” of brain mutations to match body mutations, because the developing brain can develop a corresponding organization “on line,” during development. Paradoxically, the initially crude determination of targets is what allows the topographic precision of connections with in the brain, because it allows for progressively more detailed fine-tuning. After adapting to invariant features of the rest of the brain and body, neural connections can further take advantage of the wealth of invariant patterning that is intrinsic to the stimuli the organism encounters in its environment as well, by virtue of the micro-changes in synaptic distribution and strength linking individual neurons that constitute most of learning in mature organisms. Learning, then, is only the late-stage expression of a fine-tuning process that progresses from patterns involving the whole brain to those involving its smallest cellular branches.

Thus, contrary to a century of speculative accounts of brain evolution, phylogenetic differences in the sizes and functions of particular cortical or nuclear regions cannot generally be attributed to the addition of cells to that area or to changes in gene expression in that area. This sort of evolutionary phrenology is inconsistent with the processes that underlie differences in brain organization. The relative sizes of the different cortical areas, the specific connections that they have with other brain structures, and even attributes of local cellular architecture are not locally determined. If a cortical region appears to have changed size or function in the course of evolution it is likely because of a systemic change affecting a number of brain regions whose connections happen to converge on it. This indirect and distributed determination of brain structure and connectivity radically changes how we must think about the evolution of the nervous system.

Evolution is thus provided with a power tool for adaptive flexibility. The brain does not have to be redesigned every time that the body is restructured. The eyes can converge or diverge, the olfactory apparatus can shrink or expand, limbs can be reduced to vestigial proportions or radically restructured for different forms of locomotion, or tactile receptors can be concentrated into the tips of sensitive digits or tails over the course of phylogeny, and the very same neural developmental mechanisms can produce a brain that is appropriate. This explains why pig or human fetal neurons transplanted to the brain of a rat host grow to appropriate targets and produce appropriate functional consequences—for a rat. Each species does not need its own revised axonal growth instructions. The developmental information is highly conserved precisely because it can be general, relying on Darwinian-like developmental processes to produce the detailed adaptations of neural networks to one another. This introduces an evolutionary logic that runs counter to many of the most basic assumptions of classic theories of brain evolution. We do not need to invoke all sorts of specific and highly improbable mutations of brain structure design in order to account for changes in the relationships between the parts of brains. But we are also not able to call on genetic micro-management of neural wiring to explain brain and cognitive differences between species either.





Displacement


Because the construction of neural circuitry has a crude and initially unspecified character, subtle differences in such biasing influences as developmental timing, neuronal numbers, and correlated activity patterns can be a source of species differences in brain function. If the determination of which connections persist and which are retracted depends on the correlated activity of other axons projecting to the same target region, then the relative quantities of projections that arrive in any target region are a particularly important selective bias affecting which connections will be eliminated or not. Among competing structures, the structure that sends the greatest number of axons to a particular target will tend to drive the activity patterns of cells in that target more effectively, and this will give connections that are from a larger source population a “voting” advantage in determining which connections will remain. This has very important implications for understanding the patterns and processes of brain evolution, because it means that modifications of the relative proportions of peripheral and central nervous system structures can significantly alter connection patterns. So, although genetic tinkering may not go on in any significant degree at the connection-by-connection level, genetic biasing at the level of whole populations of cells can result in reliable shifts in connection patterns.

This suggests that regional brain and peripheral nervous system size effects play a major role in mammalian brain evolution.5 I call this evolutionary mechanism displacement. In general terms, relative increases in certain neuronal populations will tend to translate into the more effective recruitment of afferent and efferent connections in the competition for axons and synapses. So, a genetic variation that increases or decreases the relative sizes of competing source populations of growing axons will tend to displace or divert connections from the smaller to favor persistence of connections from the larger (see Figure 7.6). Differences in the relative sizes of alternative target structures will have a complementary effect. The relative enlargement of one target or another will tend to attract connections away from the smaller since the competitive elimination is more fierce within the smaller structure than in the larger structure.



Figure 7.6 Examples of some general mechanisms of cell and axonal displacement effects influenced by relative size changes in different brain or peripheral neural structures.

Left: Normal culling of projections from a source to a target (idealized thalamo-cortical connections are depicted) results in a parcellation of the target structure into functionally discrete regions (two shades of gray).

Right: Changes in either target or source cell populations can shift the balance of competition and produce displacement effects, with cascading consequences in other brain structures. Relatively increasing (+) or decreasing (-) the numbers of inputs from different peripheral sources (e.g., due to normal cell proliferation differences in different species or due to early damage) effectively reduces one of the competing input sources and modifies the parcellation at subsequent levels as well. Enlargement or reduction of the target with respect to its sources of inputs can also bias the axonal competition in complementary ways. Change in the relative population of neurons in a source or target can even induce projections to invade “phylogenetically new” territories.

The notion of axonal displacement helps explain a number of cases of species-specific brain reorganization described in the literature of both developmental and comparative neuroanatomy. Some of the most labile components of the nervous system, in terms of size, are the peripheral sensory and movement systems. Once the sizes and spatial geometries of these structures have been determined in each species independent of the brain, they contribute stable biases whose influences can propagate through many levels of central nervous system organization. Thus, changes in the total numbers or proportions of sensory receptors (size of retina, increased receptor density in specialized tactile surfaces, etc.) should have significant organizing consequences in the developing brain. This is exemplified in a series of studies with newborn ferrets in which the ascending projections from tactile centers of the spinal cord were cut so that few reached their destination in the thalamus, the major relay station between most inputs and the cerebral cortex, and also in which the major thalamic targets for visual projections from the retina were damaged (see Figure 7.4C). These combined insults caused the undamaged visual projections—which lacked a normal target—to reroute to the region of the thalamus that otherwise would have received the now-severed tactile projections. As in the cortex, different parts of the thalamus were equally willing to accept almost any of the class of thalamic inputs, irrespective of the type of information they carried. Since the thalamus still sent connections to the cortex, the information that arrived in a region that otherwise would have handled touch was visual information—and, remarkably, this tactile area of cortex became responsive to visual stimuli. Similar studies involving newborn rats, ferrets, and hamsters have shown that the rerouted information can even induce structural changes in the cellular organization of cortex that are appropriate for the change in modality of inputs.

Dennis O’Leary has completed this loop of inferences by showing that experimentally produced changes in inputs that modify the pattern of cortical maps can also contribute to the patterning of the cortical output connections as well. Cortical regions that get rerouted visual inputs and lack normal somatic and motor information eventually lose all but those output connections that contact to visual system targets of the tectum. (Compare Figure 7.4C to Figure 7.5 C and D.) Input information is essential for sculpting the output connections. Neither the inputs nor the outputs are predetermined intrinsically.

In an analogous manner the potential for developmental displacement harbors a potentially important source of variability that can be unmasked during the course of evolution in different species. For example, transient connections that are eliminated during the development of an ancestral species might not be eliminated under differently biased conditions that could arise in a later lineage. An interesting example of such a possibility has been discussed by O’Leary.6 He notes that fibers projecting in a bundle called the fornix, which originate from the hippocampus (a limbic cortical structure of the cerebral cortex) and terminate in targets mostly in the diencephalon (including the mammillary bodies of the posterior hypothalamus and the anterior nuclei of the thalamus), also project beyond these normal targets to reach central midbrain regions during a transient period in the early development of the rat brain. They are culled as the rat matures. But in some brains, this connection appears to be retained into adulthood. Elephant brains (and some human brains), for example, have a clear postmammillary fornix that persists in this midbrain region in adults. It is entirely possible that the size differences in these species is what contributes to a different competitive milieu that favors retention of this connection (and conversely biases against it in small brain species).



Figure 7.7 The blind mole rat (Spalax) provides an example of neural displacement effects in evolution of the brain. This species’ nearly vestigial eyes provide so few visual projections to the thalamic visual targets that during development they are out-competed for this target by auditory inputs. As a result, a normally visual nucleus (the lateral geniculate nucleus, LGN) receives auditory projections that would usually be confined to an adjacent nucleus (the medial geniculate body, MGB), and passes auditory signals to cortex to take over territories usually involved in visual sensory analysis. The figure summarizes findings from Heil, et al. (1991), and Doron and Wollberg (1994).

More generally, sensorimotor specializations of the brain may be achieved in different species simply by the enlargement or reduction of peripheral structures. In cave-dwelling and subterranean species, we see a trend toward a reduction of eyes. This is the natural counterpart to lab experiments involving interrupting visual inputs in early development. Displacement is clearly evident in these cases. For example, in a species of “blind” mole rat (Spalax), the cerebral cortex is almost entirely lacking visual areas, while somatic, motor, and auditory areas seem to have expanded to take over the territory that vision would have occupied in a nonblind rodent counterpart (see Figure 7.7).7 This displacement of functional regions clearly corresponds to the nearly complete reduction of the eyes and the massive expanse of muscles of the head and neck that are important for digging. Analysis of connections in the brain of this species demonstrates that there has been axonal displacement at the level of the visual thalamus and below. Although the lateral geniculate nucleus (typically the primary retinal receptive nucleus) of the thalamus projects appropriately to the posterior dorsal cortex (the location where visual cortex normally would reside), it receives projections from the inferior colliculus, the major midbrain auditory analyzer that normally would project to the neighboring medial geniculate nucleus of the thalamus. Thus, as in the experimentally manipulated perinatal brains, radically altering the proportions of peripheral projections from different systems can produce axonal displacement effects that cascade throughout the developing brain, spontaneously matching the central organization to the peripheral specializations.

But not all quantitative shifts of inputs and outputs are caused by evolutionary modifications of peripheral sensorimotor organs. Since body plans for both the smallest and the largest mammals must be scaled up from similar embryonic beginnings, significant allometric shifts in body and brain proportions may result from this extrapolation process. These, too, should contribute displacement effects, but they will tend to correlate with scale. One of the first patterns of cortical “evolution” recognized by neuroanatomists at the beginning of the twentieth century was the progressive decrease in the relative proportion of highly specialized sensory cortical areas (koniocortex) and the relative increase in more generalized cortex (the so-called association areas) in the presumed evolutionary “ascent” from small insectivores to large primates. This has long been interpreted to mean that there had been a trend toward more elaborate “higher-order” cognitive functions in brains with a higher proportion of association cortex. But this pseudo-evolutionary trend is highly correlated with size. The relative proportions of koniocortex and association cortex can be predicted from brain size alone.

In the last chapter, I suggested that scaling patterns of different brain regions might in part reflect internal information-handling problems (informational allometry and analogous to the increase in middle-level management with business size). This might be achieved by displacement effects. For example, larger animals do not have proportionately larger eyes. Their eyes and the number of cells on the retina are negatively allometric with body size and even with brain size, so as animals get larger, these retinal projections probably become a smaller and smaller fraction of the projections to the thalamus during development. If the allometry of brain and spinal cord is indicative, this also seems to be true of somatic inputs and skeletal motor outputs, since the brain is larger with respect to the spinal cord in larger species. As result, direct peripheral projections probably diminish in proportion to intrinsic projections to the thalamus. The decreasing proportion of “projection” cortex and the increasing proportion of “association” cortex with increasing brain size might thus reflect a cascade of size-correlated displacements.

The displacement process is likely to be most informative in the case of the human. As we have seen, the most robust differences distinguishing human brains from other primate brains have to do with size. In the mystery of the human brain, the displacement process provides the crucial link between global changes in brain growth patterns and changes in functional organization. Our relatively larger brain and its comparatively prolonged and out-of-sync growth suggest that displacement may have played a crucial role in restructuring the relationships within it, ultimately resulting in some very different functional relationships from those in other primates and other mammals generally. Major shifts in proportions between the enlarged human brain and the peripheral nervous system structures of a relatively unenlarged body should have produced a cascade of displacement effects within the brain. Major shifts in the initial proportions of major brain divisions should also have added unique internal displacement effects, none of which have clear precedents in other primates. Unlike speculations about unique human functions based upon hypothetical special mutations modifying the local wiring of this or that brain structure, or adding this or that new region—all of which appear to be ruled out by the Darwinian nature of brain development—there are quite specific rules of inference we can apply to the analysis of quantitative changes and their effect on neural circuitry. Knowing something about the general patterns of early target determination, and the types of biasing influences that translate these into final architecture, we are in a much better position to extrapolate from other, better-understood mammal brains to human brains.

Now we can see why it matters how the human brain became enlarged with respect to the body. And why the level of encephalization exhibited in adulthood does not necessarily have consistent neural or cognitive correlates. What distinguishes human encephalization from that of other primates and from chihuahuas is not so much the extent of encephalization, but at what point during development the size differences appeared, and which structures accounted for the growth disproportions. The major displacement processes that shape the proportions and patterning of neural circuitry are completed around or shortly after birth. At this point in development, growth of most of the body is still at an early stage. Proportional variations that develop later in life will thus have a minimal impact on brain structure. The chihuahua, which develops along a brain/body growth trajectory very similar to that of larger dogs in utero and only significantly deviates from this pattern after birth, does not develop its neural architecture in the context of significantly modified central versus peripheral proportions. In a chihuahua, while in the womb and just around birth, the brain is adapting to a typical-size fetal dog body.

But the situation for primates as compared to chihuahuas and to most other mammals is different. Even if primate encephalization is a consequence of reduced body growth and not accelerated brain growth, as is suggested by developmental growth curves, the shift in these proportions is present throughout fetal development. Immature primate brains do indeed adapt to bodies that are proportionately smaller than in most other mammals. The deviation of primate brain organization from more typical mammalian patterns, then, depends on exactly how these proportional differences are distributed in the fetal body. Is the primate head, including the brain, eyes, and ears (but not face, mouth, or nasal region), spared from this postcranial reduction, or just the brain itself? If, for example, primate eyes do not participate in this postcranial reduction, then we would predict that visual projections will exert greater success at recruiting sensory brain regions when compared to tactile and motor systems. I suspect that this is the case, given the comparatively large percentage of primate cortex that is visual; however, neither fetal body segment data nor adequate brain region data are currently available to test this possibility. In whatever way this shift in proportional growth partitions primate bodies, it will initiate a series of competitive biases that ramify through the primate brain during development, and cause it to differ systematically in connection patterns and regional proportions from those of other mammals. Even if we are not willing to conclude that primates are more intelligent than other mammals as a result, we can confidently predict that their brains will operate with very differently distributed sensory, motor, and cognitive resources.

Human brains, too, will have a unique shift of cognitive resources, distinct both from other primates, whose encephalization is the result of embryonic reduction of body size, and from chihuahuas, whose encephalization is the result of dwarfism. The disproportionate expansion of human dorsal forebrain structures from a point in early fetal development should have produced a unique signature of connectional and functional shifts as well. Some, due to the global shift in brain / body proportions, will further extrapolate the primate pattern of brain structure deviations. Others, due to the segmental differences between brain regions, will have no nonhuman counterpart. Both are relevant to the evolution of language.





An Alien Brain Transplant Experiment


While attending a conference in Santa Fe, New Mexico, I came across an advertisement for a lecture by a New Age guru. The lecture promised revelations that would unite both the biblical and evolutionary versions of the Creation story and explain many mysteries from human nature to the Egyptian Pyramids. Though I was unable to attend, I learned that the lecturer presented evidence that humans are an artificial species, created by a race of aliens/gods as a result of an advanced genetic experiment. Presumably, this experiment involved a modification of the brain, perhaps the genetic analogue of a brain transplant. Though I am not in any way suggesting that we seriously consider an alien experiment scenario for human origins,8 there is at least one sense in which the thought experiment of a hominid brain transplant leads to interesting consequences. The altered growth process that produces a human brain can perhaps best be described as though a human child is growing a brain from a much larger primate species. The human pattern of brain growth is appropriate for a gigantic ape, while the pattern of body growth is appropriate for a large chimp. So, imagine that alien scientists literally transplanted the brain from the embryo of a giant ape into tine head of a chimpanzee embryo. The species known as Gigantopithecus—an extinct eight-foot ape that left fossils in Asia and Europe perhaps as recently as a few hundred thousand years ago—would be a good choice for the donor species. When we try to imagine how this fanciful experiment would affect the host’s brain development, some interesting predictions result.

The large adult size of the transplanted fetal brain compared to the adult size of its host body would radically alter the normal competitive “balance” between connection systems originating peripherally and centrally. Projections from peripheral organs like the host eye and the tactile sensory inputs from the host body would recruit target populations of neurons within the donor brain that were appropriate for the number of inputs they supply. But since the chimp body would only be a fraction as large as would normally carry a brain this size, the space within this brain that these inputs would recruit would be significantly reduced compared to what would happen in a normal Gigantopithecus body. Similarly, as in embryos where limbs are removed prior to motor innervation, there would probably be greater cell loss in motor-output systems and less recruitment of central brain areas for motor functions than in a typical Gigantopithecus brain. In general, the disproportions of body and brain would ramify through the developing brain as each stage in competition for connections was influenced by prior biases. The adult brain that would result would be quite different from either the donor or host species’ brains. Many structures and functional divisions of the transplanted brain would be smaller than expected for a Gigantopithecus brain, but others would be larger, if they inherited neural space from those that were more constrained by peripheral connections.

So let’s return to reality. Though a chimpanzee-Gigantopithecus chimera is a product of science fiction, it offers a remarkably close analogue for understanding the special problems of human brain development, and a good predictor of human brain structure proportions. This science fiction scenario leads us to expect some curious discrepancies in our brains compared to more typical primate patterns. In general, we should expect that brain structures more directly tied to or dependent upon peripheral systems should be the most constrained in size to match them, and that those most synaptically removed from the periphery should be the least constrained in the competition for neural space.

For over a century neuroanatomists have been collecting and comparing data on the sizes of brain structures in human and nonhuman brains. However, without an adequate understanding of how growth processes and developmental competition effects interact to produce these quantitative results, interpretations of these data often did not consider the ways that relative size differences at all levels may be linked. The result has been that brain evolution was treated as a sort of mosaic affair, in which changes in different parts were considered independently. If one structure appeared enlarged, it was thought to have become more important or a more powerful information processor (following a gross or net functional logic). The Gigantopithecus brain transplant analogy suggests, however, that local structural changes can be developmental consequences of large-scale changes in relative size of the brain and body, and so may not be independent adaptations, even if all may influence neural processes.

Consider the visual cortex as an example of this linkage between global and local size effects. The Columbia University paleoneurologist Ralph Holloway was one of the first researchers to notice that an unexpectedly small proportion of the human cerebral cortex was taken up by visual projections.9 Though not small in absolute terms, in comparison to other primate visual cortices it was smaller than would be predicted for a primate brain as big as the human brain. Thus, to extend the analogy, when corrected for our large brain size, our primary visual cortex appears to occupy less surface than it would in a super Gigantopithecus’ brain. Holloway offered this as evidence that the human brain had not just evolved increased size, but had become differently organized as well. But does this suggest that in some way vision became less important, or that other nonvisual areas became more important than this one and took up more space in our evolutionary past?10

The imaginary example of the alien brain transplant experiment provides another way to look at these proportions. Consider the interrelationships between the eyes and the visual structures to which they project. Both the lateral geniculate nucleus, which receives direct inputs from the retina, and area 17 of the cerebral cortex, which receives lateral geniculate inputs relayed from the retina, are significantly smaller than would be predicted in a primate brain that reached human proportions. This is because an ape of the immense proportions that would normally carry such a large brain would also have had much larger eyes than we have; the number of visual projections to that brain would have been far greater than for the human retina. In the Gigantopithecus-chimp chimera, the proportions of these visual structures would be matched to a relatively reduced input, and would be more typical of chimp proportions than Gigantopithecus proportions. A similar argument can be made for the human visual analyzers. Our visual cortex is not small for our brain size because of some reduced importance of vision or because of the independent addition of other nonvisual areas to the cortex. The human brain does not have a reduced visual cortex, but the appropriate amount of visual cortex for its retina (see Figure 7.8).



Figure 7.8 Quantitative deviation of human cerebral cortical regional areas as a function of the sizes predicted for a “typical” ape brain of human brain size (this is analogous to studying the brain of a 1,000 lb. ape: the size that a primate would be if it had a human size brain but fit the typical brain-body trend for monkeys and apes). Many of the data are incomplete and insufficient for statistical tests, but for prefrontal and occipital cortices the values are sufficiently deviant and the data are sufficiently complete to know that these structures are significantly different in size than expected. The figure points out a global pattern to these proportional changes. Structures with relatively direct peripheral links (from eyes, nose, touch senses, muscles) tend to be constrained in size by the size of these sources or targets (which are proportional to the body). Prefrontal cortex lacks direct peripheral connections, as do auditory and parietal areas for which data are not available. This pattern is also observed for relay nuclei between these areas and the periphery. Thus, the human cerebral cortex reflects significant displacement effects, due to the shift in brain/body proportions in our evolutionary history.

A similar pattern characterizes motor and tactile systems as well. The primary motor cortex is also closely linked to the periphery, but by efferent (output) rather than afferent (input) connections. The boundaries of this cortical region are clearly demarcated in microscope sections by the presence of unusually large output neurons located in layer five of the six-layered cortex. These are termed Betz cells. The limiting factor that determines how many Betz cells are in the motor cortex, and thus its total size, is probably the number of long direct axonal connections that can be established with primary motor neurons in the ventral horn of the spinal cord. The number of spinal motor neurons thus determines the number of cortical motor neurons that will take on the morphology characteristic of these giant long-distance projection neurons. The number of spinal motor neurons in turn is determined by their competition for muscle fibers. This peripheral competition between motor axons is probably even better understood than that which occurs in the central nervous system. As we saw in the beginning of this chapter, it results in both a retraction of supernumerary (outcompeted) projections and the death of some spinal neurons in the process of matching neuron numbers to muscle fiber numbers during early development (see Figure 7.1 and earlier discussion). Studies of other peripheral sensory systems that have been rewired from birth suggest that this effect will be passed on up the line, and that the size of the cortical motor region (as identified by the presence of Betz cells) will, in turn, be indirectly determined by the production of fetal muscle fibers.11 Cells in primary tactile, motor, and visual regions of the cortex are just one synapse removed from the corresponding peripheral representations, and the corresponding thalamic nuclei of these two sensory areas are only one synapse away, so it is not surprising that these structures are among the most appropriate in size to their peripheral connections and the most reduced with respect to typical predictions for brain size (Figure 7.8).

So, a bigger brain in the same-size body will also be a very different brain, but it will be predictably different, and the developmental causes and consequences of this should not be difficult to trace to changes in body structure and proportions. The relative sizes of the brain’s functional divisions are determined in a systemic competition for space driven ultimately by peripheral constraints and shifts in segmental proportions determined in early embryogenesis. Though this does not rule out functional and adaptational consequences of individually enlarging or reducing brain structures, it forces us to understand such size variations in terms of systemwide effects:12 they are not isolated adaptations. With peripherally specialized input and output systems recruiting less synaptic “space” than would be expected in such a large ape brain, some other systems must stand to benefit instead. Those nuclei and cortical areas that receive little or no input from peripheral nervous structures should stand to inherit extra space because they are relatively insulated from peripheral constraints.

Among cortical areas it appears as though the prefrontal cortex may have inherited additional territory in the human brain, perhaps from reduced motor areas nearby. According to separate extrapolations derived from independent data sources (see Figure 7.9), I have estimated that human prefrontal cortex is roughly twice the size that would be predicted in an ape brain as big as ours.13 This is probably the most divergently enlarged of any large brain region (the olfactory bulbs are probably the most divergently reduced). The magnitude of this expansion of the prefrontal lobes has been so extensive that it has been recognized by researchers since the late nineteenth century, based on gross comparisons of human and nonhuman brains and skulls. To get some idea of how this compares to systems that are constrained by peripheral representations, consider that it is roughly six times larger (in absolute size) than the chimpanzee prefrontal cortex, though chimpanzee and human bodies are nearly comparable. Prefrontal cortex receives only very indirect relayed information from peripheral systems, mostly via connections from other cortical areas. Its thalamic inputs come from nuclei that receive limbic and dorsal midbrain information conveying arousal and orienting signals. All these inputs are from brain structures that have been part of the embryologically expanded brain regions, so it is not surprising that the prefrontal cortex should be among the least constrained in size. Though this relative size increase is an indirect consequence of these many converging competitive processes during development, it nevertheless contributes one of the more extreme shifts in net human brain function, compared to other species.



Figure 7.9 Human prefrontal cortex allometry assessed using two independent data sets and corrected for part/whole artifacts.

A. Scaling of prefrontal cortex surface with respect to the remaining surface of the cerebral cortex shows that, for the trend extrapolated from other monkeys and apes, the human proportions are anomalous (data from Brodmann, 1912).

B. Human disproportion of prefrontal cortex with respect to the adjacent pre-motor cortex (data from Blinkov and Glezer, 1968) compared to the trend extrapolated from the other apes and a baboon.

So in all these ways, the Gigantopitheus-chimp brain transplant analogy provides a reasonable model for a variety of human brain structure proportions. However, neither the whole brain nor even the whole forebrain has enlarged in humans, only the dorsal portions of the forebrain (as described in the last chapter). Thus, the effects on connectional organization are somewhat more complex than are envisioned by this imaginary extraterrestrial experiment. The divergence in size of the human dorsal versus the ventral forebrain has shifted connectional patterns in ways that are radically different from other species’ brains. These turn out to be critical to understanding two of the most central features of the human language adaptation: the ability to speak and the ability to learn symbolic associations. Specifically, I will argue that the ability to produce skilled vocalizations can be traced to changes in motor projections to the midbrain and brain stem, while the ability to overcome the symbol-learning problem can be traced to the expansion of the prefrontal cortical region, and the preeminence of its projections in competition for synapses throughout the brain. The functional consequences of these displacement effects will be discussed in some detail in the next two chapters. But before we can consider these issues, we need to consider briefly some general problems of interpreting the relationship between size and brain function that we encountered in the previous chapter.





Beyond Phrenology


This developmental approach to brain morphology gives a new meaning to a classic theory concerning the relation of brain structure to function: the concept of “proper mass.” As we saw in the last chapter, the concept of “proper mass” is usually invoked along with the assumption that larger brain structures are more powerful analyzers or more spacious storage devices than smaller ones. So, the presence of a comparatively large auditory region might have suggested that its possessor had a greater capacity for sound analysis and a heavier demand for sound analysis in its niche. This “bigger-is-more-powerful” perspective has thus been applied at the regional as well as whole brain level of analysis. Indeed, the regional interpretation is probably older. It was the basis for one of the first theories of localized brain functions—phrenology—proposed at the turn of the nineteenth century by Franz Josef Gall. Gall and his student Spurzheim reasoned that the shape of brains and the effects of localized brain damage suggested that brain functions were organized in local centers. He further hypothesized that there should be individual differences in brain structure that corresponded to differences in talents, propensities, and other personality traits, and that these should be reflected in the relative sizes of the corresponding centers for these functions. Greedy people should have a large aquisitiveness center, musicians should have a relatively large musical center, and so on. This also led to the prediction that head shape should reflect underlying enlargements or reductions of the various centers, allowing phrenologists to collect evidence for their theories by studying patterns of cranial geometry. Though Gall’s choice of functions to assign to brain centers seems curious from a modern perspective, the logic of his underlying theory is alive and well.

These phrenologically derived notions are to some extent in conflict with developmental data which suggest that the sizes of individual brain structures are not determined in isolation. Both peripheral-central matching processes and region-by-region competitive effects play a role, along with initial more global cell-production processes. A larger retina or a more densely innervated tactile receptor surface will require a larger network in order simply to break even, in information-processing terms, and their projecting axons will compete in proportion to their numbers with other projections for the synaptic space that corresponds to that information-processing need. This rule of thumb can be extended to other brain regions that do not directly link to the periphery, though the analysis becomes complicated by the cascade of converging parcellation influences from many different sources.

The logic of the developmental processes that determine brain structure sizes may offer some initial clues about the resulting functional consequences. Since a Darwinian-like process in brain development determines the relative sizes of functional brain regions and their patterns of connection, there is reason to suspect that a Darwinian-like functional consequence should result. The brain’s wiring is determined by virtue of the interaction of information conveyed by its connections, so the way that information is analyzed ultimately becomes reflected in the way brain regions are “designed” by this activity. This is a competitive selection process, a sort of rapid local evolutionary process on a microscopic scale. It makes sense, then, to predict that the principal effect of changes in relative scale within the brain will also have a competitive-selective consequence on function. The relative enlargement of one structure with respect to another may give the larger some sort of competitive advantage in the battle for influence over target synaptic activity. In other words, if one brain structure is relatively enlarged compared to another, this should translate into both displacement of connections during development and displacement of computational influence in adulthood with respect to other competing inputs from other brain structures. More inputs equals more votes influencing the computational outcome.

Parcellation is a zero-sum game. When one structure become partially enlarged, another is reduced. Applying this analogy to cognitive functions would suggest that shifts in relative proportions will be translated into functional trade-offs. The class of neural computations supported by an enlarged region will tend to have more influence over final global outputs than that supported by a reduced region. This argument has analogies to some of the effects of brain damage. When a structure is damaged, not only is there a loss of function but there is also inevitably a gain of function—though not an improvement—in the form of “released” behaviors, which appear to be disinhibited by the removal of a competing influence. A zero-sum size effect is also suggested by studies of the effects of quantitative differences in connections. For example, differences in the number and extent of fibers projecting between two major structures within the hippocampus14 (a limbic structure that has been strongly implicated in the consolidation of certain kinds of memory) correspond with inverse patterns of learning improvements and impairments on complementary tasks (such as maze learning versus passive avoidance learning). Differences in relative hippocampal size with respect to the rest of the brain have also been correlated with food-caching behaviors in birds and their ability to recall a large number of observed hiding places in tests. If this too reflects a trade-off, one might predict that species with relatively smaller hippocampi would outperform their food-storing counterparts in some other complementary mnemonic tasks, though I do not believe this has been studied.

But this zero-sum logic which applies to parcellation processes in development also applies to growth processes, which are also involved and are of special importance for the expansion of the human brain. Differential growth alters the context of functional competition and parcellation so that certain classes of connections—those with input and output connections to other enlarged regions—gain an unfair competitive advantage. For them, the competition is less severe and the game is thrown in their favor. Thus, the developmental interpretation that led us to assume a functional interpretation of size relationships cannot strictly apply to these systems. In developmental terms, these changes are addition effects that are prior to and independent of the competitive parcellation processes. By analogy, however, we could argue that larger recruitment fields reflect some “virtual” competitive parcellation. It is as though they were being recruited by some massive input projection, or were supported by a massive output target from outside, though in fact this is not the case. From an adaptational perspective, the source of the competitive bias is irrelevant. The final connectional proportions are what will determine function.

Recasting the problem of net versus gross function of different brain regions in this way provides a new tool for thinking about the functional consequences of proportionately enlarged human brain structures, not in terms of their being more “powerful” computers, but rather in terms of shifting the balance of computational influences in the whole brain: size difference as a source of cognitive bias. It is as though the enlarged structure’s share of the workload of information handling has been increased, and its ability to recruit and dominate the computations going on in other structures has also increased. The relatively enlarged regions of the human brain should thus tend to shift the balance of information processing towards the sorts of sensory, motor, and mnemonic processes that characterize these structures in other species.

In summary, the Darwinian nature of neural connectional development suggests a new interpretation of the functional consequences of neural allometry—that functions will be modified in response to proportional changes by a kind of functional displacement of some computational tendencies by others, not just increase or decrease of localized functional capacities. Considering the displacement of connections that distinguishes species of different sizes and relative proportions, and the displacement of competing mental computation processes that results, forces us both to extend and modify the classic notions of proper mass as applied to brain structure, by extrapolating the analysis to circuitry relationships.

The displacement theory offers a powerful predictive tool for interpreting the significance of quantitative differences in brain structure. In particular, displacement effects can help answer the troubling question raised by the difference in development of chihuahuas, primates, and humans. When and how such disproportions arose and how they are distributed in the developing brains and bodies of these different species have everything to do with how they become wired up in the end. Chihuahuas’ brains and bodies are growing along typical dog trends during the phase when axonal competition divides up the brain, so their brains should not diverge significantly in design from other dog brains, but primates depart from the brain/body trend of other mammals right from the beginning of embryogenesis, so their brains should depart in some interesting ways, as well. The initial changes in proportions within the human brain also are expressed early in development and so inevitably produce a novel pattern of internal structural proportions and correspondingly shifted distribution of functional relationships. The details of these displacement processes, though not yet directly analyzable in human brains, should be at least broadly predictable from well-known general processes of brain development. These differences should be the best clues to the functional demands that selected for them. The resultant shifted pattern of regional parcellation in human brains can be interpreted as though enlarged systems were deluged with some massive new set of peripheral inputs. This input is not supplied from the periphery but internally, as a result of shifts in the early production of neurons. It is an evolutionary response to a sort of virtual input, with increased processing demands. This suggests that the difference between human and nonhuman brains may be far more complex and multifaceted than simply an increase in extra neurons over and above the average primate or mammal trend. Working backwards from these brain changes to shifts in function offers the best hope of developing a model of just what sorts of virtual inputs were responsible for these changes in the first place.
