CHAPTER EIGHT


The Talking Brain


Silence is deep as Eternity, speech is shallow as Time.

—Thomas Carlyle





Hoover’s Brain


One evening in the mid-1980s my wife and I were returning from an evening cruise around Boston Harbor and decided to take a waterfront stroll. We were passing in front of the Boston Aquarium when a gravelly voice yelled out, “Hey! Hey! Get outa there!” Thinking we had mistakenly wandered somewhere we were not allowed, we stopped and looked around for a security guard or some other official, but saw no one, and no warning signs. Again the voice boomed, “Hey! Hey you!” It now sounded a bit thick-tongued. Perhaps it was the half-conscious territorial threat of a wine-drinking vagrant sitting in a dark corner. The words were repeated again, and again we searched for the origin, calling back with no reply besides the repeated commands. As we tracked the voice we found ourselves approaching a large, glass-fenced pool in front of the aquarium where four harbor seals were lounging on display. No guard, no drunk, no prankster; just harbor seals. Incredulous, I traced the source of the command to a large seal reclining vertically in the water, with his head extended back and up, his mouth slightly open, rotating slowly. A seal was talking, not to me, but to the air, and incidentally to anyone within earshot who cared to listen. Perhaps it was a practical joke and someone was hiding nearby. I stood there for a long time trying to figure out the trick, expecting to discover a slip that would show this seal to be a ventriloquist’s dummy, an unwitting accomplice to someone hiding in the shadows, laughing at the gullible passers-by. But there seemed to be no voice when he was underwater or when he closed his mouth, and no place for a speaker to hide. Still, just to make sure, the next morning I placed a call to the aquarium.

“Oh, yes,” I was told. “That’s Hoover, our talking seal. He’s become our star attraction.” I was dumbfounded. How come this wasn’t national news? Were scientists studying him? Was the ability to train seals to talk common knowledge, except to scientists? When I was put in touch with the staff in charge of the animals, I learned Hoover’s brief life story. It seems he was discovered as an orphaned and sickly pup by a fisherman in Maine, who took him in and nursed him back to health. But harbor seals grow quickly and require incredible amounts of food. In no time, he was getting into everything and eating his benefactor out of house and home. As a result, he was named for the famous vacuum cleaner, and the Boston Aquarium was asked to become his foster home soon after.

Hoover did not talk from infancy, not until many years later, in fact, as he approached puberty. During the interim he became a sort of mascot of the aquarium staff, continuing to get into things and live the life of a pet. He was also very sick more than once, and it was thought he might even have suffered a bout with encephalitis. He was weakly, and did not seem to do well with other harbor seals, especially males. But most peculiar were his efforts to vocalize. What started out as rather odd but unclear vocalizations as a growing pup developed into a few reasonably clear phrases that he used in no particular order and to no apparent purpose, perhaps just out of the boredom of captivity. These included “Hoova!” “Hey!” “Hey hey hey hey!” “Hey you!” “Get outa there!” and a sort of gurgling or laughing sound like “Yadda yadda yadda” that no one could seem to translate. He also had the standard seal vocalizations, which he used socially with other seals. Opinions were mixed on where and how he learned these phrases. Some were convinced that he learned them from the staff, or was taught by them as he began to vocalize in ways that sounded speechlike; but the story that seemed to ring true was that he sounded just like the old fisherman who originally took him in, years before. I thought from the beginning that he had sort of a down-east, old-salt accent. And something else fit with this story.

It had been known for more than a decade that many songbirds learn a dialect version of their species’ song when they are nestlings, but only start singing when they approach puberty. Their first singing, called subsong, is a rather crude version that they soon hone to reflect their parents’ song, irrespective of the songs currently being sung around them. Apparently, they have a sort of auditory template, remembered from the earlier stage, that they try to match (a mechanism verified by isolating and deafening birds at different ages and seeing how this affects their song). Though we will never know for sure, the image of Hoover guzzling the food in the cupboard and the old fisherman yelling, “Hey! Hey! Hoover! Hey you! Get outta there!” has a persuasive feel, or twisted irony.

Staff members made some attempts to study his speech, and some effort to train him to produce it more predictably, for a fish reward. I too recognized that Hoover was worth paying attention to. It took little convincing to find a Harvard undergraduate who was interested in studying this curious fellow with me. The student, T. H. Culhane, and I began to videotape Hoover’s speech and other behaviors for later analysis. Over the course of an academic year we followed his speech and behavior patterns. When did he speak? What else he was doing when he spoke? Did he speak to other seals, or to people, or to no one? And how did he respond to training efforts? There were some interesting patterns. For example, he did not seem to speak more during the mating season, though adult male seals are most vocal at that time. If anything, his speech decreased and his normal seal vocalizations increased at that time, and he did not lack for the normal repertoire of harbor seal barks, grunts, and cries. His response to training was not very promising, either. Not only did he not learn any new words or phrases; our data suggested that training might be causing him to increase the proportion of short phrases and decrease the more complex ones, probably Hoover’s way to increase the rate of fish thrown to him. In other words, his speech did not appear to be made up of modified seal vocalizations. It was something independent.

What if Hoover had been taught to speak? Seals (usually sea lions) are often trained to perform rather complicated tricks, even easily trained to bark on command. The aquarium staff had many expert trainers and they presented some marvelous seal and dolphin acts, though Hoover wasn’t involved. Had these trainers found a way to train a new trick? I don’t think so. Hoover was one of a kind. Efforts to train other young seals to mimic speech have not, to my knowledge, produced any new talking seals. Nor does just being around people during development seem to get other seals to speak. It turns out that there are good reasons to suspect it would not. And this is what makes Hoover’s speech so curious.

Hoover’s speech, like our own, begs a question: why are other mammals so poor at vocal learning? It is a curious fact that, except for some dolphins and whales, other mammals have quite limited vocal abilities. Mammals are poor at learning to produce any new vocalizations that are not minimal variants on their innate ones, and even their natural vocalizations tend to be limited in articulatory variety and complexity. They are no match for most birds in this regard. The vocal repertoires of birds appear far more flexible and are far more dependent on learning to develop normally. Many species of birds learn distinctive local song dialects as nestlings, and some have the ability to learn complex arbitrary sound patterns. Humans, some species of dolphins, and some species of whales seem able to learn more than the vocal calls they are born with, but even these other vocal species seem to learn and use their new vocalizations in quite restricted ways. More important, it is no accident that the other highly vocal mammals are all cetaceans (the order of mammals including all the dolphins and whales), because they don’t produce sounds the ways that other mammals do. Their sound production appears to depend on air passing through specialized sinuses leading to their blowholes, which are modified nasal openings on the top of the head, and not on vibrations of the vocal folds of the larynx. The details of this unique mechanism are still poorly understood, but it almost certainly involves structures and muscles that have no similar function in terrestrial mammals or even seals. But Hoover’s throaty speech was not exactly produced like ours, either. He would lean his head back, prop his mouth open, and with only a slight movement of his tongue and lips, like a novice ventriloquist, he would say his piece. No special muscles or vocal structures were involved, probably fewer than we normally use to produce similar sounds. This made his speech sound a little slurred, but everyone who heard it recognized it as speech, and it took little imagination to understand him.

The single mockingbird that wakes me each morning sounds more like a carefully directed choir of birds, with one bird species after another singing its short phrase. This is probably what mockingbird singing was selected for during their evolutionary past: providing the illusion of a territory overfilled with birds. Sometimes I am even convinced that I hear a cat’s meow or the approximation of a car door squeak. The mocking bird’s ability and propensity to mimic the sounds it hears around it are unusual, even for birds, but many other unrelated bird species have independently evolved this trick, which is an extreme variation on the more widespread ability to modulate singing behavior dependent on the variants of song sung by one’s local population. But although many bird species are chosen as pets because of their ability to copy human speech, no mammals are, or could be. Such abilities are not just rare, they are nearly nonexistent. Why? It’s not because mockingbirds are particularly bright, or that dogs, cats, and monkeys are less bright. Monkeys and apes are also well known for their mimickry, except when it come to vocalization. Theirs is not a failure of general cognitive abilities, but the lack of a special skill for producing diverse vocal sounds and of a predisposition to match them to some model.

So, why can’t most mammals learn to sing or talk? Why can birds? And why can we? What crossing of connections or shift of emphasis in neural function or unprecedented developmental experience changed this one seal’s brain to give him an isolated fragment of human uniqueness. What treasure was locked up in Hoover’s brain?

The story of Hoover has an unfortunate end—for Hoover and for science. A little less than a year after I first heard his gravelly imperatives, Hoover died. It was during the annual fall molt, when a harbor seal’s summer fur is shed and he can become prone to skin infections and other more serious complications. By the time I was told of Hoover’s death, his body had been autopsied. And as parts of that talkative old fellow were sent out to determine the cause of death, I lost track of the one clue to his anomalous capabilities, his brain. The autopsy report noted that Hoover had died of an infection. In addition, the veterinarian who examined his body noted in passing that there was an unusual degree of calcification in his cramium, probably associated with early encephalitis or other brain damage. To my knowledge, no further analysis of Hoover’s brain has been done. For the pathologist and the aquarium staff, the case was closed. Hoover died of natural causes. No one’s negligence was to blame.

For me the case remains open and unsolved. This “believe it or not” oddity has never been explained. Had congenital or infantile brain damage contributed to his curious foray into the world of speech? Was Hoover’s speech the result of just a few critical short circuits in his brain? Though Hoover’s brain will not provide the answer, it’s reasonable to suspect that by some misfortune it was modified in a way that parallels our own. This prompts us to ask whether there might be some common aspect of brain organization that is shared in common by all articulate species? If so, it might provide a clue to what happened both to Hoover and to Homo sapiens.





Visceral Sounds


It turns out that communicative behaviors in a wide range of vertebrate species, including members of every class from fish to birds to mammals, are funneled into a final common pathway that consists of structures in the central midbrain and brain stem. The midbrain is the transition zone between the brain stem and the forebrain. It is the first point, ascending from the spinal cord, where the long-distance senses, vision and hearing, are integrated with information about touch and movement. As a result, we find that structures of the midbrain effectively provide the first tier of complex behavioral control. Together, the behavioral programs built into midbrain structures comprise what might be called “higher-order” or “second-level” reflexes. These include a variety of automatic tracking and orienting responses of the senses, as well as an integration of head and body movements to support these automatic processes.

The midbrain contains sensorimotor-orienting systems involved in automatically shifting gaze and attention, and turning the head in the direction of interesting stimuli. It also contains descending motor pathways and a number of intrinsic motor-control systems. One of the most crucial but still poorly understood motor systems is distributed within the reticular formation (an amorphous collection of nuclei, located about midway between the dorsal and ventral midbrain). The reticular formation surrounds a centrally located canal through which cerebrospinal fluid flows between fore-brain and hindbrain, and it derives its name from the crisscrossing fibers of the sensory and motor systems that enter and leave at this level. But these are not just fibers passing through. The reticular formation monitors inputs from most sensory nuclei and sends outputs to most motor nuclei of the mid-brain and brain stem. Most neuroanatomists believe it to be the locus of arousal and a gateway to the majority of mid-level innate motor programs, including everything from chewing and swallowing to threatening or cowering.



Figure 8.1 Output control systems for the major muscles of the vocal tract used to vocalize in humans and primates. The trigeminal and facial motor nuclei are typical skeletal motor output nuclei for controlling face and jaw muscles, respectively. The hypoglossal nucleus is a special motor region that controls the tongue muscles. The nucleus ambiguus controls laryngeal muscles. The reticular regions contain circuits that are substrates for many automatic movement patterns, and reticular regions around the nucleus ambiguus and further down the brain stem are premotor regions for breathing. The muscles of the tongue and face are more directly accessible to cortical motor and premotor control, whereas the muscles of the larynx and respiratory system are indirectly influenced by limbic structures such as the hypothalamus, amygdala, and cingulate cortex. Many of the limbic structures were once called the rhinencephalon (“nose brain”) because the olfactory input is most direct. Stimulation of most limbic structures (not the olfactory bulbs) can elicit stereotypic vocalizations from mammal species, but motor cortex stimulation cannot.

At the core of the midbrain, surrounding the fluid-filled central canal that connects the forebrain ventricles (fluid-filled chambers) with the fourth ventricle and spinal canal, lies a cell-dense structure called the central gray (or periaqueductal gray) area of the midbrain (see Figure 8.1). The central gray area appears to be endowed with numerous hormone receptors, and passing nearby are ascending pain-projection systems and other ascending pathways carrying autonomic nervous system feedback on their way to the forebrain. Descending inputs arrive from areas of the forebrain limbic areas (hippocampus, amygdala, and cingulate cortex) and hypothalamus, which are specifically associated with emotional state and autonomic arousal. Among the output targets of the central gray area are both respiratory pre-motor regions of the brain stem reticular region and motor neurons that control the larynx (nucleus ambiguus). The central gray area is also a source of outputs controlling other visceral “behaviors” via the autonomic peripheral nervous system. Together with the surrounding dorsal tegmentum, the central gray area is thus part of a core system for coordinating relatively automatic vegetative and arousal functions of the organism, including ingestion and respiration.

Not surprisingly, behaviors that communicate arousal and emotional states in most vertebrates depend on this core midbrain center. The majority of communicative signals that animals produce, whether vocal or nonvocal, are associated with sensory/motor systems of the head. As the mobile “turret” on which all the long-distance sense organs are mounted, and also often the carrier of some of the most formidable “social” weapons (e.g., teeth, antlers), the head is a crucial source of information about an animal’s direction of attention, motor readiness, and emotional state. Such important indicators of one’s present and future propensities are crucial bits of information to make available to members of one’s social group, in order to help mediate collective behaviors. Situated at the top of the spinal cord, the midbrain and brain stem are the locus for input-output systems of the head, and so it is not surprising that they should play crucial communicative functions.

Vocalization, in particular, has a special association with these midbrain systems because it involves the interaction of the oral and respiratory tracts. To organize vocalization requires the coordinated activation of clusters of motor neurons that control the muscles for breathing, the tension of the larynx, and the movements of the oral and facial muscles. The motor neurons controlling all of these are located in the upper brain stem. Even premotor neurons controlling the diaphragm and intercostal muscles for breathing can be found in this region, though the primary neurons for these muscles are located in the upper spinal cord. The premotor neurons for respiration include a distributed set of “pacemaker” neurons in the lower brain stem (the medulla oblongata) that control the breathing cycle. These receive inputs relaying information about oxygen and carbon dioxide levels in the blood, and are responsible for automatically adjusting the rate and volume of breathing during different states of activity and metabolic demand. Like most systems of the brain that control visceral functions, the pacemaker neurons comprise a network that is spontaneously active and autonomous. This enables breathing to be completely reflexive and automatic. The pacemaker system in turn controls motor neurons in the spinal cord which directly control the diaphragm and intercostal muscles that inflate the lungs.

But the oral tract has to serve two partially conflicting functions: both breathing and ingestion of food. Since swallowing and breathing are exclusive functions, the larynx plays a pivotal role as the gateway to the respiratory tract. When a bolus of food is pushed back by the tongue into the pharynx, an automatic swallowing reflex becomes engaged. With the initiation of this automatic movement pattern, breathing is momentarily inhibited and the larynx is briefly closed. Though well protected by the physical position of the epiglottis, which forces food behind and around the opening in most mammals, the laryngeal constriction prevents air movement from inadvertently diverting the passing food into the airway. Many infant mammals and some adult mammals can continue to breath, albeit in a slightly altered pattern, while swallowing liquids (e.g., during suckling), but this capability is unavailable to adult humans because of a much lower position of the larynx in the throat. As adults, we are much more dependent on laryngeal closure to protect the air passage from food and liquid than are other mammals (a curious difference we will return to in Chapter 11).

There are other reasons for adjusting the flow of air through the larynx. By constricting the air passage to a greater or lesser extent during different modes of breathing, pressure within the lungs can be adjusted. This can affect oxygenation during exertion, as well as modulate rigidity of the trunk in synchrony with locomotor activities that also need to make use of trunk muscles.

These problems of coordinating swallowing and breathing, and adjusting subglottal air pressure, have dictated an ancient linkage between the motor control of such processes. The muscle systems involved in eating and breathing are largely automatic, like many other visceral muscles, such as those that control digestion. Breathing, for example, needs to continue whether we are conscious or not, and so it defaults to an autonomous reflexive behavior. But these prepatterned behaviors can sometimes be intentionally inhibited and modified in response to changing circumstances, and there are times when it may become critical to stop breathing for a second or two. For the most part, however, the links among swallowing/breathing behaviors are not modifiable. The reason for all this should be obvious. If we needed consciously to inhibit inspiration of air while swallowing, sooner or later we would make an error and choke.

Not infrequently, we hear of cases where even the automatic system fails. This is probably far more common in human beings than in any other species because of the peculiarly long distance from mouth to larynx, and so has made the Heimlich maneuver an important addition to an otherwise automatic protection. Nevertheless, even animals that are less susceptible to choking because of a higher position of the larynx tend to alternate breathing and swallowing, or significantly modify their breathing during swallowing.

The functional organization of the breathing-swallowing-chewing systems is also reflected in the anatomical organization of the nuclei that control these functions in the brain stem. The groups of neurons that control the muscles for these behaviors are lined up in side-by-side columns, or nuclei, within the brain stem. At one end is the skeletal motor column (controlling voluntary muscles of the mouth and face), at the other end the visceral motor column (controlling automatic muscle systems for swallowing, breathing, and heart rate); and between them is the branchio-motor column, which connects to muscle systems that have both automatic and voluntary functions (i.e., controlling the tongue). The branchio-motor nuclei get their name from their position near the branchial arches that form where the embryonic head meets the neck. In fish embryos, these arches develop into gill arches.

The visceral motor systems were probably coopted for communication during terrestrial vertebrate evolution because changes in respiration patterns provide some of the most useful indices of arousal state. Accentuating the symptoms of respiration by making a hissing sound—produced as air passes through the narrow constriction of the throat and mouth—may have provided some of the earliest forms of vocal communication. The subsequent differentiation and specialization of sound-breath patterning has likely built upon this otherwise primitive index of arousal. Because of this ancient pattern, vocal communication has inherited many of the organizational features of a partly automatic, partly controllable motor system. These include the automatic, reflexlike production of sounds when in an appropriate arousal state; stereotypic vocalizations; and a minimal role for learning.

Vocalization, like swallowing, requires linked synchronous activity of the oral, vocal, and respiratory muscles, and so depends on a more central site that connects to all. This convergence center appears to be the central gray area of the brain. Electrical stimulation of the central gray area in cat, squirrel monkey, and macaque monkey brains appears to be capable of producing the full range of vocal calls for these species. The corresponding structure has been shown to elicit communicative gestures, postures, and sound production in essentially every vertebrate species that has been studied, including fish, frogs, reptiles, birds, and mammals. Stimulation of other linked brain stem sites (e.g., individual motor nuclei involved in vocalization) only produces isolated movements of the corresponding muscles. The central gray area is the critical central link among the surrounding reticular nuclei and brain stem motor nuclei comprising a distributed network for innate sound production.1 It seems clear that call-production “programs” are actually embodied within this network of structures linked with the central gray area. Damage to components of this system can alter the form and sound of calls,2 and transplantation of the entire midbrain from quail to chick embryos can “transfer” some of the quail’s calls to the chick.3

Vocalizations do not occur in a behavioral vacuum. They are inevitably one component in a more complex visual-auditory display that also includes postural and gestural information (e.g., facial expressions). Although the networks that embody the innate motor programs underlying species-typical vocal behaviors are located in midbrain and brain stem circuits, they can be activated by arousal from a number of higher structures, including the hypothalamic and limbic system structures located deep within the fore-brain. The limbic system contains the brain regions mostly responsible for emotional experience, motivation, and attentional processes, as well as for their associated autonomic and hormonal responses. Rather than an isolated behavior, innate vocalization is one of the outward manifestations of an integrated state of emotional and behavioral arousal. Other output systems that tend to be simultaneously activated may include postural, autonomic, and hormonal changes. Decades of electrophysiological and lesion studies of these structures in monkey brains have mapped out the forebrain sites that contribute directly and indirectly to call production. In general, the further these sites are removed from the midbrain, in connectional terms, the more integrative and less direct their effects on vocalization. This is often reflected in considerable delay between electrical stimulation of a site and the production of a vocalization. In some regions, vocalizations are only produced after the electrical stimulation is turned off, producing a kind of rebound effect. These forebrain systems provide multiple levels of control over vocalizations.

The motor programs for most innate mammalian vocalizations are highly modular. They are relatively invariant from birth; learning plays little or no role in their form and often can do little to influence when a vocalization is produced or inhibited. The links between specific vocalizations and distinct states of emotional arousal are also highly automatic and invariant. Appropriate calls are produced when arousal rises above some threshold in certain fairly stereotypic contexts. Different arousal states, such as fear or sexual arousal, are correlated with very different activity patterns within the structures of the limbic system and the hypothalamus. In some sense, the circuits that are active at a given time provide a signature of a particular emotional state. Not surprisingly, different limbic circuits project their outputs to the midbrain vocalization system through independent pathways, which are divided along lines that correspond to alternative arousal states. When directly stimulated, these pathways can also elicit vocalizations. Since each distinctive arousal state has a characteristic activity signature, its pattern of outputs can serve as a sort of code sent to the midbrain that specifies which vocal program to run. This linkage has other consequences as well. Because of this relatively invariant association, vocal calls are quite literally symptoms of specific emotional and arousal states.

The reflexlike links between perceiving and producing calls, and the emotional states associated with them, are made evident by the “infectiousness” of some of our own species’ innate calls, specifically laughter and crying. Newborn babies lying in a maternity ward demonstrate this innate primitive linkage as they are induced to cry by hearing the cries of other babies, but many of us are also familiar with the personal experience of being induced to tears by the crying of others over the death of someone we do not know, or made to laugh by the irritating but effective “laugh track” that underlines and “sells” the jokes on television’s situation comedies. Like the motor systems underlying innate vocalizations, the call analysis process also works on many levels at once. Before even arriving at forebrain auditory centers, auditory inputs are relayed in midbrain analyzers. Here, an initial categorization may occur, sufficient to activate initial orienting responses to evolutionarily important classes of stimuli. The emotional response elicited by innate species calls is also probably mediated by cortical analysis, since the cortex is the major source for sensory input into limbic structures. Links between midbrain structures may, however, provide the substrate for an independent tendency to call in response to a call, that, in effect, short-circuits higher-order analysis.





Why Don’t Mammals Sing Like Birds?


The key to the vocal difference between birds and mammals can be traced to some interesting differences in their anatomy. Though human speech depends critically on structures of the cerebral cortex and rapid, skilled movements of the oral and vocal muscles, this is not true of vocalizations in other mammals. The human, cetacean, and bird “solutions” to skilled vocalization are quite different, but some interesting parallels offer important clues. What these exceptions to the rule share in common is what they avoid: leaving vocal communication under the control of the visceral motor systems of the brain.

In order to learn and produce skilled movements, many regions of the brain must become involved that are unnecessary for innate gestures and vocalizations. The visceral muscle systems that are most directly involved in mammal vocalizations are not well suited to this task, precisely because these systems must be capable of operating autonomously, according to a few set motor programs. Such programs are the epitome of modular brain functions that are closed to any interference from other systems. Once they are activated, they tend to run their stereotypic course irrespective of our awareness or monitoring of the process. In addition, such modular programs tend to be quite specifically localized to circuits interconnecting midbrain and brain stem nuclei. Skilled behaviors, in contrast, are associated with the skeletal muscle systems, such as the limb muscles. Since locomotor needs are so varied and unpredictable in most species, this system has to be capable of considerable plasticity and modifiability. Ongoing behaviors must be capable of being monitored and must be open to interruption and modification. Just the opposite of autonomous and modular. Nevertheless, once a behavior program has been learned, it can be “offloaded” to other motor systems that allow it to be treated as an unanalyzed modular program. Consequently, highly skilled behaviors can be as rapid and autonomous as any innate behaviors. Not surprisingly, the systems of the brain that support these plastic motor abilities are quite widely distributed. The cerebral cortex and cerebellum of mammals are among the most critical structures for consciously elicited movement, as well as for the development and modification of skilled behaviors.

Damage to the primary motor cortex in a mammal brain (motor cortex lies along a vertical strip running down either side of the cortex just ahead of the halfway point from back to front) can produce a complete loss of movement on the opposite side of the body that corresponds to the position of the damaged region in an inverted map of muscles from legs and feet at the top, to head and mouth at the bottom of the motor strip. Damage to the cortical area for oral and facial muscles on one side produces a partial paralysis that can affect the use of the mouth and tongue during eating, and bilateral damage can completely paralyze these muscles. The other parts of the brain that are involved in skilled behavior, such as the basal ganglia and cerebellum, play a complementary role to the cortex, and appear to be particularly important for fine-tuning and automating skilled movement patterns. It is probably accurate to view the motor cortex as helping to compose and test a behavioral subroutine that will eventually be run with little cortical intervention by these subcortical systems. In birds, although there is nothing quite like a motor cortex (in fact, no cerebral cortex as in mammals), there are forebrain nuclei that play a similar role in orchestrating intentionally monitored movements and programming deeper brain systems to run the programs for well-learned behaviors.

The superior vocal abilities of birds are probably a consequence of a peculiar quirk of anatomy having to do with the adaptation to flight. The evolution of flying provided intense selection pressure for weight reduction. One aspect of this was an elimination of the heavy teeth and bones of the mouth and jaw, which were replaced by a much lighter bill and a reduced tongue. In this process, the larynx was also simplified to accommodate special breathing problems imposed by flight. In birds, unlike most mammals, the larynx has become vestigial and is not the major regulator of air flow to and from the lungs. Birds control air flow with a paired muscular structure called a syrinx, which is located somewhat deeper in the chest cavity near the divergence of the bronchial tubes projecting to the two lungs. The syrinx functions like the larynx in mammals by selectively pinching off the flow of air; but being situated lower, it provides the possibility of independent control of the air flow through each bronchial tube. Tensing the syringeal muscles is also what produces the tones of birdsong. Some of the complexity in such song stems from the interaction of sounds produced by the two syringeal pathways. But why should this have also conferred more flexible vocal abilities and the possibility of vocal learning?

This difference between birds and mammals is related to the difference between the tongue and laryngeal muscle control in mammals. The larynx, as we saw, is controlled by the visceral motor system, which mostly produces stereotypic preprogrammed movements. In contrast, the tongue is controlled by systems intermediate between visceral and skeletal motor systems, and is capable of both stereotypic movements and some more deliberate movements. The muscles of the tongue run both radially and longitudinally. Radially oriented tongue muscles control its elongation by contracting at right angles to one another and squeezing the larynx in on itself, like the way that squeezing a balloon elongates it. Longitudinally oriented muscles of the tongue extend into it from attachments behind the tongue and aim the extended tongue to either side or up and down. One right and left pair of these connect at their posterior ends to the paired styloid processes, little spikes of bone extending from the frontal base of the skull, and another pair connect to the hyoid bone—a small, horseshoe-shaped bone that encircles the top of the larynx and bottom of the epiglottis. The tiny hyoid bone is not directly attached to other bones, but “floats” freely in the throat, suspended by long, thin ligaments and muscles that attach it to the base of the skull and the tip of the jaw. Contraction of the hyoid-tongue (hyoglossal) muscles retracts the tongue with respect to the larynx, and contraction of the hyoid-jaw (geniohyoid) muscles raises the larynx and epiglottis, at the same time compressing the tongue against the roof of the mouth and the back of the throat to push food along during swallowing. Contracting the muscles that link the hyoid to the jaw also aids in extending the tongue, by pulling it forward in the mouth.

All of these tongue muscles are controlled by fibers coursing through the hypoglossal nerve (named for its position “beneath the tongue”), which carries impulses from motor neuron cell bodies in the middle of the brain stem. These motor neurons form a cluster of brain stem columns collectively known as the hypoglossal nucleus (after the nerve that grows from it). A few years ago, a colleague (Alan Sokoloff) and I put some of the finishing touches on a half century of anatomical investigations of this most complicated muscle of the body by showing that in monkeys, each class of intrinsic and extrinsic tongue muscles is innervated by its own columnar sub-nucleus of the hypoglossal nucleus.4 This point-to-point organization is what makes possible the remarkable articulatory control that is necessary for food preparation and for speech, at least in humans.



Figure 8.2 Comparison of structures that control the musculature of sound production in terrestrial mammals, dolphins and whales, and birds.

Left: In terrestrial mammals there is a clear segregation of the skeletal motor nuclei that control the movement of the tongue and the visceral motor nuclei that control the respiratory tract, including the laryngeal muscles. This limits coordination, control over automatic vocalization patterns, and vocal skill learning.

Middle: Dolphins and whales may get around this limitation because they probably do not make much use of their larynx in sound production and instead appear to use muscles associated with sinuses and the blowhole. These are derived from skeletal muscles of the face and thus have links to skilled volitional motor systems.

Right: In birds, though their brains are organized quite differently, there is considerable participation by forebrain auditory, motor, and association regions.

Different muscles of the tongue in mammals are controlled by subnuclei in the hypoglossal nucleus. One of these divisions controls an extrinsic tongue muscle in mammals that links the small horseshoe-shaped hyoid bone with the the inner tip of the jaw and can cause the whole body of the tongue to protrude. It is controlled by a subnucleus of the hypoglossal nucleus that is situated just ventral to the rest of the nucleus (compare bird and land mammals). In birds, in contrast, vocalization is produced by contraction of a paired muscular structure at the branch point of the paired bronchial tubes. By a curious twist of evolution, this structure is controlled by the ventral subnucleus of the hypoglossal nucleus (designated XIIts), which probably corresponds to the part that controls the geniohyoid muscle in mammals. Thus, a function subserved by visceral control in mammals is provided with skilled motor control in birds.

As far as we can tell, the human and monkey hypoglossal nuclei contain entirely corresponding columnar divisions, and these have parallels in many other vertebrates as well. One part of this motor map of tongue muscles stands out as particularly relevant to the bird-mammal comparison. Among the muscles involved in tongue movement, the muscle between the hyoid and the jaw (the geniohyoid muscle) is the exception. It is the only muscle that controls tongue movement without actually attaching within the tongue body. The motor neurons that control it occupy a column of the hypoglossal nucleus that is correspondingly separated from the rest, at the ventral-most tip of the nucleus. Since mammals lack a syrinx, the comparison is difficult, but it appears that the syringeal muscles are not simply laryngeal muscles that have been shifted to a lower position, and their innervation reflects a sort of mix of mammalian larynx-and-tongue control systems. Different syringeal muscles are controlled by neurons in both the nucleus ambiguous (larynx) and the hypoglossal nucleus (tongue). Curiously, the ventral hypoglossal subnucleus that controls the geniohyoid muscle in mammals appears in the same relative position as the subnucleus that is the major controller of muscles of the syrinx in birds (see Figure 8.2). Perhaps with the reduction of the skull, the loss of the jaw and teeth, and the modifications of the upper respiratory tract in birds, the corresponding nerves and muscles were recruited to control syringeal tension rather than tongue protrusion. By whatever means this occurred, this subdivision of the tongue-control nucleus appears in birds to have taken on the problem of breath control and sound production, thus handing over a visceral motor function to a skeletal motor control system.

This shift to a more deliberate and monitored control of air flow is probably an adaptation to the special demands of flight. For birds, flying and breathing are intimately linked. With massive flight muscles strapped to the sternum and alternately pulling against the rib cage, expanding and collapsing the rib cage in order to breathe could become complicated if the two functions were not coordinated. Unfortunately, this cannot be accomplished by simply linking breathing and wing flapping together in some stereotypic motor program. Flight requires the ability continually to adjust wing movements in the face of the unpredictable demands of changing wind conditions and obstacles. An ability to adjust related breathing and wing movements thus required involving the skeletal motor systems also in the control of air flow. Since the control of air flow is the basis for sound production, this too has come under more deliberate control as a side effect of the evolution of flight.

In addition to our own species, and perhaps Hoover, there is one group of mammals that exhibits some significant degree of vocal flexibility and learning ability: the cetaceans (dolphins and whales). In many ways, they are the exceptions that demonstrate the rule of visceral versus skeletal motor control. Though much of cetacean sound production remains poorly understood, it is generally believed that the many sounds they are capable of emitting probably are not produced by the larynx. Instead, dolphins and whales appear to generate squeaks, clicks, and whistles within an elaborate system of sinuses that are located in the front of the skull (behind the large, sound-focusing “melon” in dolphins) and that feed into the blowholes on the top of the head. This is probably controlled by passing air through constrictions between sinuses tightened by the contraction of underlying muscles. These blowhole muscles correspond to face muscles in other mammals, and are almost certainly controlled by the skeletal motor nuclei of the brain stem (probably the facial motor nucleus). Deliberate control of air flow to and from the blowholes is of course particularly important in these aquatic mammals. Like birds’ adaptation for breathing in flight, but recruiting an entirely different muscle system, this special mammalian adaptation for adjusting air (and perhaps water) flow seems to have incidentally opened the door for more controllable sound production as well.

So, how might this anatomical logic shed light on our own vocal facility? Humans have not entirely shifted phonation to skeletal muscle systems, as have birds and cetaceans. Like other mammals, we produce most vocal sounds by constricting our laryngeal muscles. And yet a large fraction of sound variation in speech is only minimally explained by changes in laryngeal tension. Most speech sounds involve both muscle systems: a modification or interruption of laryngeally produced sounds by movements of the skeletal muscles that control the jaw, lips, and tongue. Some speech sounds—such as fricatives (sss or fff), plosives (p), and clicks (sounds not used in European languages but used by, for example, the !Kung San Bushmen of Africa and produced by variously snapping the tongue off the palate, cheek, or teeth under a slight negative pressure)—are produced entirely by oral muscles. So there are some interesting anatomical parallels between cetaceans, birds, and humans in the flexibility of sound production. It demonstrates the general rule: only when the skeletal muscle control system enters into the process is there any significant capacity for flexibility, learning, and the intentional control of sound production.

But a shift of most sound manipulation to oral muscles is not the whole story. Ours is a dual or hybrid vocalization process. The articulation of the tongue in the mouth must be precisely orchestrated with the production and modification of sounds produced in the larynx. Not surprisingly, the linguistic roles of variation of fundamental frequency and gating of sound production are mostly related to sound continuance. Though many languages (Chinese is one) use a few patterns of tone shifts as phonemes, only a very small number of such distinctions (e.g., rising, falling, stable) ever play a major role in speech. Most tonal variation plays a paralinguistic role in speech prosody—the tonal, amplitude, and rhythmic variations that convey attentional and arousal information in speech—and most of this occurs subconsciously and automatically with the corresponding shifts in affect. In this regard, laryngeal activity functions much as it does in the vocalization of most mammals: as a symptom of limbic arousal.

But singing demonstrates the extent of our capability systematically to control specific tone production by an independent mechanism. Such a precise control of relative vocal frequency and timing exemplifies an unprecedented capacity for laryngeal control that is only minimally incorporated into any language. Moreover, the crucial role of laryngeal sound production in distinguishing phonemes (e.g., by differences in voice-onset time) to partition words and mark phrases must be coordinated to millisecond accuracy with the movements of the lips and tongue, and these carefully choreographed combinations must be learned so that they can be deployed at a moment’s notice in a vast array of contexts. Clearly, then, more than just a shift in emphasis to oral muscles underlies our speech abilities. There must also be a difference in our capacity to control laryngeal movements that reflects differences not just at the periphery but within the brain.

Humans have a degree of voluntary motor control over the sound produced in the larynx that surpasses any other vocal species. Indeed, this degree of voluntary control is otherwise found only in motor systems controlled by cerebral cortical and cerebellar motor pathways projecting ultimately to skeletal muscles. This suggests a difference in the neural control of the human larynx that is the neural equivalent of the shift from visceral to skeletal muscles that underlies vocal skill in birds and cetaceans. Though direct evidence of such a change in the human brain’s motor output to the larynx is not yet available, the circumstantial evidence is abundant. One way or another, the human larynx must be controlled from higher brain systems involved in skeletal muscle control, not just visceral control. Additional evidence for such a shift is supplied by the partial decoupling of sound production from emotional arousal states in language, as it is also in birds and cetaceans.

This separation is particularly evident in bird species that are capable of mimicking other animals’ sounds or being taught speech. Though it may be necessary to be sufficiently aroused to vocalize at all, a particular vocalization is only arbitrarily linked with a particular emotion. A similar dissociation of specific vocal sounds from specific emotions is also characteristic of humpback whale songs, which change annually (see Figure 2.1 in Chapter 2), as well as of many of the vocalizations that dolphins produce. This dissociation from specific affective states is an essential requirement for learning novel vocalizations. It is my suspicion that Hoover’s speech was also dissociated from any specific emotional states, except perhaps just being bored. His speech did not replace any typical harbor seal vocalization. He seemed to produce speech less often in threatening social contexts or during the mating season, when he used typical seal vocalizations instead. And his most vocal periods seemed to be at times when he was aimlessly “pacing” back and forth (in his case swimming repeatedly back and forth) in his enclosure and periodically punctuating this boredom by reclining back in the water and speaking.

But the motor/emotion dichotomy is not absolute. Not only do we exhibit a mix of arousal-independent learned vocalizations (speech and song) and highly stereotypic vocalizations that are innately linked to certain emotions (laughter and sobbing), but our visceral-emotional and skeletal-muscle-skill-learning systems often compete for access over vocalization, as well as often complementing each other in the same vocal behavior. It is as though we haven’t so much shifted control from visceral to voluntary means but superimposed one upon the other.

One of the more intriguing examples of the interactions between intentional motor systems and automatic calling tendencies has been provided in an observation by Jane Goodall.5 Chimpanzees often produce food calls when they come upon a new food source. This stereotypic call attracts hungry neighbors to the location, often kin who are foraging nearby. Goodall recounts one occasion where she observed a chimp trying to suppress an excited food call by covering his mouth with his hand. The chimp had found a cache of bananas she had left to attract the animals to an observation area, and as she suggests, apparently did not want to have any competition for such a desirable food. Though muffling the call as best he could with his hand, he could not, apparently, directly inhibit the calling behavior itself.

People are often faced with circumstances of this sort. For example, there are many times when humorous events threaten to make us laugh, but for reasons of politeness we feel compelled to stifle the tendency. To suppress an irresistible laugh, we resort to such tricks as gritting our teeth, clenching our jaws and lips, putting our hands over our mouths, or simply turning so as not to face someone who might take offense. Even for humans, the essentially automatic and unconscious nature of many stereotypic calls causes them to erupt without warning, often before there is time indirectly to interfere with their expression. Some degree of self-consciousness may be a prerequisite for such control. This curious conflict between simultaneously produced intentional and unintentional behaviors offers a unique insight into the nature of language. The superimposition of intentional cortical motor behaviors over autonomous subcortical vocal behaviors is, in a way, an externalized model of a neural relationship that is internalized in the production of human speech. It graphically portrays the functional bridge that links the vocal communication of primates to the speech of humans. The evolution of speech effectively occurred at this neurological interface. Understanding this relationship is a first step in the process of deconstructing language into its evolutionary antecedents.

Though the cerebral cortex plays little role in the production of vocalizations in most mammals, some cortical systems appear to regulate call production by superimposing or relaxing inhibitory control over these spontaneous tendencies. The only cortical areas involved in call production in primates are located in the medial frontal cortex (anterior cingulate cortex).6 These areas are intermediate between limbic cortex and neocortex, and are otherwise involved in sustaining attention and initiating intentional actions. Extensive bilateral damage to this region in human brains produces at least a temporary immobility and mutism, though not actual paralysis or language loss. Damage to nearby medial and ventral frontal cortical areas may also produce disturbances of affect and emotional expression in both monkeys and humans. Though most mammal calls are not learned, these cortical regions appear to be critical for learning under which circumstances one needs to facilitate or inhibit the tendency to call.

The cerebral cortex in most mammals includes areas that control movements of the oral and vocal muscles, but these cortical areas are probably most involved in controlling movements of the mouth, tongue, and lips during grooming, food preparation, and eating. When these areas are damaged, or their output nerves are severed, paralysis of the facial and oral muscles occurs. Bilateral destruction of these areas in a monkey’s brain makes it impossible to eat, and yet, though paralyzed and severely incapacitated in other uses of the oral pathway, these animals can still produce calls whose form is not radically altered from normal. Despite the fact that cortical motor damage does not disrupt call production in the monkeys that have been studied, motor cortical areas may nevertheless play an indirect role. Projections to oral and vocal motor nuclei in the brain stem may offer a route for direct intentional inhibition of calls. The direct superimposition of other competing motor output signals can help to inhibit or block call production under circumstances where arousal cannot be suppressed, but where such calls might result in unfortunate consequences. Consider, for example, the tendency to produce distress calls when separated from a group, or fright calls when startled. An animal that suspects that a predator is nearby may need to be able to suppress these tendencies in order to avoid giving its location away.

Again the comparison to bird brains is instructive. Forebrain structures are intimately involved in both birdsong production and learning (although bird forebrains are organized quite differently from mammal forebrains, correspondences become more obvious in midbrain and brain stem). Many of the structures that contribute to singing can be compared to limbic structures in mammal brains and contribute to arousal thresholds for initiating singing, but a number of other structures have been shown to be essential for song learning and even to the organization of the song structure. These include the forebrain auditory nuclei, and motor nuclei as well as structures that play integrative roles between them. When the motor nucleus of the bird archistriatum (RA) is damaged, for example, singing is disrupted; but if more anterior auditory and association structures are damaged, song learning and song structure may be disrupted while singing remains possible. This difference from most mammals is analogous to the difference between humans and other primates. Only in humans does damage to or stimulation of the cortical auditory and motor cortex produce an analogous disturbance of the structure of vocalizations.

One reason why calls are largely unaffected by cortical motor damage is that they do not generally involve complex articulatory movements of the mouth and tongue. Instead, vocalization is produced along with specific stereotypic positions and shapes of the lips and tongue, sometimes with the addition of simple repetitive stereotypic movements of the mouth. Segmentation of calls is mostly marked by the onset and offset of air flow and the associated frequency shifts (e.g., on and off sound production, or rising and falling tonality). These features are also well exemplified by the two most distinctive human innate calls, laughter and sobbing. Both involve rhythmic sound production and very stereotypic breathing patterns that segregate the sound into repeating units (laughs and sobs). Both are also associated with relatively stable mouth-tongue positions and no articulation of the lips, or of the tongue against other oral structures. The fixed stereotypic positioning of the mouth and tongue during these human calls often makes it impossible to speak at the same time.

Speech, in contrast, involves extensive and rapid articulation of the tongue with lips, tongue, and palate, along with simultaneous changes in lip shape, and opening and closing of the jaw. Though phonation is often interrupted by articulatory movements that momentarily cut off expiration, and tonality may be varied slightly as we speak to mark distinctive features or to provide emotional or attentional information, vocalization during speech is fairly continuous and invariant compared to the stereotypic on and off patterns demonstrated in calls. Breaks in sound production may be necessary to take a breath or may signal a break between thoughts or sentences, but individually vocalized words or syllables separated by silences are not normal, and may occur as a symptom of some types of brain damage (see the discussion of Broca’s aphasia in Chapter 10).

In neurological terms, calls are characterized by foreground visceral motor programs on a background of relatively stable oral facial postures. The skeletal motor system is subordinated to the visceral motor system. Speech inverts this relationship. When humans speak, the skeletal motor components of the oral tract take the foreground against a comparatively more stable vocal-respiratory background. Most of the information that distinguishes individual speech units is encoded in rapid articulatory movements. These are superimposed on a background of constant expiratory pressure and more slowly varying tonality. Thus, although both calls and speech require the coordinated action of the subcortical motor systems that control respiration and vocalization as well as the cortical skeletal motor systems that control the jaw, lips, and tongue, the patterns are inverted. Humans are perhaps at an intermediate stage between birds, who have usurped vocal control from visceral motor systems, and the chimp with his hand over his mouth trying to stifle a call produced with visceral systems using a limb controlled by voluntary cortical systems. Cortical motor movements during speech are superimposed over a relatively stabilized visceral motor activity. In this case, oral muscles rather than hand muscles are involved in modifying the vocal output, and so the control is more complete and the modifications more facile and subtle. The fact that chimps (and indeed the vast majority of mammals) cannot exercise a more direct cortical motor control over either their phonation or their oral movements at this time demonstrates that even at this low level in the neural control of sound production, human brains must be unusual.





A Leveraged Takeover


In all mammals, the cortex includes neurons (called “pyramidal cells” because of their shape) that send output axons to deeper structures of the brain. In the motor cortical region, these output neurons are particularly large, and send their axons into the brain stem and spinal cord. There they contact the dendrites of premotor interneurons (one step removed from final output neurons) and motor neurons responsible for muscle activation. The brain stem of a typical mammal also receives direct cortical inputs into regions of the reticular motor system. These are widely distributed premotor structures, some of which send their outputs to the motor neurons that directly control the muscles of the face and jaw (the facial and trigeminal motor nuclei, respectively). In the nonprimate mammals we and others have studied, relatively few if any cortical projections contact the output motor neurons directly. The separate reticular regions relay signals from the motor cortex to the tongue motor nucleus (the hypoglossal nucleus), and to the laryngeal motor nucleus (the nucleus ambiguus).

Compared to most other mammal species, however, the projections from the monkey cerebral cortex are more extensive (Figure 8.3). The cortical inputs to the spinal cord in monkeys include the intermediate premotor layers that are innervated in most mammals, but also extend all the way to include the ventral-most layers of the spinal cord, where they likely contact motor neurons directly. In the brain stem, there is a similar pattern. Not only do axons from the motor cortex connect to reticular regions, they also connect directly with the facial, trigeminal, and hypoglossal motor nuclei. Not contacted by cortical inputs are the visceral motor nuclei. The nucleus ambiguus, for example, still only receives indirect projections via the reticular regions, as it does in other mammals. The consequence of direct cortical motor neuron connections in monkeys is probably their increased voluntary control over the movements of hands and fingers. The importance of this for primate locomotion and foraging is obvious. Shifts to more voluntary control of the facial and mouth muscles could also be important for preparing food and communicating by gestures.



Figure 8.3 Two evolutionary shifts producing increasing cortical control over motor output from brain stem articulatory and vocal systems. These shifts were produced by an increase in the proportions of the cerebral cortex in comparison to these brain stem structures.

Left: Basic relationships between brain stem nuclei (neuronal cell clusters) controlling face-jaw-tongue and larynx-respiration muscles.

Right: This shows the progression from a typical terrestrial mammal plan (far left of the three) with minimal direct cortical input to these systems (mostly indirect via the reticular regions of the brain stem) to the monkey-ape condition (center image), where increased forebrain size gives cortical projections a favorable competitive bias, to the possible human condition (far right), with extensive recruitment of even visceral motor systems due to the massive cortical projection to these regions. The asterisk indicates increased projection to spinal respiratory motor neurons as well.

How has this takeover of motor nuclei by cortical inputs been achieved in primate brain evolution? Primate forebrain expansion provides a sort of vertical rendition of the displacement process responsible for the connectional changes in the brain of the blind mole rat, Spalax. As a result of the reduction in proportions of the postcranial body compared to the head and brain there has been a change in relative proportions between the forebrain as compared to the brain stem and spinal cord, and this embryological shift in neural proportions is a recipe for displacement. With so many more descending axons vying for space in the primate motor system, the more numerous cortical axons displace the less numerous local connections, since these displaced connections arose from systems that were scaled for a smaller body. In nonprimate brains, the initially overexuberant and somewhat nonspecific cortical projections to these brain stem motor nuclei are outcompeted by local projections and pruned back during development to leave only those projecting to premotor regions of the brain stem and spinal cord. In primate brains, on the other hand, the initial cortical projections are so numerous that they outcompete the local connections and persist in far greater numbers in many additional motor nuclei.

This same logic can be extrapolated to the human case. The primate/human difference is characterized by an additional increase in cortical/brain stem disproportion. Though of different embryological origin, this additional human shift in embryonic neural numbers should provide an analogous displacement, compared to the typical primate pattern. Because of their greatly expanded numbers, human cortical axons should enjoy an even greater ability to recruit brain stem and spinal cord targets during development. But where else are there targets for human cortical axons to invade? They will almost certainly increase in proportions in face and tongue muscle nuclei, with the consequence that the voluntary control of these systems will be greater than in other primates. In addition, however, the more extensive human cortical projections have probably also invaded nuclei in the brain stem and neurons in the spinal cord that even primates do not have voluntary control over: nuclei-controlling visceral muscle systems. Two of these, in particular, are relevant to speech: the motor neurons that control the larynx (the nucleus ambiguus), and those that control breathing (in the brain stem and upper spinal cord).

Neurologists have long assumed that humans have direct cortical control over the larynx because of the tendency of cortical motor damage to produce muteness. Uwe Jürgens, Detlev Ploog, and their colleagues at the Max Planck Institute have provided additional circumstantial evidence for a primate/human dichotomy in this regard by demonstrating that monkeys lack direct cortico-ambiguus connections, and by showing that cortical motor damage does not eliminate a monkey’s ability to vocalize.7 They surmise that such a difference might explain the behavioral difference in response to brain damage, and might also explain the well-known difficulty in getting monkeys and apes to vocalize from learned associations, much less form articulate words. But gaining volitional control over laryngeal functions is only part of the story. In order to produce complicated skilled vocal sounds, the laryngeal muscles need to be coordinated with breathing, and with muscle movements of the tongue, lips, and jaw. The human ability to speak is probably a consequence of all these systems being brought under common cortical control.

One of the more interesting sources of evidence for a shift in motor control over vocalization and breathing is suggested by studies of laughter. Laughter is not only highly stereotypic in form and similar in sound structure in all normal people, it is also quite different in some important respects from corresponding vocalizations in other primates. Though chimpanzees also produce a laughterlike vocalization—often as a result of tickling or related tactile play—which is made up of similar short, rapidly alternating inhalations and exhalations, chimps vocalize on both the outbreath and the inbreath, whereas humans vocalize almost exclusively on the outbreath (though there are individual differences in this regard).8 This may not seem to be particularly noteworthy, but consider the curious fact that although many other primate vocalizations also involve this in-out vocalization pattern, as though the larynx is just set at a fixed tension irrespective of breathing, no typical human vocalizations, whether calls or speech, have this character. Why not? We tend to relax the larynx on inhalation, even when we are not thinking about it. It is indeed quite difficult and almost painful to speak while inhaling.

For speech, this asymmetry has obvious communicative value. A large number of units of sound distinction (phonemes and syllables) and the sound units of meaning (words and morphemes, like word stems and prefixes) can be produced during a single exhalation by modifying the resonances of laryngeal sound production by complicated sequences of upper vocal tract movements. These are far less effectively produced during inhalation (try reading this sentence aloud while inhaling). Because of this, during speech we rapidly inhale between phrases in order to set up for each subsequent prolonged, controlled, sound-producing exhalation. This rapid inhalation is facilitated by completely opening the laryngeal folds. Rapid alternation between orally modified vocalization and nonvocalized inhalation increases the information transmission rates of spoken information by effectively shifting the focus of information transmission from breath units to articulatory units. It appears, then, in the interest of speech, that the relatively inflexible link between laryngeal movements and breathing has been broken and subordinated in a rather thorough way to skilled articulation. Human laughter and sobbing are like primate calls in that they tend to be based around alternation of the presence and absence of vocal sounds, superimposed on relatively more stable mouth postures. They are bottom-up, viscerally driven patterns. In speech, this relationship is reversed. Relatively slower tonal changes and exhalation patterns become precisely timed and subordinated to match the rapidly fluctuating articulatory movements of the mouth and tongue. Speech is thus comparatively top-down in its control. The skeletal motor systems driving mouth and tongue movements dictate breathing and laryngeal patterns.

The predominance of cortical projections to these visceral motor systems also explains another, often ignored oddity of human vocalization: the unprecedented babbling of human infants. Within a few months of birth, human infants begin spontaneously and incessantly experimenting with sound production, sampling most of the range of possible phonemes that speech will later employ. No other mammal species’ babies produce even a tiny fraction of the sort of unstereotypic vocal play that human babies produce. And human infants don’t need to get particularly excited or upset to babble; in fact, they only babble while emotionally calm. When they get upset, their babbling is interrupted by a more stereotypic call: crying. This propensity is a clear indication that human babbling is activated differently from other innate vocalizations. It is the first sign that human vocal motor output is at least in part under the control of the cortical motor system. Even the timing of the first appearance and maturation of babbling and vocal mimickry corresponds to the maturation of the cortical motor output pathways. Although newborns do engage in some vocalizations other than crying, the kind of vocal manipulation that characterizes babbling is not produced until a few months after birth. At this time the cortical motor tracts are just beginning to become encased in a sheath of cells filled with myelin (a fatty substance which acts like a sort of neural insulation, promoting fidelity of the signal and more rapid signal transmission). By the time a child produces its first words and its first steps (around one year of age), the projections that carry voluntary movement information to the brain stem and spinal cord have nearly reached adult levels of myelin.

Since the displacement of noncortical inputs by cortical inputs in brain stem motor nuclei is an indirect consequence of the shift in brain and body proportions in our species, information about relative brain proportions can fortuitously provide an index of the degree of cortical vocal control in our fossil ancestors. Though fossil speech sounds weren’t left behind in the fossil record, nor even fossil vocal tracts, we do have numerous measurements of the brain and body sizes for each major hominid species. These data suggest that human vocal skills first exceeded the capabilities of any living non-human primate at least 2 million years ago, in the hominid fossil species Homo habilis, since this species marks the first significant upward shift in relative brain size (see Chapter 11 for discussion). Since the trend toward larger brains continued from that point until about 200,000 years ago, we can predict with some confidence that vocal abilities were enhanced continuously over this entire extended period of hominid evolution. These data suggest that it is unlikely that speech suddenly burst on the scene at some point in our evolution. The ability to manipulate vocal sounds appears to have been in a process of continual development for over 1 million years.

However, there is an additional source of evidence for a shift in cortical control over respiration that is provided by hominid fossils. One correlate of our greater cortical control over breathing appears to be an enlargement of the thoracic (chest) spinal cord as compared to other primates. This is the region of the spinal cord that contains motor neurons that control the intercostal (between-rib) muscles and other trunk muscles involved in breathing. This enlargement may reflect a comparative increase of the numbers of motor neurons in this segment of the cord (because of reduced cell death?) and possibly an increase in descending connections terminating in this area. In their recent book on human evolution, the Johns Hopkins paleontologists Pat Shipman and Alan Walker suggest that the evolution of speech may be contingent on this enlargement. They looked for this feature in the relatively complete vertebral column from a fossil Homo erectus boy, but could not find a corresponding thoracic enlargement. They conclude from this that speech had not yet evolved at this stage in human evolution. Given the neurodevelopmental information suggesting that cortical takeover of breathing control is a quantitative allometric effect—and not likely the result of a pair of all-or-none mutations that added new neurons to this part of the cord and retargeted cortical axons to match—I suspect that an intermediate interpretation is more likely with a relative brain size intermediate between modern apes and modern humans, this erectus boy likely also had an intermediate level of cortical control over respiration, supported in part by an increase in cortical projections to thoracic motor neurons as well as to other higher respiratory centers.

Did the use of speech have to wait until these modifications reached a modern level, or did the demands of vocal communication contribute some of the selection pressure that led to these modifications? These are questions that we will return to later (in Chapter 11), but in general, we can conclude that the modern human level of control over vocalization did not evolve overnight, and that upper vocal tract articulatory capabilities were probably always in advance of laryngeal capabilities, due to the target bias in favor of skeletal motor over visceral motor nuclei. This means that if this erectus boy and his contemporaries did communicate using something like a language, it may well have been one that was more reliant on orally produced sound variations than on laryngeally produced ones. In other words, it likely employed fewer vowels and rapid tonal variations, relied more heavily on consonants and oral clicks, may have been limited to short phrasing, and so probably required more nonverbal support as well.

So, what about Hoovers speech? If most other species of mammals are unable to talk because the connections from the cortical motor centers to the vocal nuclei in the brain stem are pruned away during early development, isn’t it possible that perinatal damage to the limbic-midbrain projections in Hoover’s brain turned the tables in favor of cortical motor projections to vocal systems? If more typical projections to vocal control systems had been damaged early enough, the usually transient cortical projections to these same nuclei might have been able to persist into adulthood. Brain damage could indeed have provided Hoover with more direct motor control over his tongue and larynx. In any case, it is probably not coincidental that Hoover was an aquatic mammal. Unlike terrestrial mammals, for whom breathing can be left to run on autopilot, aquatic mammals need to have direct control over when and when not to breathe. Overriding automatic respiration via cortical control is almost certainly a prerequisite from an early age. How this is accomplished is not known, but we now can make some confirmed guesses. Though we will never know Hoover’s secret, he may have taken a road toward speech that happened to converge with ours at these critical neural intersections of breathing, sound, and oral movement control.
