CHAPTER NINE


Symbol Minds


If our brains were simple, we would be too simple to understand them.

—Mario Puzo





Front-Heavy


A gradual superimposition of cortical motor control on visceral motor systems for vocalization has made possible our modern speaking abilities, but the ability to produce articulate sounds is not in itself sufficient to make language possible. An articulate verbal ability is not sufficient to lift parrots across the symbolic threshold, nor has merely shifting to manual signing enabled apes to become articulate members of human society, despite the hopes of some researchers. Even Kanzi—who more than any other nonhuman has demonstrated the extent to which language comprehension abilities are possible without any explicit language adaptations, and how providing a computer speech system can enhance access to symbolic communication—will probably not progress beyond the level of symbolic sophistication exhibited by a three-year-old human child (though he still has many years in which to prove me too pessimistic). This is because the more fundamental constraint affecting language evolution derives from learning and memory difficulties, not limited motor abilities. The evolution of vocal abilities might more accurately be seen as a consequence rather than the cause of the evolution of language. The changes in brain organization that have provided humans with the support necessary to surmount the symbolic-learning threshold are more critical. Symbol acquisition abilities provide the pacemaker for language evolution from which other adaptations for language must derive their usefulness. A greatly enhanced vocal articulatory ability would be of minor adaptive value if not coupled with symbolic abilities.

Human brains are not just large ape brains, they are ape brains with some rather significant alterations of proportions and relationships between the parts. We ought to expect a significant part of this shift in proportions to reflect adaptations to the unusual cognitive demands imposed by symbol learning. In other words, if the human brain is a more language-friendly ape brain, then the special demands of the language adaptation are likely to be reflected in the ways that human brain structure diverges from nonhuman brain structure. Given the completely unprecedented and indeed countervailing demands imposed by symbolic learning, as contrasted to all other forms of learning, it seems inevitable that some equally unprecedented neuroanatomical changes must lie behind the human symbolic facility. The most extreme deviations in brain structure between human and other primate brains may thus offer clues to the neural computations that most distinguish human from nonhuman minds.

As we saw in Chapter 6, these radical structural deviations in the human forebrain have resulted in a disproportionately enlarged human prefrontal cortex and a shift in connectivity favoring prefrontal connections in other systems. Let’s examine this most dramatic brain renovation for clues to the kinds of cognitive demands that drove human brain evolution (Figure 9.1). What functional correspondence could link this remarkable neural disproportion to our unusual mode of communication? Does this most modified structure reflect the most intense and unusual demands imposed by language? If so, it is not the production of everyday speech and the comprehension of others’ speech that is the main problem. These processes are only minimally affected by damage to prefrontal cortex; such damage seldom produces permanent difficulty producing speech, comprehending speech, or analyzing grammar. Disruption of these basic language abilities—aphasias—typically results from damage to areas more closely associated with motor and auditory analysis: Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas, respectively (these will be the subject of the next chapter). Prefrontal areas seem instead to be recruited during such tasks as planning complex behaviors. But the range of specific cognitive processes that are altered by prefrontal damage cannot be described in such simple terms, and searching for a common underlying pattern in prefrontal syndromes leads to an indirect and far more interesting connection to language and symbolic cognition.



Figure 9.1 Idealized depictions of the predominance of prefrontal influence over other brain structures. White arrows in the left image represent the relative expansion of prefrontal cortical areas (1). Gray arrows in both images represent expanded prefrontal projections to other cortical areas, basal ganglia, and thalamus. Black arrows signify projections that have expanded so as to invade novel targets: including (2) increased prefrontal projections into midbrain and brainstem vocalization circuits (discussed in the previous chapter) with respect to other limbic and midbrain sources; and (3) expanded interconnectivity of prefrontal regions and lateral cerebellar cortex, probably including connections with ventral prefrontal cortex (which has auditory-oral cortical links). For the first time in evolution, this would, bring cerebellar systems into the loop of higher-order control of vocal-auditory processes (discussed later).

Just as prefrontal expansion can only be understood as a function of dynamic systemic interactions between many of the brains structures during development, its structural and functional consequences also require an understanding of the systemic consequences of changes in size. This prefrontal enlargement as compared to the majority of brain structures in the cortex and elsewhere is a consequence of the developmental competitive advantage that its afferents have over other types of cortical afferents. These afferents come from such thalamic nuclei as the medial dorsal nucleus (which receives a majority of inputs from the midbrain tectum and dorsal tegmentum) and the anterior nuclei (which receive their inputs from limbic cortex), and from a very wide range of other cortical areas, including all sensory and motor modalities.

Of particular interest are the widespread cortical outputs that project back from the prefrontal cortex to every modality of cortex, including limbic cortex and cortical projections onto the basal ganglia and into the mid-brain, particularly to the tectum and dorsal tegmentum. Given the very large size of the prefrontal cortex compared to the size of its targets, it could be expected to recruit a far greater proportion of synapses in these structures during development than do other structures that send competing afferents to these targets. Compared with more typical primate and mammal brains, then, we should expect that in the human brain, prefrontal synapses will be in greater proportions within its targets. Consequently, prefrontal information processing will likely play a more dominating role in nearly every facet of sensory, motor, and arousal processes. Irrespective of whether this structure has more “capacity” in some information-processing sense because of its size, it simply “has more votes” in whatever is going on in those regions of the brain to which it projects. In general terms, human information processing should be biased by an excessive reliance on and guidance by the kinds of manipulations that prefrontal circuits impose upon the information they process. We humans should therefore exhibit a “cognitive style” that sets us apart from other species—a pattern of organizing perceptions, actions, and learning that is peculiarly “front-heavy,” so to speak. But how can this be described in neuropsychological terms?

Although, during development, the prefrontal region is probably carved out as a single projection field, in the mature brain the prefrontal cortex is not a single homogeneous structure with a single function. There is a danger of extrapolating from studies based on one prefrontal area to claims about the whole prefrontal region. Different prefrontal regions receive diversely different cortical inputs and outputs which provide general hints concerning their functional differences. Many regions receive inputs from specific sensory or motor modalities, and others receive converging inputs from more than one modality. No prefrontal area, however, receives direct input from primary sensory or motor cortices. One reason the prefrontal region remains to some extent mysterious is that its map structure is difficult to discern. Unlike the cortical topography of most sensory areas, positions within prefrontal regions do not seem to correlate with the peripheral topography of any sensory receptor surface. Nor is there a clear map of motor topography.

One hint concerning the sort of mapping of functions within the pre-frontal regions, however, comes from studies of visual attention and the sub-cortical structures that underlie it. Patricia Goldman-Rakic and her colleagues at Yale University have demonstrated that one portion of the prefrontal cortex in monkeys (the dorsal lateral prefrontal region, or principalis region, named for its location surrounding the principal sulcus) maps the direction of attention-driven eye movements with respect to the center of gaze.1 As a result, damage to some sector of this region can selectively block the ability to learn to produce or inhibit directed eye movements in a particular direction, or in response to cues in a particular direction. Not surprisingly, this subregion of the prefrontal cortex is located close to a region known as the frontal (motor) eye field, which directs eye movement. The eye-movement/attentional features of this region of the prefrontal cortex are also not surprising when considered in the context of its input/output association with the deep layers of the superior colliculus. And it has extensive connections with temporal and parietal visual areas.2

Just above and below this prefrontal visual attention zone are regions that are reciprocally connected to the auditory and multimodal auditory/somatic cortical areas of the temporal lobe.3 They likely also send projections to tectal regions where auditory information is initially processed in the deep layers of the superior colliculus and the inferior colliculus. One way to understand the frontal cortical auditory areas is that they “map” auditory-orienting processes in ways analogous to the way principalis cortex “maps” visual orienting. In addition to the sensory-associated prefrontal subdivisions on its lateral surface, there are also orbital and medial regions of the prefrontal cortex. These are less easy to find map correlations for. These have predominantly limbic and adjacent prefrontal cortical connections, and show output pathways that include structures more associated with visceral and arousal functions than sensory motor functions.

The function of the lateral divisions of prefrontal cortex must, in part, be understood in terms of attentional mechanisms, both with respect to collicular systems and with respect to cortical systems to which they project outputs, whereas the function of orbital and medial divisions of prefrontal cortex must in contrast be more involved with arousal, visceral, and autonomic functions. These two systems are not only structurally interconnected but likely also to be functionally interdependent as well. Arousal, orienting, and attending are all part of the same process of shifting motivation to regulate adaptive responses to changing conditions. The lateral divisions may provide a substrate for intentionally overriding collicular-orienting reflexes, using orienting information as cues for working memory about alternative stimuli, or to select among many sensory configurations for further sensory analysis. The orbital and medial divisions may provide correlated shifts in arousal and autonomic readiness both to support shifts in attention and to inhibit the tendency for new stimuli to command attentional arousal.

So, what does the prefrontal cortex do? This is no simple question. In fact, it remains one of the more debated questions in neuropsychology.4 The reason it is difficult is that the explanation cannot be tied directly to any sensory or motor function. When prefrontal areas are damaged, there are no specific sensory or motor problems. Surgeons who performed prefrontal lobotomies used to point out that it didn’t reduce their patients’ IQs either. The consequences of prefrontal damage only show up in certain rather specific sorts of learning contexts; but these can be extensive and ultimately debilitating. Understanding these associations is also difficult because there is not one type of prefrontal deficit for the simple reason that there is not one homogeneous prefrontal area. Because different prefrontal areas are connected to different cortical and subcortical structures, when they are damaged, they produce slightly different types of impairments. Not only are there numerous competing theories that attempt to explain individual types of prefrontal impairments, there is no account of the family resemblances that link the many different deficits associated with different prefrontal sub-areas.

Let’s begin this global overview of prefrontal functions, not by treating the prefrontal cortex as homogeneous, but rather by searching among prefrontal areas, connections, and deficits for common themes and family resemblances. I am encouraged that there are some common threads because of the global similarities in connecting architecture that link these areas with the rest of the brain. Like the numerous subareas of the visual cortical system, I suspect that the different prefrontal regions share a common computational problem, but have broken it up into dissociable subtasks in large brains, perhaps separated according to differences in modality.

Let me begin by surveying a variety of interesting examples of tasks that are affected by damage to the prefrontal cortex in monkeys (see Figure 9.2). It is appropriate to start with the classical prefrontal task identified by Jacobsen many decades ago.5 The highly schematized figure depicts the delayed response or delayed alternation task. In this task, a food object is placed in a covered container as the monkey watches; then the monkey is distracted for a few seconds, often by pulling down a blind; and finally he is allowed to retrieve the food object by uncovering it. This is no problem. But on a succeeding trial, the hidden food object is placed in the alternate container, again in full view. Now, however, after the delay period, rather than looking in the new hiding place, the prefrontally damaged monkey again tends to look in the place where he found food before, not where he saw it being hidden.6



Figure 9.2 Diagrammatic depiction of six different cognitive deficits shown in monkeys with frontal lobe damage to different subregions (indicated by blackened regions). A: Delayed response (delayed alternation) task associated with dorsal lateral prefrontal damage (Jacobsen, 1936). B: Self-ordered sampling task associated with dorsal lateral prefrontal damage (simplified from Passingham, 1985) C: Delayed non-match to sample task associated with ventral medial prefrontal damage (Mishkin and Manning, 1978). D and E: Conditional association tasks (spatial versus non-spatial cues, respectively) associated with periarcuate prefrontal damage (Petrides, 1982; 1985). F: Go/no-go task associated with periarcuate premotor damage but not prefrontal damage (Petrides, 1986).

Some have explained this as a problem with short-term memory. The monkey might be unable to use information from a past trial to influence his choice in a future trial. A simple memory problem, however, would tend to produce random performance. In general, the animal’s perseveration indicates that he does remember the previous successful trial, all too well, it would seem. Apparently he either can’t inhibit the tendency to return to where he got rewarded the last time, or can’t subordinate this previously stored information to the new problem. Historically, interpreters of prefrontal deficits have split evenly over whether they define this response in terms of memory or response inhibition. But before taking sides, let’s consider a few additional examples.

Another, more sophisticated version of the same task has been investigated by Richard Passingham.7 It offers some insight into how this task might have real-world adaptive consequences. As in the simple delayed-response experiment, food is placed in food wells while the monkey watches (although the observation is not a necessary factor); but in this case food is hidden in all or many of a large number of wells. No delay is necessary. The monkey must simply sample through the wells to retrieve all the food objects. Monkeys with efficient sampling strategies won’t tend to sample the same wells twice. Once food has been located in one place and taken, there is no reason to go back and check it again. Prefrontally damaged monkeys, however, fail to sample efficiently. They perseverate, return more often to previously sampled wells, and fail to sample others at all. Again, it is not clear whether to consider this as forgetfulness or as a failure to inhibit a repetition of past responses. The practical significance of such an ability is clear, however. This is precisely the sort of problem that might be faced by an animal foraging in many different places. Once all the food has been eaten in one place, it makes no sense to go back looking for more, even if the food tasted particularly good there.

Turning now to monkeys with medial frontal damage, we find a slightly different kind of deficit. Although such monkeys succeed at the tasks described above, they fail at tasks where the shift in food location is cued by a shift in stimulus as well. The food object is hidden, and the location is cued by some stimulus. After the monkey succeeds at this task, the food object is rehidden and the hiding place is marked by a new stimulus, with the previous stimulus now marking no food. Thus the monkey must learn that the food will always be hidden where the new stimulus of the two is placed. Medial prefrontal damage appears preferentially to affect this kind of learning, but not delayed response, delayed alternation, or sampling tasks that are sensitive to dorsal lateral prefrontal damage.

Compare this to tasks that are sensitive to posterior prefrontal regions. Such tasks have a multipart form, but common to them all is a dependency between two classes of cues or cues and behavior options. One cue stimulus indicates that the food is hidden in the well with the lighted light, whereas the alternative cue indicates that the food is hidden in the well with the unlit light. The pattern is “If X then Z; if Y, then not Z.” It is a conditional relationship in which one stimulus indicates the relationship between another stimulus and the position of the food. Other variants that involve a similar dependency relationship, but differ in terms of the kind of response (e.g., choice of buttons to push instead of positions to check), also are sensitive to damage in this region. Unlike the previous task, there is no spatial difference in food position; but like the last task, there is a conditional relationship in which the stimulus indicates which of two alternatives is associated with the food. Depending on what stimulus is presented, the monkey has to reverse his expectation about the association between the reward and some behavioral option.

These tasks are all different and yet they share a number of common features. Although all involve some apparent inability to inhibit responding, this is probably not itself the locus of the deficit. Prefrontally damaged animals do not show a problem with simple go/no-go tasks that require with-holding a response. In this sort of task, the presentation of one of two different stimuli indicates whether an immediate response or the same response just delayed a few seconds will produce a reward. Animals who have difficulty suppressing a response will be unable to learn such tasks because they will fail at the no-go task. This difficulty is, however, demonstrated by animals with premotor lesions, which additionally produce problems with motor sequences and skilled movements.

Another whole class of learning abilities undermined by prefrontal damage are those involving transfer of information from one learning task to another—often referred to as transferring a “learning set.” The analogy to the prefrontal tasks we’ve just been considering is that the transfer requires using information from previous trials, but divorcing it from specific stimuli. Probably the most difficult learning-set problems involve transfer of an inverse pattern of associations from one task to another. Only some of the larger brained primates succeed at such doubly demanding tasks (see Rumbaugh, et al., 1996). This suggests some interesting species differences that may be correlates of both the size and relative proportions of prefrontal cortex.

One might argue that all of these tasks involve holding information in mind while not acting on it—a function some have called working memory. Arguing against a simple mnemonic interpretation of these errors is the fact that the deficit pattern always involves perseverative failures, that is, errors that result from repeating the previously successful performance. We could, for example, interpret the failures as resulting from information in short-term memory that inappropriately dominates the tendency to respond. Although a trace from previous trials must be retained in order to succeed at these tasks, what must be “held in mind” in these tasks is not just prior information, but information about the applicability of that information in a different context. One of the most salient common features of these tasks sensitive to prefrontal lesions is that they all in some way or other involve shifting between alternatives or opposites, alternating place from trial to trial, shifting from one stimulus to a new one, or from one pairwise association to another depending on the presence of different cues. Tasks sensitive to prefrontal damage thus involve short-term memory, attention, suppression of responses, and context sensitivity. But they all have one other important feature in common: each involves a kind of negation relationship between stimuli or stimulus-behavior relationships. They all have to do with using information about something you’ve just done or seen against itself, so to speak, to inhibit the tendency to follow up that correlation and instead shift attention and direct action to alternative associations. Precisely because one association works in one context or trial, it is specifically excluded in the next trial or under different stimulus conditions. An implicit “not” must be generated to learn these tasks, not just an inhibition.

Similar deficits are well known in human patients,8 though associations between specific tasks and different prefrontal subareas are less well worked out in humans. For example, human prefrontal patients often fail at card-sorting tasks that require them to change the sorting criteria. They also tend to have trouble generating word lists. In trying to generate lists of words according to some criterion or instruction, they barely get past the first few names of things before getting stuck or repeating already named items. These tasks are formally similar to conditional association and sampling tasks, respectively. To generate a word list, it is necessary to maintain attention on the selection criterion and on previously generated words in order not to produce them again, but rather to elicit additional alternatives appropriate to these same criteria.

Prefrontally damaged patients also often have difficulty learning mazes based on success/failure feedback, making plans, spontaneously organizing behavior sequences, and performing tasks that require taking another’s perspective (allocentric as opposed to egocentric). The last are analogous to using a mirror. In order to think in allocentric terms, one is required to perform a systematic mental reversal of response tendencies, and so egocentric information must continuously be used as the frame of reference, but responses based on it must be specifically inhibited and inverted. In general, tasks that require convergence on only a single solution are minimally impacted by prefrontal damage, but those that require generating or sampling a variety of alternatives are impaired. This capacity has been called divergent thinking by J. Guilford,9 and it may explain why prefrontal damage does not appear to have a major effect on many aspects of paper and pencil IQ tests. Prefrontally damaged patients exhibit a tendency to be controlled by immediate correlative relationships between stimuli and reinforcers, and this disturbs their ability to entertain higher-order associative relationships. In summary, these human counterparts to different frontal lobe defects in monkeys also involve difficulties in using information negatively. Impairment of the neural computations provided by these cortical areas makes it difficult to subordinate one set of associations to another, especially when the subordinate associations are more immediate and salient.





Making Symbols


These general insights about the contributions of prefrontal cortex in primate and human problem solving may not answer the riddle of prefrontal function in general, but they offer some useful clues to the significance of the disproportionately large size of this structure in human brains. What might an anomalously large prefrontal region have to do with that other human anomaly, language? Or to pose the question more specifically: Is there something about language that requires a predisposition for working with difficult conditional associative relationships, maintaining items in working memory under highly distractive conditions, or using negative information to shift associative strategies from concrete stimulus driven links to abstract associations?

Phrased in these terms, the parallels with the cognitive processes required for symbol acquisition become obvious. The contributions of prefrontal areas to learning all involve, in one way or another, the analysis of higher-order associative relationships. More specifically, judging from the effects of damage to prefrontal regions, they are necessary for learning associative relationships where one associative learning process must be subordinated to another. These are the most critical learning problems faced during symbol acquisition, and less effective regulation of competing learning tendencies by the prefrontal cortex is almost certainly the primary roadblock to symbol learning in nonhuman species. Conversely, the expansion of this structure in human brains may reflect the advantage of exaggerating the predisposition to employ this learning strategy and giving it added strength over competing learning tendencies in order more efficiently to cross the threshold from indexical to symbolic associations. Though experiments with chimpanzees have shown how it is possible to supplement the special attentional and mnemonic demands of symbol learning from the outside, the constant demand for this analytic process throughout human evolution has apparently selected for a pattern of brain reorganization that shouldered more and more of this burden internally.

The prefrontal cortex helps us inhibit the tendency to act on simple correlative stimulus relationships and guides our sampling of alternative higher-order sequential or hierarchic associations. Its role in language and symbol learning in particular is not, however, merely to increase something we might call prefrontal intelligence. Rather I suspect the importance of the size change can be thought of in displacement terms, in patterns of cognition as in patterns of brain development. Prefrontal computations out-compete other cognitive computations and tend to dominate learning in us as in no other species. In simple terms, we have become predisposed to use this one cognitive tool whenever an opportunity presents itself, because an inordinate amount of control of the other processes in the brain has become vested in our prefrontal cortex. The way the parietal cortex handles tactile and movement information, the way the auditory cortex handles sound information, the way the visual cortex handles visual information are all now much more constrained by prefrontal activity than in other species.

We should not, however, make the mistake of thinking that prefrontal cortex is the place in the brain where symbols are processed. It is not. Massive damage to the prefrontal cortex does not eliminate one’s ability to understand word or sentence meaning. The symbolic associations that underlie the web of word meanings are probably much more dependent on the mnemonic support of sensory-based “images.” This is supported by the high incidence of semantic disturbances after posterior cortex damage, especially damage to areas surrounding the posterior temporal cortex. It is also supported by our intuitions of mental imagery generated as we read stories, or of sound motor “images” as we search our memories for the right words to say or the correct names to match with familiar faces. It would be misleading, however, to suggest that these images are all there is to symbols, any more than the words on this page suffice in themselves to convey their meanings. They are merely neurological tokens. Like buoys indicating an otherwise invisible best course, they mark a specific associative path, by following which we reconstruct the implicit symbolic reference. The symbolic reference emerges from a pattern of virtual links between such tokens, which constitute a sort of parallel realm of associations to those that link these tokens to real sensorimotor experiences and possibilities. Thus, it does not make sense to think of the symbols as located anywhere within the brain, because they are relationships between tokens, not the tokens themselves; and even though specific neural connections may underlie these relationships, the symbolic function is not even constituted by a specific association but by the virtual set of associations that are partially sampled in any one instance. Widely distributed neural systems must contribute in a coordinated fashion to create and interpret symbolic relationships. The prefrontal cortex is only one of these.

The critical role of the prefrontal cortex is primarily in the construction of the distributed mnemonic architecture that supports symbolic reference, not in the storage or retrieval of symbols. This is not just a process confined to language learning. The construction of novel symbolic relationships fills everyday cognition. A considerable amount of everyday problem solving involves symbolic analysis or efforts to figure out some obscure symbolic association. As soon as language processing leaves the realm of relatively habitual phrases and uses, it, too, often involves some level of novel symbol construction. Almost certainly the confusing and idiosyncratic ways that information is weaved into the sentences and paragraphs of this book impose significant demands for symbolic analysis on its readers. It is in these circumstances that the language impairment of patients with damaged prefrontal cortex shows up. One of the most important uses of language is for inferential processes, for taking one piece of information and extrapolating it to consequences not obvious from the information given. This is essentially using symbols to elicit or construct new symbols.

The prefrontal cortex is not totally uninvolved in ongoing language processing, and it is particularly important in language processing, where corresponding sequential, hierarchic, and subordinate association analyses are required. The recursive embedding of sentence clauses within one another, which provides language with its expressive economy, also takes advantage of our remarkable facility for manipulating conditional association hierarchies. Such syntactic constructions are specifically cued by sentence morphology (using position, word, or inflectional markers) and so probably require only minimal prefrontal support to sort them out. Nevertheless, there may be occasions where the syntactic constructions are particularly tortuous, or where semantic cues directly interfere with the syntactic analysis (e.g., “the cat the mouse killed”), which require the special contributions of prefrontal functions. Moreover, as word association tasks reveal, prefrontal control is likely critical for guiding word choices and shifts in logic during discourse. It is often noted that despite their control of the mechanics of language production, prefrontally damaged patients are characterized by a disturbed “flow” of ideas and word choices, not to mention a sort of “concreteness” in their interpretations of sentence meaning.

The more complicated the combinatorial relationships, or the more easily confused the correlated relationships, the more prefrontal systems are taxed. This is clearly demonstrated by imaging studies of the metabolic correlates of different cognitive tasks in human subjects.10 Complex sorting problems and difficult word association tasks have been shown particularly to activate prefrontal metabolism. There is also indirect evidence that the difficulty of a task determines how much of prefrontal cortex gets recruited to that task. Electrical stimulation studies of awake neurosurgery patients have shown that patients with lower verbal IQs tend to have larger regions of prefrontal and parietal cortex susceptible to disruption of language tasks.11 In addition, when a difficult word association task (such as the example of producing appropriate verbs for rapidly presented nouns) is practiced so that the task format and the words presented are no longer novel, the level and extent of metabolically activated ventral frontal and cingulate cortex is significantly reduced (see discussions of PET scan studies in the next chapter). Numerous tasks involving other cortical areas demonstrate a similar pattern of recruitment of additional cortical space to respond to novelty and difficulty, and a reduction of activity and extent of areas involved after practice. This might offer another correlate of cortical size-related effects. Having a larger prefrontal cortex is analogous to having a large voting contingency in reserve to guarantee a majority even when the competition is stiff. A larger prefrontal region in general might increase the territories that can be easily recruited for diverse tasks that tax specific prefrontal computations.

The most critical effect of a disturbance of prefrontal functions to language should be most evident in the processes of symbol construction during initial language learning. Prefrontal impairment early in life should thus be far more devastating than later in life, because it would make the critical shift away from rote, stimulus-bound learning of words and phrases far more difficult. A brain-damaged child, limited in his or her ability to pull attention away from the surface correlations between stimuli, would require much more extensive external support in order build up each minimal group of symbol-symbol relationships, and so might find language acquisition particularly rough going, for precisely the same reasons that other species do.

Direct evidence that prefrontal damage in young children impairs language learning comes from a survey study by Bates, Thal, and colleagues (1994). They found particular impairments in development of both vocabulary and grammar after prefrontal damage in the critical period between nineteen and thirty-one months of age. The fact that such damage affects both semantic and syntactic aspects of language is consistent with a general symbolic impairment. Bilateral prefrontal damage at this age produces a permanent deficit, but damage to either side alone can produce language delay.

Language-learning difficulties are often associated with a reliance on rote-learned phrases and overly concrete interpretive responses. Such tendencies are particularly characteristic of Down’s syndrome and autism. The language-learning problems associated with these more global cognitive deficits are often compared with an inverse developmental pathology. Williams syndrome (WS) is one of the most enigmatic examples of selectively spared language learning. It is characterized by highly verbal individuals who seem adept at storytelling and recitation of verbal information, but who also exhibit major cognitive deficits in analyzing thematic-level language processes, very poor problem-solving abilities, and very impaired spatial reasoning. Though they may have IQ scores in the range of 50, their vocabulary and speaking skills may test above normal at early ages. Along with their peculiar mix of language abilities and disabilities, they are also intensely social and gregarious, exhibiting an almost hypersocial personality, and they have a slight facial abnormality that is often described as pixielike, with a constant wide grin.

The paradoxically spared language skills of WS children caught the attention of Ursula Bellugi, one of the pioneers in the study of deaf signers. She and her colleagues have mounted an extensive effort to study these individuals, and have compiled both extensive testing data and some of the first evidence concerning their brain abnormalities. WS children are especially interesting because their somewhat precocious verbal skills follow curious patterns. When asked to tell what they know about a familiar object, they can produce a long list of physical characteristics, places you might find one, things they are good for, and so on. But if you then ask whether the same object could be used for a novel purpose that could be simply figured out from its physical characteristics, they are often baffled. Normal children of the same age might not produce nearly as many descriptive characterizations when answering the first question, but would find the second part easy to guess. The WS children’s knowledge of words might be likened to that of someone who had memorized entries from a dictionary or an encyclopedia but had never had any experience with the things they know about. They have acquired extensive knowledge of linguistic associations, but only a fraction of the web of additional experiential associations that link words to the world.

The fact that WS children can appear to have well-developed verbal abilities and yet very low IQ scores has been used to bolster arguments about the modularity of language functions. On the surface, WS children demonstrate spared grammar and syntactic ability, but their understanding of language is in the context a somewhat shallow pragmatic understanding, and shows minimal problem-solving ability. For this reason, they have been cited as evidence of innate grammatical knowledge that is independent of other cognitive abilities. This interpretation is also consistent with the minimal consequences of aphasia on intelligence measures that exclude verbal performance tests. But it would be a mistake to think of these two ways that language and general intelligence dissociate under pathological conditions as reflecting an independence of language from intelligence. Intelligence isn’t a unitary brain function, and language isn’t walled off from other cognitive functions. Nevertheless, in Williams syndrome we see a deficit in which cognitive functions are splintered in a manner that selectively spares certain processes most critical to language development, and in this way serves to reinforce the claim that the type of learning biases that favor symbolic learning may be quite different and even antagonistic to those useful in the majority of other learning contexts.

Recently, anatomical data have suggested some curious abnormalities in the brains of patients with WS that may provide a clue to this paradoxical dissociation. Both postmortem analysis and MRI analysis have revealed brains with a reduction of the entire posterior cerebral cortex, but a sparing of the cerebellum and frontal lobes, and perhaps even an exaggeration of cerebellar size. Currently, there is too little data to be sure that all WS patients show an intact frontal cortex and cerebellum, and the underlying pathology may not always produce such gross abnormalities. Still, this systematic sparing may be the most consistent clue to their curious language symptoms (see Figure 9.3).



Figure 9.3 A somewhat idealized comparison of Williams syndrome neurological deficits to autism neurological deficits emphasizing their complementary neurological patterns (as well as deficit patterns). Williams syndrome (which produces relative sparing of superficial linguistic abilities against a background of massive global intellectual impairment) appears to produce sparing of prefrontal cortex and cerebellum but has been associated with significant reduction of more posterior cortical systems (Galaburda, et al., 1994). Some forms of autism (which is associated with relatively severe communication difficulties in language and other modalities) appear often to be associated with apparent depression of prefrontal functions but relative sparing of posterior cortical functions, and have also been correlated with cerebellar abnormalities. Arrows point to areas most likely to exhibit anatomical reduction or abnormality.

This pattern of intact prefrontal cortex paired with a subnormal posterior cortex may offer a hint to the paradoxical abilities and disabilities of people with WS. These proportions represent an interesting twist on the human shift in prefrontal proportions, as compared to other primates. My argument has been that the enlargement of prefrontal cortex with respect to posterior sensory and subcortical regions is responsible for the biased learning that enables human beings to employ symbolic representation strategies. The learning and other cognitive and emotional biases in WS might offer clues to this transition to the extent that it too involves a prefrontal bias, though for quite different reasons. WS is not prefrontal enlargement, only an exaggerated prefrontal predominance compared to normal human brains, due to pathology that spares prefrontal cortex in the context of other widespread developmental damage. At the present time, there is not a sufficient neuropsychological profile of WS to verify this prediction, but it nonetheless might help us to understand the peculiar language abilities of these people. In terms of symbol learning, recall that the contribution of the prefrontal areas is most critical for making the shift away from indexical token-object associations to rely on systematic token-token association patterns to organize reference. This shift is difficult because indexical associations are acquired by constant experience of immediate correlations between events that are highly salient, whereas the token-token patterns are only discovered by comparing their patterns of combination across many interactions with other speakers, and these are obscure because they are distributed across interactions and inconsistently correlated. Prefrontal predominance probably aids this process by biasing both attentional and mnemonic strategies to favor attention shifted from token-object associations to higher-order token-token relationships.

Consider that one consequence of WS is poor learning and problem solving (see Figure 9.3). In terms of referential abilities, this will inevitably translate into poor indexical learning. Physical and pragmatic relationships between physical signs, objects, and their attributes—which for most people and animals are rapidly and effortlessly accumulated in memory, and provide a dense network of indexical references—will be limited in individuals with WS. Although the salience of these associations inhibits the development of symbolic abilities in other species, it is also what “grounds” symbolic reference in the first place. Semantic features are predicated on these potential indexical associations. In these terms, it appears that WS children exhibit a precocious ability to seek out and discover the higher-order combinatorial connections among words. This skill may be exaggerated precisely because of their poorer than normal indexical learning abilities. Discovering an alternative mnemonic strategy to hold together a weak network of indexical associations may lead them to rely more heavily on higher-order combinatorial patterns than do normal children. But lacking indexical support, they are far more trapped by word association logic alone. One of the peculiar features of the vocabulary of WS people is an apparent penchant for unusual words. This can be understood in terms of the insufficient information they have at their disposal to value different lexical items comparatively. Their lack of experiential familiarity should provide far less influence over word salience, and thus the relative frequencies of typical and atypical words should differ less. But in addition, since learning frequency of occurrence, without ancillary indexical support as a guide, is itself based purely on correlation as an index of commonality, even this information will be denied them.

Finally, their exaggerated sociality offers a particularly interesting clue both to the functional effects of prefrontalization and to the attentional biases that support symbol learning. It has long been known that prefrontal damage can often produce a disturbance in social behaviors. One of the first described and most celebrated cases of human prefrontal damage is that of a man called Phineas Gage. While he was working on a railroad crew in Vermont in 1848, compacting blasting powder into a hole with an iron rod (a tamping iron), the powder accidentally exploded, propelling the tamping iron through his head, right through the middle of his prefrontal lobes. Gage lived, but was highly moody and emotionally unstable, and behaved quite inappropriately in public. The belief that prefrontal abnormalities might underlie the inappropriate behaviors of schizophrenics later became a justification for the use of prefrontal lobotomy, and the less damaging prefrontal leucotomy (cutting the fibers to and from the orbital prefrontal regions), as a means of controlling psychiatric patients. More recently, research in which the medial and orbital prefrontal areas were removed from the brains of monkeys demonstrated a parallel loss of appropriate social competence. The animals became both asocial, preferring isolation, and socially inept when forced into social contexts.12 If WS produces a comparative prefrontalization by virtue of posterior impairment, we might explain exaggerated sociality by an inverse mechanism: a preoccupation with and hypersensitivity to social information and social relationships. This may also aid the process of symbol acquisition, by virtue of exaggerated attention on social stimuli, particularly patterns of word use, at the expense of other information. Thus, speech and word-word relationships would be among the most salient of associative relationships.

A related disorder initially appears as a precocious reading ability. It has recently been dubbed hyperlexia. At an age when most children are just learning to form their first words and sentences, a very few children demonstrate incredible feats of symbol identification. They read words off cereal boxes, quote road signs, identify trade-marks, and know the names of all the letters and numbers. Unfortunately these abilities, which might herald the first signs of a literary or mathematical prodigy, turn out to be isolated abilities of a mind that in fact has a severely retarded ability to interpret these symbols. The comprehension of language is minimal, and their ability to reason or see the connections between the things they read is equally poor. Little is known of the neurological correlates of hyperlexia, but we might predict similar patterns of neurological impairment and sparing, and of learning and attention bias. Other pathologies, such as hydrocephaly, can also produce similar patterns of language impairment,13 so it is probably not that WS is produced by overexpressing some gene for language but rather that it reflects the biased cognition produced by a consistent pattern of preferential damage and sparing of cortex and cerebellum.

Interestingly, there appears to be good evidence for exactly which genes are responsible for Williams syndrome. Geneticists have identified two genes that are apparently deleted in all cases of the disorder. The first to be identified was the gene for elastin, a connective tissue protein which when absent results in a heart defect that is characteristic of WS. In a collaborative study with a colleague at the University of Massachusetts in Lowell, Thomas Shea, we found that elastin may also serve as a substrate on which axons can grow, so its absence could potentially be a problem during brain development. But recently, a more relevant gene located next to the elastin gene and also deleted in WS has been identified.14 Its protein product is called LIM1 kinase because of its structural similarity to a homeotic gene product called LIM1. Not coincidentally, the genes for both LIM1 kinase and LIM1 are expressed in the head region of developing embryos. Though much remains to be learned about how the absence of the gene for LIM1 kinase may contribute to WS, there is one feature of the counterpart gene for LIM1 that marks it as highly relevant. Transgenic mouse embryos that have had both copies of the LIM1 gene knocked out fail to develop heads altogether, even though the remainder of the body seems to develop normally. (Also see the discussion of this gene in the context of other homeotic genes in Chapter 6). WS is essentially a human LIM1 kinase knockout, which, analogous to this mouse knockout, seems to produce significant underdevelopment of a large contiguous brain region (it also may be responsible for the abnormal development of the face that produces the pixie appearance characteristic of WS).

Williams syndrome provides a distorted mirror image of the genetic changes that must underlie the human symbolic bias. The underdevelopment of much of the brain but sparing of the frontal cortex and cerebellum, which occurs in a person with Williams syndrome, has given these two structures greater control over all cognitive processes. The effect is to exaggerate the bias to learn symbolic associations, even though the capacity to learn nonsymbolic associations is severely impaired. This accounts for the hyperlexic tendencies of these children: their precocial vocabularies and reading abilities, their preoccupation with unusual words, and even perhaps their heightened sense of sociality (see Chapter 13 for a discussion of other social and emotional consequences of prefrontal bias). But this homeotic gene defect in people with Williams syndrome achieves an exaggerated prefrontal bias at the cost of poorer learning in all other realms, with the result that their understanding of symbols is almost entirely confined to lexical relationships—i.e., word-word relationships—and is lacking in supportive indexical links to objects and events. So Williams syndrome demonstrates that high general intelligence is not as critical for crossing the symbolic threshold as is growing up with a peculiar bias in learning tendencies. But Williams syndrome is more than just an exception that proves a rule about the evolution of language abilities; it is also a clue to the sorts of genetic and neural developmental changes that lie behind that evolution.

An interesting contrast to Williams syndrome is autism.15 Autism is most notably characterized by complete social with drawal and a lack of communicative ability and/or desire. Severely autistic children avoid eye contact, are often not comforted but even disturbed by physical touch, seem not to notice the presence of others or find their presence disturbing, and tend to live their adult lives as relative loners. These social patterns have led some researchers to focus on their apparent lack of a “theory of mind,” by which they mean an awareness of others as conscious agents and feeling beings. It is often said that autistic children tend to treat other people (and animals) no differently from other objects. This has led to theoretical excesses analogous to language organ claims. Recently, there have been a number of hypotheses about a “primary social cognition deficit” or impairment of a “theory of mind module” in the brain of autistic individuals. These suggestions are at best premature. Not only is the modularity claim superfluous, but a focus on the social impairment alone is incomplete. An impairment in social cognition (however it might be represented in the brain) cannot alone explain the failure to develop normal language, nor a range of other attentional deficits and learning biases also common to autism. It seems more likely that the social deficit is a correlate and possibly a consequence of something more basic. Further clues to this are provided by the other cognitive and behavioral predispositions of autistic children and adults. They are highly likely to develop extensive and very stereotyped ritualized behavior patterns, both socially and in the ways they perform mundane tasks and manipulate familiar objects. As adults, they often run their lives by strict schedules and memorized lists that, if violated, throw them into confusion. The neurological basis of autism is still unresolved. Unlike WS, which is associated with a specific genetic abnormality, there are probably many potential neurological causes for autism. Numerous studies have failed to identify any consistent structural abnormality distinguishing autistic from normal brains, but where abnormalities are observed, there are some complementary patterns to those seen in WS. Remarkably, despite the symptomatology of higher cognitive impairment involving language and learning, there is both minimal and confusing evidence of structural abnormalities involving the cerebral hemispheres. Many researchers have postulated involvement of the limbic system, considering the emotional features of this disorder, but no solid evidence for a limbic pathology is apparent either. Structural abnormalities seem to predominate instead in the brain stem and cerebellum. Autistic brains are often reported to have smaller cerebellar lobes, especially on the midline, and a smaller brain stem than normal. This has led to all sorts of speculations about the role of the cerebellum in social and emotional development. However, at least one study has found that such deficits are not so much diagnostic of autism as of neural pathologies expressed late in fetal and neonatal development. Since the cerebellum is comparatively one of the latest structures to mature and shows the latest large-scale growth patterns, it may also be most susceptible to other less specific, cellular-based pathologies. The only direct evidence of cortical involvement again seems to focus on the activity of the frontal lobes in autistic adolescents and adults. Like gross anatomical factors in autism, frontal lobe signs are also variable; but in studies that have looked for metabolic differences in cortical regions, a number have shown reduced cerebral blood flow and reduced metabolism of the prefrontal region.16 Recently, a number of psychologists have shown that autistic patients have a quite specific difficulty with tasks that require imagining what is going on in other peoples’ minds. Taking others’ perspectives or recognizing that others have different information due to their different perspectives on a task seems to be a problem for autistics. Not coincidentally, this too would be predicted for someone with prefrontal cortex damage.

The significance of the cerebellum’s being either specially spared (WS) or specially reduced (autism) in these two congenital syndromes preferentially affecting language ability is curious, because the cerebellum is not generally incorporated into theories of language processing, nor is it implicated in aphasia studies. The cerebellum is usually thought to be involved in the regulation of relatively automatic movements—such as preprogrammed ballistic movements like throwing a ball, jumping over a log while running, or playing a well-practiced scale on the piano. There are good reasons for imagining that it plays some role in the articulation of speech, and evidence that cerebellar damage can affect fluency, but this does not seem to be the factor of central importance in these congenital syndromes. Both syndromes appear to involve higher levels of language organization. Corresponding clues to cerebellar language functions come from imaging studies. Though the cerebellum is to some extent activated during speaking, it is most intensely activated by difficult word association tasks (like the rapid production of an appropriate verb for a noun in the task described earlier). Even when the contribution of the cerebellum to speaking is subtracted in PET (positron emission tomography) studies, its independent activation by the associative task is large. The cerebellar activation may aid this process by providing access to relatively automatic word-sequence subroutines, and possibly supporting the rapid shifts of attention that are required (see Figure 10.4 and the discussion in the next chapter).

A central role for the cerebellum in attentional processes in humans has recently been recognized as a result of studies of patients with cerebellar resections and damage.17 Cerebellar damage in primates can produce impairments for a number of the same tasks that are also sensitive to prefrontal damage, but more generally seems to impair a variety of perceptual and cognitive tasks where timing issues are important. Rather than some totally different function of the cerebellum, this is probably analogous to the cerebellar role in motor functions. Many features of nonlocomotor activities require similar neural operations to those involved in movements, including automatic prediction and preparation. If the cerebellum augments cortical processing by providing a repository for replaying previously learned sequences of activity and providing clocklike regulation of their performance, it could play an important role in the support of a variety of rapid semi-automatic language processes to the extent that it was linked to the appropriate brain structures.

The cerebellum also turns out to be one of the group of brain structures that has been selectively enlarged in humans as compared to other primates. This implies that it, too, may have displaced projections from other systems that are not expanded. Though the cerebellum receives inputs from the spinal cord conveying somatic information about muscle tension and joint position, and contributes a major spinal motor output via the red nucleus in the midbrain, the link between the cerebellum and the cerebral cortical systems is also extensive. Motor, premotor, and prefrontal projections comprise a major portion of inputs to the cerebellum by way of relays in the pons, the enlargement at the top of the brain stem. In humans, the prefrontal component of this input system is likely to have been particularly enlarged, displacing other inputs from the spinal and cortical motor systems. The cerebellar output nuclei also project back to the cortex by way of relays in the ventral lateral portion of the thalamus, which primarily projects upon motor and premotor areas.

In other primates, there is an extensive array of cortical regions that project to the cerebellum, including most motor and tactile sensory regions. There is also a modest projection from the dorsal parts of the prefrontal cortex, probably from regions receiving tactile and motor information from other cortical areas. But in monkey brains, it does not appear that the ventral parts of the prefrontal cortex send any outputs to the cerebellum. The extensive enlargement of prefrontal cortex in humans, however, has likely shifted these connectional relationships so that a greater number of connections from a larger expanse of the prefrontal cortex project to the cerebellum as compared to other primate species. Areas of prefrontal cortex that do not project to the cerebellum in other primates, such as the ventral regions, may thus take part in the cortical-cerebellar-cortical circuits in humans. This sector of the prefrontal cortex receives relayed auditory inputs, and is closely linked with both premotor vocal-articulatory areas of cortex and midline vocalization systems (see the next chapter for details). Bringing the cerebellar system into the circle of these prefrontal functions would introduce a unique computational aid into the analysis of symbolic relationships, and one that has a novel affinity with symbols encoded as sounds.

So, the cerebellum is probably far more involved with sound analysis in human beings than it is in any other species. This may be very important for the generation of word associations at a rate sufficient for speech. At the rate words are presented in speech, the speaker or listener must be able rapidly to generate associated words and avoid letting earlier associations interfere. The cognitive search process must be as rapid but as shallow as possible. Any slight tendency to perseverate would entirely derail the process. It is not a passive analysis that must be performed, but the rapid, controlled generation of relatively novel responses, though only relatively novel because word associations are recalled from innumerable previous associations in which they were elicited together in sentences. A word-generation process analogous to conjugating a verb for a noun in rapid alternation must inevitably be part of all sentence production. Succeeding at this task appears to be greatly facilitated by linkage to the brain’s rapid prediction computer, the cerebellum. The cerebellum may provide an independent generator of novel but predictable shifts of associations from one context to another, while prefrontal cortex is providing a selective inhibition of all but the one sample that fits the new criteria. In addition to the cerebellum, the cingulate cortex also seems to be intensely activated in a variety of tasks that require top-down intentional shifting of attention.

This array of special prefrontal links with critical aspects of modern language functions—enabling symbol construction, shifting control of vocalization away from emotional systems, enhancing the tendency for social mimickry, and bringing rapid cerebellar prediction systems to the service of auditory-vocal analysis—almost seems like too much of a coincidence. Why should these changes in prefrontal cortex, derived from a global change in relative proportions, just happen to provide what language needs? In fact, these apparent coincidences only appear coincidental when considered in hindsight, in terms of the way language works today.

Considering these supports for our modern abilities to be prerequisites for language reverses the evolutionary logic behind them. In the co-evolutionary interaction between brain and language evolution, both converged toward the easiest adaptation to the cognitive and sensorimotor problems that were posed. As symbolic difficulties were eased by prefrontal cortex enlargement, the shifts in connectional relationships that resulted also incidentally provided increased auditory and vocal abilities and an increased propensity for vocal mimickry. Those symbolic communication systems that took advantage of such enhanced abilities would consequently have been more successful. And this in turn would have fed back on selection for greater elaboration and utilization of such abilities. The adventitious nature of co-evolutionary processes guarantees that when an opportunity presents itself, it will likely be taken advantage of, but in so doing it will set in motion processes that bias future evolutionary trends in this same direction. It’s not that our exaggerated prefrontal cortex was an evolutionary prerequisite for these many supportive language adaptations; rather, these features of languages have evolved to take advantage as well of other incidental prefrontal biases that symbolic evolution inadvertently produced.

The curious logic of the co-evolutionary dynamic that has caused many otherwise unrelated language functions in addition to symbolic learning to converge on the same cluster of neurological changes in humans will be explored more fully in the third and final section of this book. But before we can turn to this topic, we need to complete the circle of logic that links the changes in human brain evolution with the way that other language functions utilize the brain after this symbolic threshold has been crossed in childhood. How does this reanalysis of the core human language adaptation alter the way we need to think about language in the brain?
