CHAPTER TEN


Locating Language


Everything is absolutely impeccable. There is only one, poor thing, which is mistaken inside.

—Mr. L., an aphasic patient





Forcing Square Pegs into Round Holes


A man of about seventy years of age sits at a table holding a pencil in his hand. It is cradled between his fingers as though he is preparing to write with it. “What is this?” a woman asks, pointing to the pencil from across the table. “Uh, it’s a wedge for the rain…?” he replies with a sort of questioning tone, and moves it in a vague writing gesture. “What do you use it for?” the lady continues. “…For to rain for the scretch,” he answers. “Very good,” she responds. “Why to am I here to learn about this?” he asks. “We’re here to see if we can help you with your words,” she says.

In reality, there will be very little she or others will be able to do. This man has suffered a stroke that damaged a part of his left cerebral hemisphere near the auditory areas of his temporal lobe, and as a result he will spend the remainder of his life not quite getting the questions and not finding the right words to answer. The damaged region of his cerebral cortex subserved a specific set of language operations that cannot be recovered, despite the fact that most of his brain and intellect are otherwise intact. He has not regressed to an earlier stage from which he will need to relearn words and meanings. He has not just lost some word memories. He has lost hold of the cognitive tools to map the sounds of words to what they mean. This loss of language abilities resulted from damage to a brain region that has come to be called Wernicke’s area (after the nineteenth-century German physician who discovered it, Carl Wernicke). And the deficit seems to suggest that such language functions might be highly localized to just a few regions of the brain.

Historically, most of our information about how the human brain comprehends and produces language has come from insights provided by studying people with localized brain damage that affects language functions. This information has been filtered through psychological theories about the nature of mind and language, and until recently it has been limited by the intrinsic messiness of studying organic pathologies. Now, however, a stream of information has emerged from new methods and techniques for studying both normal and damaged brains, including ways to get images of metabolism, blood flow, and electrical activity in whole, intact, functioning brains. These new windows into brain function are both extending and challenging traditional ideas about brain-language relationships.

Loss of language abilities due to brain damage (termed aphasia, literally, “no speech”) does not occur in only one way. When language abilities are lost, they do not regress to childlike forms, as some early researchers surmised. Brain-damaged adults have not simply lost the memory of language or parts of language, and they are not analogous to children arrested at an earlier stage of language acquisition. Language tends, to break down along distinct componential lines, in which the functional losses reflect specific processing difficulties, and not some generic diminution of language ability or complexity. The two most intuitive ways of dividing language functions follow linguistic and behavioral categories, respectively. In linguistic terms, the most widely accepted dichotomy of language function is between semantic and syntactic structure. In many theories, these are essentially treated as orthogonal dimensions of language function. Since such aspects of language can be logically separated in language analysis, it seems reasonable to expect that these two aspects of sentences might require different neural substrates to process them. A dissociation of disturbance of the two functions after damage to different locations within the brain would strongly support this. Alternatively, an intuitively useful distinction in language impairments can be made between the hearing and speaking functions of language. These two fundamental modalities by which language enters and leaves the nervous system offer a natural division of functions that must be reflected in the neural organization of language. Both dichotomies have found their way into aphasia theories in various forms.

The most influential categorization of aphasias, however, does not follow either of these logics, but rather an anatomical logic. This is the classic division of aphasic disorders into Broca’s and Wernicke’s aphasia. Although a number of early nineteenth-century physicians suggested the existence of two major classes of language disorders—a difficulty in remembering how words are produced as opposed to a difficulty in remembering how words sound—the systematic analysis of brain-damage language disorders was prompted by the discovery that different patterns of language dysfunction followed damage to different areas of the brain.

In 1861, a French surgeon named Paul Broca demonstrated that damage to the lower portion of the left frontal cortex could produce a profound disturbance of the ability to speak. He called this behavioral syndrome aphemia (literally, “no words,” or more colloquially, “bad speech”) to emphasize its motoric character, though the term Broca’s aphasia came to replace Broca’s own term. A little more than a decade later, in 1874, a young German physician name Carl Wernicke demonstrated that damage to the posterior part of the temporal cortex on the left side produced a different language problem: a profound disturbance of the ability to understand speech, along with a tendency to speak fluently but with anomalous words and word combinations.1 This came to be termed Wernicke’s aphasia. The corresponding brain regions that each of these physicians associated with their respective aphasias are now also referred to as Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas, respectively (see Figure 10.1).

Wernicke provided the first systemic analysis of the relationships between brain damage and aphasia. By organizing his theory around a diagrammatic analysis of cortical areas and putative connections with respect to input and output functions, he predicted a whole range of aphasic disorders defined by the possible ways that the physical connections between these presumed brain centers could be interrupted. Not only did he account for some of the prominent symptoms associated with auditory analysis and motor disturbance, but he predicted a number of additional syndromes that might result from damage to some of the presumed connections between these and other areas. Among these were predictions of “transcortical” aphasias due to interruption of links between input-output systems and “higher” cognitive centers.



Figure 10.1 Cerebral cortical areas most commonly associated with language functions in the left hemisphere along with a depiction of a few of the major cortical connectional pathways as identified in other primates.

A. The classic language areas cluster around the horizontal fold called the Sylvian fissure, which divides the temporal lobe from parietal and frontal lobes. Broca’s area can roughly be identified with the ventral premotor and prefrontal areas and Wernicke’s area can roughly be identified with the superior and middle temporal gyrus. Midline areas are involved in initiation of speech (supplementary motor cortex) and arousal-attentional control in comprehension and production of speech (anterior cingulate cortex). The angular gyrus was thought to be important for multimodal language processing, as in reading and naming objects. The corpus callosum is the fiber bundle that links the hemispheres.

B. The general pattern of major connections has been studied in other primates (but still cannot be determined in human brains). These cortical connections are reciprocal (though connections are not symmetric with respect to layers innervated) and form a tiered organization in each modality (adjacent tiers are connected by short U-connections). The tiered pattern is reinforced by long intermodality connections, which tend to link cortical areas at the same level across modalities. Connectional data simplified from Deacon (1988 and 1992b).

More than a century has followed their ground-breaking discoveries, but even today, the syndromes associated with Broca and Wernicke provide the backbone of aphasia research. Yet a precise and broadly accepted interpretation of these disorders or exactly what part of the brain is responsible for the component symptoms remains controversial. What made Wernicke’s analysis so compelling was both its categorical logic and its surprising predictive power. Though few details of this theoretical scheme persist unaltered in present analyses of aphasia, his focus on the importance of anatomical location and sensorimotor modality have continued to provide useful guides. Not surprisingly, in the more than a century since these men began to analyze the relationship between language breakdown and brain damage, we have come to appreciate that aphasias occur neither along either strictly linguistic nor along strictly sensory versus motor lines. They have a logic all their own, an uneasy hybrid logic that results from the post hoc evolutionary marriage between brain architecture mostly evolved in a world of concrete sensory and motor adaptations, prior to language, and a representational system that depends on a decidedly nonconcrete logic.

There are many problems with the enterprise of extrapolating from brain damage to brain function. Deterioration of a function is not just the reverse of development of that function, and loss of a brain region does not just result in a loss of function; the intact regions of a damaged brain are also changed in function by the loss. Nevertheless, aphasias and other pathologies affecting language due to local brain damage provide essential clues about what brain regions contain parts of the network that are associated with different language functions. Wernicke’s genius was in recognizing that brains needed to be analyzed in terms of circuits, and not just collections of regions with distinct functions. In recent decades, this insight has been carried much further than Wernicke could have imagined. Impairment of a specific language function following brain damage to a particular region does not mean that those language functions are located in that region. Some function that is crucial to these linguistic operations has been disturbed by damage in these cases, but the correspondence may be quite indirect. The task facing the neurolinguist is to decipher the code by which language symptoms can be translated into brain processes, but it is clearly not a one-to-one mapping, especially for functions that cannot be specified in purely sensory or motor terms. The mismatch between linguistic and neural logic is probably exaggerated when dealing with such gross analytic distinctions as syntax and semantics. This difficulty is exemplified by the problems of explaining grammatical deficits that result from brain damage.

Agrammatism is the term applied to disturbances of a patient’s ability to analyze grammatical relationships in ways that cannot be accounted for by a general lexical impairment alone. The history of the study of agrammatic disorders reflects some of the pendulum swings of neurological theory during the last century. Many theorists who divided language disorders into production versus comprehension difficulties tended to understand deficits in grammatical analysis in terms of lexical problems (therefore associated with Wernicke’s area). Difficulties in stringing words together to make a sentence, or syntactic difficulties, were considered merely motor problems. These difficulties were characteristic of Broca’s aphasia; and so, beginning with such influential physicians as Sigmund Freud, Pierre Marie, and Henry Head at the start of the twentieth century, it became common to consider Broca’s aphasia not a true language loss, only a speech production problem. Many modern aphasiologists still concur with this assessment, and they additionally point to the fact that there seems to be a high incidence of recovery of function after damage to Broca’s area, suggesting that there is no permanent loss of language knowledge per se. If language functions were located in discrete areas of cortex, then loss of the particular area that performed grammatical operations should produce a severe persistent agrammatism, just as damage to the primary visual cortex produces a permanent loss of vision in the quadrant of the visual field that corresponds to the damaged sector. Of course, this is a big assumption to make.

One of the most significant challenges to this simple dichotomy, which directly affected the interpretation of agrammatism, came with the discovery in the 1960s that many Broca’s aphasic patients had problems with grammatical comprehension.2 Though the analysis of the major content words of a sentence seemed relatively unimpaired, when the logical structure of the sentence could not easily be guessed from the content words alone (i.e., when grammatical function words or word-order clues were essential to understand how the nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs referred to each other), the patients tended to have difficulties.

Of the many theories proposed to explain this difficulty, the one that has been most widely cited suggests that the patients behave as though they simply don’t understand the grammatical function words. These include words like “was,” “that,” “who,” “which,” etc., that act like flags, signaling structural relationships within a sentence. Notably these sorts of words are by far the most frequent in any text or utterance, and form what amounts to a closed set within a language. Whereas new nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs are added and invented all the time, and in this sense form an open class, these little function words don’t seem to allow any other logical space within the language for additions. One interpretation, then, might be that the disorder could be described as a disturbance of the lexicon of closed-class words. Thus, two different lexical storage systems were invoked: one for closed-class words (associated with Broca’s area) and one for open-class words (associated with Wernicke’s area)—a challenge to the simple comprehension/production dichotomy.

The difficulties in interpreting agrammatism have only become harder as researchers have attempted to test these opposed hypotheses. For example, a simple lexical explanation (i.e., loss of the part of the mental dictionary that contains grammatical function words) does not appear to account for patients’ problems in cases where manipulations of word order are central, as in embedded sentences (“The girl the boy liked lived in a red house”) and only partially accounts for passive tense difficulties in English clauses (“The dog chased by the cat…”). Time also appears to be a critical factor. “On-line” analysis of spoken utterances tends to show significant impairments that seem to ameliorate if the patient is given written material or a longer period to reflect on the analysis. In other words, it appears that the information about grammar is not lost in these patients; it is just very much less accessible, and its use is more subject to error. It is, metaphorically, as though the main route to this information has been disrupted, forcing these patients to take more circuitous routes through the winding back roads of memory to connect the same end points. Again, it does not look as though grammar functions are “located” in Broca’s area.

Some aphasia researchers have countered that what we are observing in the impermanence of this deficit is a takeover by the paired homologue to Broca’s area on the right hemisphere, by other spared neighboring regions, or just recovery of the remainder of an incompletely damaged brain system. This interpretation, however, is harder to maintain in cases with more extensive or bilateral damage. It has also been implied that Broca’s aphasia is just a motor deficit, and that with motor cortex damage there is a permanent loss of function in this domain. In this interpretation, the cognitive impairments might be blamed on motor interference effects. Even more serious challenges have been offered by comparisons of agrammatism in patients who are native speakers of very different languages. Broca’s aphasics who speak languages that are highly inflected, for example, do not seem to be as agrammatic as their English-speaking counterparts. More will be said about this variability later.

All these challenges to the localization of grammatical functions to Broca’s area are often couched in terms either of denying Broca’s area status as a language area or of suggesting that other areas perform the functions that have traditionally been assigned to Broca’s area. But there is a different way of approaching this question, and it depends on letting the notion of localization of function go while retaining something like the localization of computation. Another way to put this is that we need to stop conceiving of localization of language functions and instead try to understand how language functions map onto brain functions, which are likely to be organized to a very different logic. As with so many other body and brain functions, there may be a number of different ways of achieving the same goal. To offer a very simple analogy, throwing a ball at a target will utilize very different muscles and coordinated patterns of neuronal activity depending on whether it is thrown overhand, underhand, or backwards. The resultant flight of the ball and interaction with the target may be very similar, even though very different muscles and body movements produced them. Even recognizing that there are many commonalities (e.g., all may involve arm-muscle flexion, rapid ballistic movement, and visual orienting to a target), what ties them together are not these but rather the requirements of the functional goal, and this is something extrinsic to the anatomy.

I suggest that we need to think of language functions in a similar way, especially those that are imagined to be “deep” to the surface structure of speech. We need to treat them as composite behavioral products or logically defined outcomes, as opposed to neural operations. There need not be any specific association between a brain region or connection and a class of linguistic operations, and there may even be many alternative neurological means of achieving the same symbolic end. This does not assume that the human brain lacks local specializations for language, or that language abilities can be described in terms of general learning mechanisms alone. And it does not depend on any denial of area specialization within the cerebral cortex. It implies only that the neural distribution of language functions need not parallel a linguistic analysis of those same functions.

The assumption that there are distinct language areas in the brain that correspond to these language disorders (e.g., Broca’s area and Wernicke’s area) is an example of what, in another context, the philosopher Alfred North Whitehead called “misplaced concreteness.” Abandoning the Procrustean enterprise implicit in correspondence theories of brain and language functions opens up a number of additional sources of information for understanding this relationship. One messy detail haunting classic theories was that Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas did not correspond to divisions of the cortex identified by distinctions of neural architecture, though many have insisted on trying to force a one-to-one correspondence. These areas even seem to vary in location from patient to patient. Not only are there no reliable microanatomical criteria for these areas, but the syndromes themselves are also not precisely delineated. They are not the same from person to person or language to language. Is it possible that there is no one ventral frontal region always associated with Broca’s aphasia, nor any one posterior temporal region always associated with Wernicke’s aphasia?

Data from brain-damaged patients provide insufficient resolving power to probe below the level of behavioral or linguistic generalities in order to carve the language problem at its natural neurological joints, but research tools with better resolving power for studying function within intact brains are now rapidly becoming available. These can help overcome many of the limitations of anatomical precision and functional dissection. One consequence is that we are being bombarded with a flood of new kinds of data that are often dissonant with existing paradigms. These data—derived from in vivo imaging techniques, electrophysiology, and numerous other approaches to brain function—often defy explanation along classic lines because they provide a view of these processes at a different level of structure and function from anything ever envisioned by classic theories. Classic high-level models of language functions were conceived in order to explain the large-scale features of language breakdown, what might be called macrocognition. We now must face up to the daunting task of analyzing the microcognition of language: analyzing phenomena at a level of scale where the functional categories often no longer correspond to any of the familiar behavioral and experiential phenomena we ultimately hope to explain.

The central problem faced by researchers studying the brain and language is that even the minutest divisions of cognitive function we hope to explain at the psychological level are ultimately products of the functioning of a whole brain—even if a damaged one—whereas the functions we must explain at a neurological level are the operations (or computations) of only a small fragment of this highly integrated and distributed network of structures. If there was ever a structure for which it makes sense to argue that the function of the whole is not the sum of the functions of its parts, the brain is that structure. The difficulty of penetrating very deeply into the logic of brain organization almost certainly reflects the fact that the brain has been designed according to a very different logic than is evident in its most elaborated behavioral and cognitive performances. This is precisely where the comparative and evolutionary approaches can provide their most crucial contribution.

Though other primate brains have not evolved regions that are specially used for language processes, those regions of the human brain that are did not arise de novo. The language areas are cortical regions that have been recruited for this new set of functions from among structures evolved for very different adaptations. They were selected during language evolution because what they already were doing offered the best fit to the new problems posed by language. Thus, we should stop thinking about Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas as “language areas.” They are the areas that language most intensely utilizes. The question we should ask then is why? What is it about these areas that dictates the distribution of language functions that we observe?

The simple answer, proposed by the nineteenth-century aphasiologists, is that their location is a function of the predominant input and output routes: sound analysis and speech production. Broca’s area is adjacent to the mouth-tongue-larynx region of the motor cortex and Wernicke’s area is adjacent to the auditory cortex. In quite general terms, these are association areas for vocalization and sound analysis. But are there distinct anatomical structures that correspond to these operationally defined language structures? The answer probably is no. Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas represent what might be visualized as bottlenecks for information flow during language processing; weak links in a chain of processes. Once we abandon the idealization that language is plugged into the brain in modules, and recognize it as merely a new use of existing structures, there is no reason to expect that language functions should map in any direct way onto the structural-functional divisions of cortex. It is far more reasonable to expect language processes to be broken up into subfunctions that have more to do with neural logic than with linguistic logic.

The one fact that is clear is that language functions are dependent on the interactions among a number of separated regions within the brain. Languages themselves are heterogeneous structures, which often encode complementary functions in very different components of the speech signal. This probably aids the computational systems that support it by breaking it up in a way that most effectively allows the simultaneous processing of a number of parallel functions. The intense natural selection operating on language forms should have produced variants that map easily to these processing demands. Complementary linguistic operations should end up by being distributed to different brain structures, and differences in aphasic disturbances should reflect this. But language is fitted to an ape brain plan, and our ape brains, though modified in response as well, are by far the more inflexible element in this relationship. So what is the anatomical logic to which language has had to adapt?





The Illuminated Brain


The first source of brain-language data to offer a significantly different perspective from that provided by brain damage came from studies of the effects of electrical stimulation of the cortex in patients undergoing neurosurgery for unrelated pathologies. In the 1950s, a neurosurgeon by the name of Wilder Penfield perfected a technique for assessing functional localization by electrical stimulation of the exposed cortex of awake, locally anesthetized patients. By passing low-level electric current into the cortex near the presumed language areas of the left hemisphere, he found that he could selectively interfere with different language tests he had his patients perform. If he asked them to speak or name an object, he could selectively block speech, cause it to be distorted, make it difficult to come up with a name, and so on. Since neural impulses are also electrochemical processes, stimulation essentially bombards a region with very “loud” neural noise and thereby disrupts whatever function is mediated by that region. This effect is remarkably temporary and localized. It tends to cease immediately current is cut off, and stimulation of closely adjacent cortical surfaces (within a few millimeters) can produce quite different effects. By probing many areas, Penfield and others mapped the extent of cortical areas where electirical stimulation interfered with language functions. This allowed surgeons to identify those regions that would likely disturb language functions if removed during brain surgery to eradicate tumors or epileptic centers.

Penfield’s findings were consistent with what was known from brain damage—and yet also strangely different in many ways. He found that stimulation of presumed language areas was indeed very likely to produce language disturbances, but these disturbances were not like aphasias. Moreover, he found both a much wider distribution of language-disturbance sites than that suggested by aphasia, and a symmetry of posterior and frontal functions that did not match the apparently dichotomous effects of damage. More recently, another neurosurgeon, George Ojemann, with his colleagues has carried this work much further, using more sophisticated neurolinguistic testing, stimulation, and recording. A composite summary diagram of many of these results is shown in Figure 10.2.

What these stimulation studies demonstrate is that the regions where stimulation disrupts language function fan out from the frontal mouth area into the prefrontal lobes, and from around the auditory area back into the temporal and parietal areas. Those regions where stimulation reliably disrupts the same language functions are organized in what appear to be tiers radiating outward from these two foci. Electrical stimulation of the regions closest to motor and auditory areas produces problems with phoneme identification and oral movements. Stimulation further out disrupts naming of familiar objects and grammatical assessments. And stimulation even further out appears to disrupt retention or recall of words. There is also a rough front-back mirror symmetry of these tiers, so that the very same responses are elicited by the second and third tiers both front and back. The language regions cover a large fraction of the entire left hemisphere, but stimulation within these regions does not produce uniform results. In fact, stimulation of most sites produces no language disturbance in a given individual, and there may be only a few sites that disrupt each sort of language task. The stimulation maps of language functions are therefore composite maps, demonstrating statistical consistencies between patients.



Figure 10.2 Electrical stimulation studies of selected language tasks indicate that language operations are fractionated and distributed in many regions of the left hemisphere. Electrical stimulation (indicated by dots) appears to indicate a tierlike pattern of functional organization fanning out from the classic language regions into the prefrontal, temporal, and parietal areas. Areas more removed from primary motor and auditory cortex appear to be involved in processes with greater temporal integration. The figure graphically summarizes data from Penfield and Roberts (1959); Ojemann (1983; 1991); and Ojemann and Mateer (1979).

The most surprising pattern in these results is the mirror symmetry of anterior and posterior effects. This is an entirely different pattern from that derived from brain-damage studies. How does it change our understanding of brain-damage effects and their distribution? The key to interpreting these differences is that electrical stimulation is something added, whereas damage is something removed. Though cortical areas just next to a stimulation site might not be directly affected by the stimulation, areas some distance away may be, so noise from many sites may be able to feed into the stream of information supporting a given linguistic function. This should not be surprising, considering the high degree of interconnectivity of cerebral cortical areas. But the pattern of distribution and kinds of disturbance tell us more than just that there are lots of ways to mess up language signals.



Figure 10.3 Cerebral blood flow studies of selected language tasks indicate that language operations are also fractionated and distributed with respect to this assay of relative metabolic demand of the given tasks. In these drawings, blood flow activation is superimposed on outline drawings of human brains; darker areas are more activated by the specific task. Wernicke’s area, the motor speech area, and ventral prefrontal areas associated with Broca’s area are differentially recruited for different language tasks. Ventral prefrontal cortex is recruited for both word perception and word association tasks (e.g., generating word lists). The figure graphically summarizes data from Larsen, et al. (1978); Lassen, et al. (1978, 1980); and Roland (1985)

First, language functions extend into all major lobes of the neocortex, including the temporal area (auditory), parietal area (tactile), and frontal cortex (attention, working memory, planning) of the left hemisphere. This wide distribution suggests a far less localized language system than is suggested by brain-damage results. Though the language impairments due to parietal and prefrontal damage are often not as noticeable and devastating as left temporal damage, both can produce problems with speech fluency, word finding, and certain sorts of semantic analyses. Second, the stimulation sites that are located closer to the Sylvian fissure are mostly correlated with sensorimotor functions of language, while sites further out are correlated with higher-level linguistic and cognitive functions. This is consistent with the the fact that the innermost tiers are located adjacent to primary tactile, auditory, and motor areas, and the outer tiers are distributed within multimodal and association areas. One obvious interpretation of this hierarchic pattern is that it parallels the layout of what are sometimes called secondary and tertiary association areas in each modality. But notice also that the differences from tier to tier reflect different degrees of linguistic integration and different language-processing time scales. From inner to outer tiers there is a progression from parts of words, to words and phrases, to verbal short-term memory. Analyzed temporally, the inner tier of areas deals with events that take place on a time scale of tens to hundreds of milliseconds (phonemes), and the outer tier of areas deals with information that must be retained over many seconds (inter-sentential relationships, for example, must be analyzed at this rate).

Time is a critically important factor, especially in an information-processing device that tends to operate almost entirely in parallel (instead of funneling all operations through a single processing unit, one after the other, as do most desk top computers). Processes that utilize information presented at very different rates tend to become segregated within the brain (as they must be in many other systems, from mechanical devices to bureaucracies). Maintaining a signal within a circuit long enough to analyze its part in some extended pattern would tend to get in the way of processes that require rapid and precise timing. Slow neural signal transmission can also become a limiting factor in the brain, so that very rapid processes are best handled within a very localized region, whereas the accumulation of information over time might better be served by a more distributed and redundant organization that resists degradation. So it makes sense that for each modality, it might be advantageous to segregate its fast from its slow processes. This is probably one of the major factors that distinguishes the cortical subregions that we label “primary areas” (fleeting signals) and “association areas” (persisting signals). Separating processes according to a gradient of time integration may be every bit as important for handling potentially interfering functions as is the segregation of different modalities and submodalities.

The symmetry between anterior and posterior functional representation can probably best be understood in connectional terms. Studies of axonal connections between cortical areas in primates have demonstrated that the connectional logic parallels the therlike organization of secondary and tertiary regions. Within a single modality, adjacent cortical areas tend to be more highly interconnected than to areas more distantly separated, but across modalities there appears to be a preference for connections at the same level in the sequence of areas progressively removed from primary input and output. Thus, the tierlike organization of stimulation effects in anterior and posterior cortex is probably a reflection of the direct interconnections between them, and of the comparability (possibly via synchrony) of the temporal-processing domains in each. The apparent lack of interference across levels may reflect the relative temporal isolation of processes at these different levels. To sum up, evidence provided by electrical stimulation suggests that there may be multiple areas in both the anterior and the posterior cortical regions that contribute to language processing at different levels of analysis and production, and that these may be linked in parallel in a temporal mapping relationship.

Once we abandon the reification of language areas as modular language algorithm computers plugged into an otherwise nonlinguistic brain, it becomes evident that language functions may be widely distributed and processed simultaneously in many places at once. They may also be distributed according to a computational logic that is not necessarily obvious from the apparent external speech signal. Our experience of the linearity of speech belies an internal parallelism and hierarchy of the underlying cognitive processes. Indeed, one possible interpretation of the hierarchic logic of grammatical and syntactic operations is that they evolved to accommodate this mismatch between cognitive processes and production constraints. This is important information to keep in mind for linguistic analysis. We may need to begin thinking of the various syntactic and morphological tricks used by languages to mark their logical and symbolic structure as markers that aid in rapidly breaking up the serial signal and distributing the processing of segments matched to different time domains to their most appropriate processors. For example, the small function words that are specially important for grammatical analysis signal the breaks between syntactic transitions, as do pauses and tonal/rhythmic changes of voice. The hierarchical complexity of sentence structure and the multiplication of tricks for compacting clauses into sentences with considerable analytic depth may not in fact add computational difficulty. They may instead be ways to distribute language processes more efficiently across many parallel and partially independent systems.

Another window on the brain’s control of language processes is provided by techniques developed in the last decades for producing images of brain metabolism. The basic assumption of metabolic imaging is that regions of the brain that are more active will exhibit a greater turnover of glucose and will demand more blood than relatively quiescent areas. Thus, hot spots will show up in areas intensely involved in a given cognitive task. Three different metabolic-imaging techniques have been used to image functional changes during language tasks: regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF); positron emission tomography (PET); and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). For rCBF images, inert radioactive gas dissolved in blood indicates where blood flow has increased. For PET images, a radioactive analogue of glucose (the simple sugar that all neurons require for energy) is injected into the blood to measure cumulative metabolism in different brain regions.3 For fMRI images, the response of water molecules within the brain to intense magnetic fields produces images of brain structures, and magnetic solutions (called “contrast agents”) are injected to visualize blood flow changes.

In response to language tasks, the greatest increases in blood flow are seen in cortical regions that correspond with those damaged in acquired aphasias (Figure 10.3). The patterns for different tasks show that mouth movements of speech tend to activate motor cortex, and that listening to words tends to activate auditory regions of the left hemisphere. But there are other, more interesting patterns. Simply repeating words over and over (like counting to ten repeatedly) does not seem to activate the region we would call Broca’s area. Instead, it activates mostly motor areas, and to a lesser extent auditory areas and a dorsal motor region known as the supplementary motor area.4 These studies also showed that listening passively to (nonrepeating) words does not activate motor areas. It activates auditory cortex, including the area that probably corresponds to Wernicke’s area, and also a ventral prefrontal region just in front of what most researchers would call Broca’s area. More complicated language tasks, however, such as generating lists of words without repeating any (for example, naming objects that can be held in the hand), produce cerebral blood flow patterns characteristic of both speaking and listening. The ventral prefrontal area is active and the motor areas are active, including areas that would be called Broca’s area (ahead of and below the motor mouth area). Uniquely recruited to this task, too, are regions of the temporal and parietal lobes that probably contain multimodal responsiveness (association areas).

These patterns reveal a number of features of functional organization that are not evident in either damage or stimulation effects. First, “mindless” repetition only minimally recruits classic language areas or association areas. Second, interpretation of words seems to involve both auditory and prefrontal regions, but apparently not what would have traditionally been called Broca’s area.5 This ventral prefrontal region of the cortex is, however, often partially damaged in Broca’s aphasics with large lesions, as is motor cortex for the mouth region. Notice also that this ventral prefrontal region is associated with naming and short-term verbal memory as a result of stimulation and word list generation, though the degree of overlap or difference from task to task is unclear and suggests that different subdivisions may be involved in these tasks. The premotor part of Broca’s area is most actively involved when both word analysis and speech are required.

Data from another metabolic imaging technique, positron emission tomography (PET scanning for short), produce similar results to those from rCBF studies (see Figure 10.4).6 These data show that passively listening to novel words mostly produces auditory activity, with some ventral prefrontal cortex activity. Similarly, looking at novel written words involves visual cortex. Visual input does not, in this example, require significant auditory activity to be interpreted (this may have something to do with the simplicity of the task, as well). In the study summarized by the idealized drawings in Figure 10.4,7 the experimenters augmented their analysis by using an interesting subtractive technique. The images that were produced from tasks that involved word perception were subtracted from images that were produced from tasks that also involved speech, and both of these images were then subtracted from images produced from tasks that additionally involved word association processes (generating a verb that is appropriate to a presented noun). Without this approach, the resulting images would have obscured the differences between more complicated tasks as they progressively occupied more and more of the brain. Subtracting images from one another isolates where in the brain activity is additionally recruited to handle specific increases in task complexity, though it doesn’t indicate that regions activated by previous simpler tasks do not also contribute in unique ways to the computations of the higher-order task as well.

Several things are revealed by these subtractions, when compared to previous results. First, though different modalities of stimuli can be used (e.g., visual versus auditory word presentation), the differential activity patterns produced by the more complicated tasks using these inputs are very similar. Second, the ventral prefrontal area again seems activated when word analysis is required. Third, areas on the midline are active. Repeating words seems to involve the supplementary motor area, arid word analysis seems to involve the anterior cingulate cortex. The cingulate cortex seems essential for most tasks that require intense attention, and so may not be uniquely part of linguistic processing (though essential). Fourth, both motor activity and word analysis independently produce intense activation of the cerebellum (on the opposite side of the brain, since the pathways linking cerebral cortex and cerebellum are crossed—see Figure 10.4, images 2 and 3).

Not surprisingly, when this task is practiced and familiar words are shown repeatedly, the task gets easier, and the activation level of all three of the differentially activated regions (left ventral prefrontal, anterior cingulate, and right cerebellar cortex) drops close to background levels. Other brain regions such as the insular cortex and striatum become slightly more active instead. The mental effort required for the task is thus reflected in the degree of differential activation of these structures.

It is surprising (from a classical perspective) that the cerebellum is recruited for this task, not primarily as a repository for automatic behavior, but for overcoming such tendencies in the service of producing alternatives. Congenitally reduced cerebellar development thus not only should be expected to produce a variety of problems associated with the learning of skilled movements requiring precise timing and complex coordination; it should also remove an important support for a variety of prefrontal functions, particularly those demanding rapid production of novel associations. Since some of the most demanding language processes are likely to be those of generating the words that make up novel sentences we must produce in real time, this cerebellar-prefrontal link may play a critical role.



Figure 10.4 Positron emission tomography (PET) studies of language tasks reveal similar patterns to those seen with cerebral blood flow imaging. In these drawings of PET image activation, patterns are superimposed on outline drawings of human brains; darker areas are more activated by the specific task. The three tasks are hierarchically constructed: 1 = Listening only; 2 = repeating the input word; 3 = producing a word associated with the word presented. The images to the right were produced by subtracting the results of those to the left to reveal differences. Notice the critical involvement of the ventral prefrontal cortex in the word association task. The activated area below the back of the brain indicates an additional intense involvement of the contralateral cerebellum (see also Fig 9.1). The figure graphically summarizes data from Petersen, et al. (1988); Posner, et al. (1988); and reviewed in Posner and Raichle (1994).

Finally, I want to draw attention to the contribution of the ventral prefrontal region that is specially activated in all these examples of word analysis. What is this region in anatomical terms? Evidence bearing on this question comes from my lab and others, and from experiments with monkeys, which have shown the connections that link the corresponding area with other cortical and subcortical regions.8 This evidence shows that this region of the brain is the principal recipient and source of connections linking the auditory areas with other prefrontal and frontal areas (see Figure 10.1B). The areas just behind it—between the prefrontal cortex and motor cortex that have classically been linked to Broca’s area—do not get auditory inputs, but rather supplementary motor inputs, and inputs carrying tactile information about the mouth region. The ventral prefrontal region also connects to the dorsal prefrontal areas (likely also those active in other word perception tasks) and with the anterior cingulate cortex, which also is highly active during this demanding word association task. As is suggested by electrical stimulation studies, systems that must be co-activated in a given language task often show evidence of linkage, and different tasks are segregated both in terms of modality and in terms of the temporal domain. For example, word association analysis in normal speech is required for interpreting the many relationships between words distributed throughout an utterance, perhaps even between sentences. Single word production or perception, on the other hand, involves articulatory precision at the level of individual phonemes, and the recognition of words requires little more than phoneme comparisons. These are distinguished by an order of magnitude difference in time, as well as by a totally different mode of analysis.

Comparing information from these very different methods for tracking the correspondence of language functions and brain regions makes it possible to begin to recognize repeating themes. The effects of ventral prefrontal stimulation on naming, grammatical decisions, and verbal short-term recall can help explain why Broca’s aphasics often show poor fluency, relatively spared word meaning analysis, and difficulties with grammar where positional cues in a sentence are most important. Some less well understood aspects of Broca’s aphasia are also given a new context of interpretation. For example, it rums out that Broca’s aphasics demonstrate some interesting word association biases as well. They tend to have difficulty with word lists but they have an easier time producing lists that are within categories (animals) than those that involve shifts in the part of speech (i.e., noun-verb relationships). Additionally, Broca’s aphasics have difficulty reconstructing hierarchical relationships among both words and objects. Finally, Broca’s aphasics even exhibit word perception deficits, which is consistent with frontal activation in simple word perception tasks.

In summary, images of the working brain doing language tasks show a hierarchic organization, which correlates both with time and with the hierarchic-segmental organization of sentences, and a segregation with respect to the physical form, presentation, or manipulation of the signal. They also show that the classic language areas are not unitary modules, but rather complicated clusters of areas, each with different component functions. This is not consistent with the view that there is one self-contained “language organ” in the brain, even one dedicated only to grammar. If language had evolved as a consequence of the addition of a language module in the human brain, we should not expect such an extensive distribution of linguistic processes in diverse cerebral cortical areas. If a grammar module exists, it is not localized to one cortical region, since subfunctions associated with grammatical and syntactic processes are found in both the anterior and the posterior regions.

If we keep in mind that primate brains very much like our own have been around for tens of millions of years and that the mammal brain plan which our brain follows has probably been around for over 100 million years, it becomes evident that the logic of language is probably highly constrained to fit an ape brain logic. Though breaking up language analytically into such complementary domains as syntax and semantics, noun and verb, production and comprehension, can provide useful categories for the linguist, and breaking it up according to sensory and motor functions seems easier from a global neuronal viewpoint, we should not expect that the brain’s handling of language follows the logic of either of these categorical distinctions. The patterns we observe probably reflect, in a very indirect sort of way, the processing problems produced by mapping a symbolic reference system encoded in a serially presented modality onto the processing logic of an ape brain.

If brain regions are recruited during language acquisition on the basis of how they map to implicit modally and temporally segregated, parallel computational domains, then we should also expect that the representation of language functions should be diversely and multiply implemented in different individuals’ brains, and even within the same brain at different times in the life span or under other special conditions. Also, even within a single brain there may be some degree of redundancy of functional capacity, so that alternative structures, besides those best optimized for linguistic operations, could be recruited to handle linguistic tasks when these more optimal systems are unavailable (e.g., due to brain damage, to the interference of multilingual communication, or to pressure from simultaneous competing cognitive tasks). Such functional substitutions almost certainly would be associated with a significant decrement in efficiency, precisely because language is not processed by some general learning capacity, but by quite heterogeneous cognitive subsystems, none of which is a language processor by design.

Some of the most compelling theoretical models of language analysis argue that the incredible rate at which sentence analysis proceeds, and the relative automaticity and inaccessibility of our experience of these processes, can only be explained by postulating the existence of domain-specific modules that are closed to information from other systems. If speech analysis and sentence production are highly parallel processes mapped onto the serial medium of speech, then we should indeed expect that the multiple components of this process would run in comparative isolation from one another. The logic of distributed processing demands it, because significant levels of “cross-talk” between distinct processing domains would inject considerable interference. However, the logic of this sort of adaptive modularity is in many respects the reverse of that suggested by linguistic theories about grammatical processes. Indeed, grammatical cues, such as are embodied in small “function words,” may be the primary agents for initially tagging and distributing sentence “chunks” to be separately processed. For this reason, it is precisely these features of language that need to be subject to minimal symbolic analysis. They serve a predominantly indexical function. And as we have seen, indices can be interpreted in isolation as automated, rote-learned skills.

In the interest of rapidly and efficiently organizing such highly distributed associative processes, some symbols had to be stripped of all but the vaguest symbolic content in order to provide a set of automatic “switches” for shutting symbolic work to the appropriate regions of the brain. So, automatization of speech production and comprehension is accomplished by setting aside a small, closed set of symbols to be used as though they were indices. As a result of being stripped of semantic links, they can be learned by rote and implemented with minimal mnemonic search. And their representation within the brain can be highly local, even subcortical. The function of these modular operations is to implement grammatical rules, but the rules are implicitly symbolic and therefore distributed. These automated language functions are not grammar modules, but merely symptoms of the grammar, which is itself probably highly distributed.

Unlike closed modules, the separately processed levels of sentential information cannot be entirely “closed” to the information processed in others. Parallelism requires synchrony in order to keep the partially decoupled processes organized with respect to one another, and selective cross-talk so that the results of some processes can constrain the operation of others. This too can be facilitated by breaking up language processing according to temporal domains, because extended (and therefore more redundant) processes can serve as a frame within which many more rapid processes can be constrained; and conversely, the progression of a slower, more global associative process can serve as an integrator that helps overcome the intrinsic noisiness of the rapid processes, which must by design have minimal associative scope.





Where Symbols Aren’t


So, where in the brain might one expect to find symbols represented? The answer appears to be that individual linguistic symbols are not exactly located anywhere, or rather that the brain structures necessary for their analysis seem to be distributed across many areas. The systemic nature of symbolic reference suggests that the representation of symbolic associations within the brain should be distributed in diverse brain regions, and yet that similar classes of words ought to share neural commonalities. Though words, as symbol tokens, may be encoded by specific sound patterns or visual inscriptions, the symbolic referential relationships are produced by a convergence of different neural codes from independent brain systems. Because they are symbolic, word comprehension and retrieval processes are the results of combinations of simpler associative processes in a number of quite separate domains, involving the recruitment of many separate brain regions. For this reason, they cannot be located in any single neural substrate; rather, as each supportive representational relationship is brought to play in the process of producing or comprehending a word, each corresponding neural substrate is activated in different phases of the process.

To the extent that each higher-order form of representational relationship must be constructed from or decomposed into lower levels of representation, we can expect that their neural representations will exhibit a similar nested hierarchic structure as well. There should be a sort of truncated recapitulation of this acquisition hierarchy, in opposite directions, depending on whether a symbolic relationship is being constructed or interpreted—from icon to index to symbol, or from symbol to index to icon, respectively. To predict how such a process might proceed within the brain, then, we need first to ask how iconic and indexical processes are likely to be represented.

The lowest level of iconic relationships inevitably should map to processes within single sensory modalities. For example, similarities recognized between phonemes in different speech contexts or between visual shapes in different visual experiences are based on assessments of only a few sensory dimensions in a single modality. Such simple within-modality iconic processes likely have a highly localized character, perhaps represented in the cerebral cortex by activity in a contiguous sensory or motor territory. Words and familiar objects often require compound iconic analyses involving more than one sensory dimension and sometimes more than one sensory modality, so depending on the object or relationship, the recognition process might be distributed across many areas. In most pragmatic contexts, however, only a few features need to be assessed (and the rest implied) in order to make a recognition decision, because the competing alternatives are limited. That the whole constellation of iconic criteria has been activated to a minimal degree in the process becomes apparent only when one of these incidentally is found to be missing in the stimulus (as in the example described in Chapter 3 of discovering a previously camouflaged moth as it flies off the bark that it resembles). This linkage between different iconic features is an indexical one, and reflects the intrinsic hierarchic relationship between these modes of representation. The mental representation of a complex object is based on a correlation of numerous iconic associations in different dimensions or modalities which predict one another’s presence. The more complicated the object or relationship, the more numerous the iconic and indexical assessments that are required to recognize it. In this regard, there is only a difference in numbers and diversity of icons involved between learning to recognize objects, on the one hand, and learning to recognize relationships between objects or between events, on the other. Recognition and prediction processes can be streamlined as we learn to focus sensory analysis on only the assessment of the most relevant features.

The indexical associations between words and associated objects tend mostly to involve cross-modality relationships (e.g., sound and vision). Consequently, we should expect the substrates of word analysis to involve a highly distributed collection of brain regions, not even confined to a single modality. Recall that for symbolic reference to develop it is necessary (1) to establish a set of indexical associations between signs (e.g., words) and objects (things and events) in experience; (2) to establish a systematic set of indexical associations between different signs in the form of logical alternation and substitution correlates; and (3) to recognize correspondences (iconisms) between the combinatorial sign-sign relationships and the implicit relationships between the various objects to which the signs refer. When all these pieces of the symbolic puzzle come together, a referential shortcut becomes available: it is possible to bypass each of the indexical intermediaries and use the relationships implicit in combinations of signs (e.g., phrases and sentences) directly to refer to relationships between physical objects and events. As the learner comes to recognize this indirect mapping of sign relationships to object relationships, attention can be shifted away from the more concrete indexical associations (in effect unlearning them by diminishing the expectation of a physical correlation), allowing the more efficient and powerful combinatorial logic of between-sign relationships to provide the mnemonic support for retrieving and reconstructing them when needed.

The symbolic recoding of systems of iconic and indexical relationships is so useful because it ultimately allows us to ignore most of the vast web of word-object, word-word, and object-object indexical associations. The availability of this mnemonic shortcut makes possible the incredible acceleration and compression of information transmission and reception during language production and comprehension, as compared to most other forms of communication. We become lightning calculators of reference. These ignored indexical relationships are still the implicit grounding of word reference; it’s just that these interpretive steps can be put off until it can be determined exactly which are relevant and which are not. The potential of being able to invoke these lower-order associations as elements in an interpretive process or use them to cue steps in symbol construction (e.g., sentence generation) is crucial. Symbolic reference is interpreted by supplying its indexical support, and these component indexical relationships are in rum interpreted by supplying their iconic support. This is a reductionistic process, like interpreting molecular interactions by considering the contributions of their atomic and then subatomic constituents. Symbolic interpretation requires a sort of idealized recapitulation of the indexical acquisition history that led up to the establishment of this referential relationship, which need not invoke anything but the most skeletal elements of the underlying indexical and iconic support—only what is essential to the immediate combinatorial and pragmatic context.

Historically, many neuropsychologists have suggested that word reference requires the involvement of special association areas or multimodal areas of the brain (particularly of the cerebral cortex). Studies of cross-modal transfer of information from discrimination learning in different sensory modalities demonstrated that, at least in monkey brains, there were multi-modal parietal, temporal, and prefrontal cortical regions that were critical to the ability to transfer learned associations across sensory modalities, such as recognizing by sight an object previously known only by shape. More recent versions of these ideas have invoked a related concept—“convergence” zones in the cerebral cortex—in order to explain how distributed sensorimotor traces of experiences might be interlinked to support word meanings. This captures an essential aspect of word meaning, but not its symbolic aspect. Rather, these cross-modal associations between images and experiences on the one hand and their associations with particular word sounds on the other provide the indexical associations of words, but their symbolic association—what we call the meaning—involves these and something more. The something more includes both the associative relationships between words and the logic of how these map to the more concrete indexical relationships. These components have long been implicit in theories of brain processes involved with retrieving meaning.

Combining brain-imaging approaches with brain-damage approaches to language processing has made possible a renewed appreciation of the multifaceted nature of word association relationships and the corresponding distribution of their component processes within the brain. In general, studies of the mnemonic and lexical processing of words indicate that different brain regions may be differentially involved, depending both on the semantic features and on perceptual features engaged in the analysis. One demonstration of this dissociability of the different aspects of word analysis involves the left ventral prefrontal region of the brain, the same region that is preferentially engaged by verb-for-noun production tasks (discussed above). This same area also appears to play a critical role in retrieval of words representing actions. A similar region is activated during word completion tasks, as shown by fMRI. However, PET studies of subjects responding to nouns with verbs reveal patterns of cortical activation that only partially overlap with nearly identical tasks involving responding to nouns with other nouns, or analyzing grammatical and lexical features of words (see Fig. 10.5). This suggests that there are subtle differences in recruitment of the prefrontal areas as semantic relationships change. Moreover, the left ventral prefrontal region does not appear to be so involved in the naming of familiar objects. Retrieval of object words versus persons’ names in response to visual cues has been shown to be differentially impaired in patients with damage to different sectors of the left middle and ventral temporal lobe, and this distinction also appears to be paralleled by imaging studies showing preferential activation of these areas in naming tasks (see Fig. 10.5).

Interestingly, these inferior and middle temporal regions are not associated with either auditory processing or Wernicke’s aphasia. In fact, anatomical evidence suggests that these ventral temporal regions probably include cortical areas that are considered to be visual as well as auditory in function. This should not be entirely surprising because the stimuli were pictures. Yet it is important to recognize that this does not simply reflect picture recognition processes. In these PET studies, the brain activation pattern for the visual component of the task (as assessed by using data from parallel object recognition trials) was subtracted from the pattern exhibited in the picture-word association task, so the remaining pattern reflects something else. An additional visual processing stage appears to come into play in order to generate the word (though it may involve some of the same visual areas as were required for the object recognition task). A different use of visually encoded information appears to be playing a critical role in this lexical (i.e., word-word) level of the task, a use that differs depending on the category of the named object. The patterns of cortical recruitment thus appear entirely dependent on the lexical demands of the task.



Figure 10.5 Summary of brain-imaging studies investigating localization of semantic processing of words and sentences.

A. In this study, subjects were required to monitor a story either for grammatical errors or for the occurrence of words in a specific semantic category. The two tasks produced slightly different, but overlapping PET activation patterns in frontal motorpremotor areas and in ventral prefrontal cortex. Anterior cingulate gyms (eg) cortex and supplementary motor area (sma) were also activated (arrow) (summarized from Nichelli, et al, 1995).

B. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) used to distinguish between the effects of task difficulty of a lexical processing task and semantic processing of a similar task showing separate effects in adjacent ventral prefrontal areas (summarized from Demb, et al., 1995).

C. Combined data from PET studies and patients with focal brain damage were used to construct maps of areas critically recruited for three categories of picture naming. Different temporal cortical areas (outside traditional Wernicke’s area) were recruited, depending on different lexical associative features of the words (person names, animal names, tool names). Lesions were confined to the temporal lobes. PET images additionally showed ventral frontal and cingulate cortex activation (summarized from Damasio, et al., 1996). Semantic processing appears to recruit different ventral and lateral temporal lobe subdivisions depending on the semantic features involved. (A similar pattern of anterior versus posterior temporal lobe recruitment in processing names for inanimate versus animate objects was also demonstrated by surface electrode recording in awake patients by Nobre, et al., 1994).

D. Cortical areas that are activated during semantic judgments about either words or pictures, identified using PET analysis of cerebral blood flow and subtracting the areas uniquely activated by each task alone (summarized from Vandenberghe, et al., 1996). All involve activation of ventral prefrontal cortex, as does the verb-for-noun word association task depicted in Figure 10.3. Additional involvement of inferior temporal cortex demonstrates distributed recruitment of cortical areas in semantic processing.

This differential recruitment of temporal-visual versus prefrontal regions offers support for a theoretical speculation first proposed by the famous MIT structural linguist Roman Jakobson many decades ago. He proposed that one could analyze word associations underlying language processes into two broad categories of associative operations that he termed the syntagmatic and paradigmatic dimensions of word association,9 and he suggested that these processes should be distributed to frontal and posterior regions of cortex, respectively. Paradigmatic operations are reflected in substitution relationships between words. Metaphors, anaphors, and pronouns all serve this role. In the most general sense, all words of the same part of speech are paradigmatic of each other to some degree since they can substitute for one another. Words that serve the same function in a sentence tend not to co-occur in the same sentence or context, except in a sort of renaming function. Syntagmatic operations are reflected in the complementary relationships between words from different parts of speech (e.g., nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, or articles) and the way these different classes of words alternate in sequence in a sentence. Word association by metonymy, such as in the sequence “glass-water-thirsty-lunch,” also employs a similar logic of complementarity. The content words that combine in sentences are almost invariably metonymically related to one another. In a sentence or in the developing context of a description or story, subsequent words operate on one another, expanding or contracting semantic relationships, introducing new topics, or simply producing a sentential function, such as indicating or requesting something. This metonymic function is not merely a shift of paradigm (in Jakobson’s sense) but a shift that involves some ground for one word to operate on the other with respect to determining reference.

Producing a metaphoric association requires selecting words with common semantic features, whereas producing a metonymic association requires shifting attention to specifically alternative features. This is why there may be a posterior cortical bias to metaphoric operations and a pre-frontal cortical bias to metonymic operations. Associations cued by attention to common perceptual features are analogous to perceptual recognition processes and so should recruit the function of the corresponding posterior cortical regions. However, associations that require a shift of attention in which some feature is used to generate its complement are likely to require prefrontal contributions. Metonymic word association thus offers a paradigm example of using information against itself to generate new complementary alternatives.

So, what parts of the brain should we expect grammatical and syntactical information processing to recruit? As with simple word association processes, the answer to this probably depends on processing demands, and not on some grammar-processing center. Syntactic operations and grammatical judgments can involve many different syntagmatic and paradigmatic processes, and these can differ from language to language. In languages like English and German, for example, word and phrase position in a sentence are used to determine many grammatical functions, such as relationships of possession or subordination, the difference between statements and questions, and certain changes in tense such as the passive tense. But in highly inflected languages, like Italian or Latin, affixes, suffixes or systematic changes in phonemes (as also in English verbs) tend to signal these functional roles. If grammatical operations were handled by some central processor we should not expect to observe neural variations correlated with language variations, but since grammatical relationships are symbolic relationships, they are probably no less distributed and task-dependent in their localization in the brain than are word retrieval processes. Even within bilingual individuals different languages may be organized differently and separately, sometimes in ways not even restricted to cortex. For example, bilingual patients with subcortical (striatal) damage are often paradoxically more impaired in their native language than in their secondary one.

The clearest demonstration of the variable relationship between language structures and brain structures has recently come from studies of acquired agrammatism: loss of grammatical analytic abilities due to focal brain damage in adults. Though it’s long been unclear whether grammatical ability could be linked to specific brain damage, English speakers appear to be especially susceptible to disruption of grammatical abilities as a result of damage associated with Broca’s area. Thus, patients who have significantly impaired speech fluency also tend to show difficulties interpreting sentences that depend critically on grammatical function words, and particular difficulties interpreting sentences that depend entirely on transformations of word order (like the passive tense in English). Such problems might suggest that this grammatical function is located in this part of the brain, and many have suggested just this. Curiously, however, a generalized grammatical deficit is not consistently associated with damage to Broca’s area, and specifically, in speakers of highly inflected languages where word order is more free and where the passive tense is marked by grammatical words, morphemes, or inflections, there appears to be far less agrammatism associated with Broca’s area damage. In these languages (such as Italian), Wernicke’s aphasics, who also show disturbances of semantic analysis but not speech fluency, are more impaired in producing and analyzing the corresponding grammatical transformation than are patients with Broca’s area damage (Figure 10.6). So if there is a grammar module, then the parts of this module map in very different ways to different grammatical operations, depending on the relative importance of positional or inflectional tricks for cuing grammatical decisions in different languages. This sort of module is a will-o’-the-wisp.

Probably the crucial factor behind this difference is the need to use very different sorts of neural computations and mnemonic tricks to analyze word order as opposed to individual words, suffixes, prefixes, and sound changes. Both coding methods offer viable means for marking the same grammatical distinctions, and are quite variably employed in different languages. Those languages that extensively utilize change in word form to mark grammatical functions tend correspondingly to allow considerable freedom of word order, and vice versa. English, for example, makes minimal use of inflection and extensive use of word order and special “function words” to mark word-order interpretations. Italian and Latin, in contrast, rely almost exclusively on inflections and function words that change the grammatical function of content words they modify. If we took the view that a particular language function (e.g., the passive transformation) was a distinct primitive operation that was “computed” by brain regions specialized for it, then we would be forced to conclude that English and Italian speakers have different kinds of brains with different types of language regions that make this possible. This, of course, is absurd. What happens is that in the process of learning one of these languages, particular syntactic functions tend to demand most from areas of the brain that were previously specialized to perform similar manipulations of the signal (e.g., tracking order-dependency relationships). Over the course of maturation and in response to constant language use, the development of a certain degree of skill in this process is accompanied by progressive specialization of this region and progressive decline of contributions from other areas, as all become more specialized and differentiated in function.



Figure 10.8 Cross-linguistic comparison of aphasic patients is beginning to demonstrate that the same deep grammatical operation may recruit different cortical regions, depending on the way it is encoded syntactically. This is particularly evident when comparing languages that depend more on word-order cues to those that depend on morphological and inflectional cues to express the same grammatical function. The arrows pointing to the brain indicate that when word order is more critical, damage to ventral frontal regions produces greater grammatical impairment; when inflection and morphology are more critical, damage to temporal regions produces greater grammatical impairment (for details, see the discussions in Bates and Wulfeck, 1989; Bates and MacWhinney, 199la).

Thus, a particular class of syntactical operation subserving a general grammatical function can come to “reside” somewhere in the brain, so to speak, and can be selectively lost due to focal damage, particularly in mature brains, and yet be located differently in the brains of speakers of different languages. Its localization is determined by the same competitive exclusion processes that hone all neural systems during development, in response to habitual computational demands, but these demands are imposed by the surface characteristics of the syntactic device employed in a given language and not by the underlying grammatical (symbolic) logic that it supports. As with a computer that is deaf and dumb to the content and function of the data entered into its memory, the physical characteristics of the data that the brain must handle in language—i.e., whether they are images, characters, or operations to perform on other bits of data—are a much better clue to where they will be processed than what they mean. The symbolic functions, the grammatical and representational relationships, are not processed in any one place in the brain, but arise as a collective result of processes distributed widely within the brain, as well as within the wider social community itself. Virtual reference is only virtually localized.





Taking Sides


It might seem odd that in a book on language and the brain, whole chapters haven’t been devoted to lateralization—the difference in functional representation between the two cerebral hemispheres. This is in part merely a stylistic choice, a matter of emphasis on some otherwise less well known features of the brain-language relationship. But it is also a reflection of the fact that I consider this to be a side issue (bad pun) that is not an essential feature of language processing, only an incidental feature of the way human brains have adapted to the computation problems of language use. The fact that many specialized language functions are strongly lateralized to the left hemisphere in the vast majority of human brains has been a major impetus for theories suggesting that lateralization might have been a precondition for language evolution. Many argue that this robust side-to-side difference reflects some major organizational logic underlying language. But as with examples of the apparent preconditions for modern language abilities that were considered above, the logic of this argument is likely opposite to the evolutionary logic behind the correlation. Lateralization is almost certainly an effect and not a cause of brain-language co-evolution. Indeed, I think it is largely an effect of language development in an individual’s lifetime. The structure of languages has probably evolved to take advantage of intrinsic subtle biases in developing brains to break up and distribute their component cognitive computations so that they can most easily be processed in parallel, and one important way this can be accomplished is by “assigning” functions to either side of the cerebral hemispheres.

Unfortunately, the study of lateralization has been afflicted with the problem of being an interesting topic for popular psychology, and of offering an attractive source of analogies for theorizing about almost every aspect of the mind. As a result, everyone’s favorite complementary pair of mental functions can be mapped onto a brain whose functions differ on opposite sides. Since the middle of the nineteenth century, physicians and psychologists have argued over whether the left was female and the right male, the left verbal and the right nonverbal, the left linguistic and the right spatial, the left rational and the right irrational, the left differentiated and the right undifferentiated, the left localized and the right holistic, the left positive emotion and the right negative emotion, the left ego and the right id, the left dominant and the right subordinate, and even the left human cognition and the right primate cognition, to describe a few of the more prominent dichotomies. The attraction of discovering the most elegant way of dividing up the mind into two major complementary cognitive systems is almost irresistible.10

Although I wouldn’t dispute the importance of lateralized function as an important clue about the cognitive demands of language, I want to emphasize that lateralization is probably a consequence and not a cause or even precondition for language evolution. In fact, it is a dynamic functional consequence of processing demands imposed by language performance during development. There is plenty of evidence to suggest that lateralization of similar functions occurs in some other species, including other primates. Because of this, it is likely that such phylogenetic biases were present in hominid brains prior to the evolution of language. But I want to make the point that although these preexisting biases might help us to understand why language could have become more commonly and more thoroughly dependent on the left and not the right hemisphere, these prior conditions do not explain lateralization. Lateralization is more an adaptation of the brain to language than an adaptation of the brain for language.

The starting point for thinking about lateralization is recognizing that although human brains are strongly biased for left-side representation of many language functions, this is neither universal nor irreversible, at least early in life. Somewhere under 10 percent of people are not left-lateralized in this way, some are reversed, others have ambiguous lateralization, and handedness and lateralization for language do not always coincide. Anatomical and maturational biases may stack the deck one way at birth and still not be sufficient to throw the game, so to speak. Cases of left hemi-spherectomy in early childhood with largely spared language later in life have also been cited as a demonstration of the right hemisphere potential. Though claims that these children had complete language recovery were probably an exaggeration, it must be remembered that single-hemisphere language learning lacks any option of separating specialized functions or relying on redundantly represented functions. The fact that hemispherectomized children can learn any aspect of language is a miracle, and as an aside, further demonstrates the limitations of brain size alone as a sufficient predictor of language and intellectual ability. Even a 700-gram brain (as might result from hemispherectomy), if organized appropriately, can acquire sophisticated language skills and pass as humanly intelligent.

Further evidence of the developmentally derived nature of language lateralization comes from a study of language development in children with focal brain damage. Bates, Thal, and colleagues (1994) report that right hemisphere damage as well as left can produce significant language development delays (discussed in Chapter 9). This developmental plasticity indicates that lateralization must be thought of as a dynamic process, driven by language and development of manual skills during childhood. Innate side biases are just that—biases in a competitive process that may involve both synaptic competition and competition for establishing memory traces of experiences and behaviors. The representation of language functions probably develops primarily in response to the need to perform simultaneous but competing operations when speaking or listening to speech. This is supported by the fact that lateralization is not so much a commitment of one side to language and the other not, but rather a segregation of component language functions, as well as many other competing functions, to the two sides. Lateralization is thus another reflection of the role of competitive processes in determining the ultimate representation of functions in the cerebral hemispheres during development (see the discussion in Chapter 6), a progressive streamlining of language operations, as competitive differentiation processes cause competing complementary functions to recruit corresponding opposite cortical areas on one side or the other. What is important for understanding the nature of language processing is not how the particular human bias came about, but rather what drives it in each individual’s development.

Before we can begin to make sense of this functional competition, it is important to get one thing straight. The right hemisphere is not the non-language hemisphere. It is critically and intimately involved in language processing at many levels during both development and maturity. Perhaps most importantly, it is critical for the large-scale, semantic processing of language, not word meaning so much as the larger symbolic constructions that words and sentences contribute to: complex ideas, descriptions, narratives, and arguments. Symbol construction and analysis do not end with the end of a sentence, but in many regards begin there. The real power of symbolic communication lies in its creative and constructive power. Since symbolic representation is intrinsically compositional, there is no upper bound to the compositional complexity of a symbolic representation. A whole novel can be used to convey a sense of a unique life experience, a research paper full of equations can be used to present a subtle but elegant idea about physical relationships, a joke can offer a new and curious way to represent an old assumption, and so on. All of these are symbols in the same sense that a word or sentence is, but they require an extended effort at symbolic reference building.

The best evidence for this right hemisphere language involvement comes from analysis of how right hemisphere damage affects such abilities as story and joke comprehension.11 Patients who have suffered extensive damage to their right but not left hemispheres are generally able to speak well, without any unusual increase in grammatical errors or mistakes in choice of words; but when required to follow and interpret a short narrative, they seem to fail to grasp the logic of the whole. For example, they do not recognize when important steps in a story have been left out or inappropriate or anomalous events have been included, though they can recount the details. They seem to be unaware of the constraints of the context. Jokes provide another window into this difficulty. Humor depends crucially on understanding both what should ordinarily follow, and how the insidious twist of logic of the punch line undermines our expectations. Assessment of what makes something funny depends on an awareness of two conflicting contexts: an expected, “appropriate” context, and a logically possible but very odd one. The aptness of the shift in contextual logic, the extent to which it effectively catches us off guard even when we know it is a joke, the way it caricatures what in a “straight” context might be serious or threatening, all these are the ingredients of good jokes. (How many scientists does it take to screw in a light bulb? Only one. It just takes him two years to get the grant support to do it.) Well, anyway, this poses a serious problem for someone unable to construct the appropriate narrative context in the first place. Patients with right hemisphere damage seem to rank jokes as funny based solely on the extent to which the punch line contains material that is different from what preceded it. (No, I do not have right hemisphere damage.)

Such inattention is also reflected in other aspects of their behavior. One of the more enigmatic symptoms of right hemisphere damage is a tendency to neglect or ignore things on the left side, including objects so placed, dressing or shaving on that side, even the left sides of objects. Asked to draw a clock, a right hemisphere patient might scrunch all the hands and numbers to the right side, or simply leave something out on the left side of the drawing. Another aspect of these patients’ pattern of inattention is a disturbance of implicit learning. For example, when asked to keep track of how often an animal appears in a series of photographs of familiar objects, they do quite well. But when asked if there had been many pieces of furniture shown in that same same series of pictures, they will perform poorly. What was not being attended to did not register in background.

These are attentional functions that are crucial to symbol building, because the basis of shifting attention from the details to the implicit logic that organizes them requires an ability to be aware of more than one network of contextual relationships at a time. I do not mean to suggest that the right hemisphere plays some special role in this process during development or in evolution. But as language abilities become progressively more sophisticated with age and experience, the need to analyze symbolic relationships at many levels simultaneously grows. The highly automated interpretation of symbolic relationships encoded in word combinations and sentence structure requires a strategy of one rapid interpretation followed by another. It demands both rapid implementation and an ability to keep previous operations from interfering with subsequent operations. The same neural systems that subserve sentence-length analysis would probably also be critical for maintaining long-term mnemonic continuity of symbolic information. These simultaneous demands would thus likely conflict or interfere with one another, and so limit the efficiency of both processes. But because right and left brain structures are paired, it is possible to keep the processes from interfering with one another by compartmentalizing them to opposite hemispheres.

The right hemisphere also subserves another important language function that is nonsymbolic, but in terms of neural computations probably is competitive with phonological analysis and word processing. It is the processing of prosodic features of speech. Prosodic features are the rhythmic and pitch changes that we generally use to convey emotional tone, to direct the listeners attention to the more and less significant elements in a sentence, and in general to indicate how aroused we are about the contents of our speech. Not surprisingly, many aspects of this speech melody have been shown to have features in common with the innate vocalizations of primates. These include the correlation of changing pitch, volume, and rate of production with the level of arousal; changes in the quality of vocalization as an indication of type of interaction (hostile, submissive, etc.); and the overall phrasing with respect to breath control. Though the extent of localization has been debated, there is a common association between both impairment in interpreting emotionality in speech and the production of prosodic speech in patients with right hemisphere damage.

Here again, language production and analysis effectively require that we implement two different modes of phonetic analysis and vocal control simultaneously: prosodic and phonemic processes. These tasks would tend to compete for recruitment of the same brain structures (probably the classic Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas), and as a result would probably interfere with each other. It would be far more inefficient to trade off use of the same cortical system for both. Like the monitoring of thematic context in background, the monitoring of prosodic information tends to operate against a foreground attention to specific words and phrases. Though we are aware of this peripherally, it tends to be attended to implicitly rather than explicitly. Exaggerating the representation of this background function to the right hemisphere, and phonemic and word analysis to the left during development, may similarly provide a means for processing these sources of information in parallel with minimal cross interference. Consequently, the right hemisphere may become more intimately associated with the midbrain homologues of innate call circuits that still exist in the human brain. Conversely, if there is a consistent developmental bias favoring such a preferential linkage, this could tip the scales toward this pattern of lateralization.

But the right hemisphere may be far more capable of full-scale linguistic functions than we normally imagine. Its abilities may be masked by this long developmental specialization, which actively reduces its roles in word-and phrase-level analysis and production processes in order to avoid cognitive conflicts. Could we find a way to observe right hemisphere abilities in conditions where there was no developmental selection to decrease its role in these processes? Data from schools that train simultaneous translators (such as are hired by the United Nations to listen to a speaker and simultaneously provide a moment-by-moment translation into a microphone for others to follow) suggest that under the special demands of this difficult language task, both hemispheres can to some extent become language hemispheres. The problem for the simultaneous translator is to keep the two languages from getting in each others way. Listening to one while producing the other is like that old problem of patting your head and rubbing your stomach with opposite hands, and then reversing what each hand is doing but leaving them in place; or chewing gum while playing the drums or dancing or just walking out of sync with each chew. The direct competition of simultaneous similar language functions is often further coupled with a consistent asymmetry of auditory input: most translators develop an ear preference for listening to the source language. Studies before and after training demonstrate that most students begin with a right ear (left hemisphere) preference for both languages, but may develop an opposite ear advantage for each language by the end of their training.12

Thus, the two languages can come to be preferentially represented in opposite hemispheres. This is all the more remarkable since the shift from unilateral preference to bilateral segregation can be induced in young adults, not infants (there is undoubtedly self-selection in this population of students, so that such flexibility and language faculty be the rule). This special case nonetheless demonstrate the general principle: when sensorimotor or cognitive operations tend to compete simultaneously for the same neural substrates, there is strong developmental selection pressure to segregate the competing operations to counterpart structures in the opposite hemispheres (Figure 10.7). Of course, any predispositions that contribute a bias that accelerates this process during development will be favored in evolution.

In general, then, it is misleading to think of language as though it is all in the left hemisphere. The right side is neither primitive nor mute. both hemispheres contribute essential and complementary functions. These develop in tandem, and the biases for a particular pattern of asymmetry evolved with respect to this complementarity of functions. Lateralization is not so much an expression of evolutionary adaptation as of adaptation during one’s lifetime, biased so as to minimize any neurological “indecisions” about what should go where.

The logic of the bias that leads most humans to develop the same pattern of lateralization may also reflect systematic temporal differences. Lateralization functions in both the linguistic and the manual domain seem to be segregated according to speed. The left hemisphere seems more often adept at ultra-rapid analysis of sound changes and control of rapid, precise, skilled movement sequences. Similar patterns seem to characterize visual analysis and manual skills as well. Thus, in the developmental competition for functional representation, a left bias for more rapid rate of processing might be sufficient consistently to tip the scales in one direction. Subtle maturational differences, myelination differences, cell-size differences, or differences in the proportions of cortical inputs from sensory systems on the two sides could provide such initial biases. In human brains, these subtle developmental biases may be amplified further by the cumulative statistical effects of large brain size (e.g., longer maturation process; longer distances producing greater conduction time differences; larger networks tending to break up more easily into functional subdivisions; and so on).



Figure 10.7 Examples of segregation of competing language-related functions that have displaced each other into the cortex of opposite cerebral hemispheres.

Similar biases are seen for other functions in species as diverse as birds, rodents, and primates. There are a number of crudely analogous patterns in other primates. Though there is no consistent species-handedness for fine-skilled manipulation, there does seem to be some consistent preference for left-side supportive functions. More relevant, however, for language evolution, there appears to be evidence for a left hemisphere advantage for processing rapid auditory stimuli, and conspecific vocalizations in some monkeys (also probably biased by rate of analysis effects). The advantages of increasing the innate bias toward one pattern probably can be explained by a kind of disruptive selection against unbiased brains. Lack of innate bias might produce a kind of physiological indecision in the developmental competition driving functional segregation. The hierarchic pattern of biases evolved to bias development is a consequence of the evolutionlike developmental wiring process. Like the disruptive evolution of different vervet monkey alarm calls, the intermediate unbiased state would be selected against. It didn’t really matter which side “won” which function, just so long as the result was a decisive difference, and having both alternative outcomes as likely possibilities would increase the chances for stalemate. The prehominid biases, however slight, could have been enough to precipitate the evolution of further innate biasing in the same direction. But there may be an additional source of bias to consider.

A number of theorists suggest an evolutionary link between handedness and language lateralization. They argue that the left brain adaptation for more “dexterous” tool use might have paved the way for language evolution. The correlation between the asymmetry of language and of handedness no doubt indicates that the independent advantages of each may have influenced the other in their evolution. This is a reflection of “evolutionary overdetermination”: the apparent convergence of many independent adaptive advantages that contribute to the same structural change. Because evolution is moved by patterns of biases, related biases from independent sources tend to reinforce each other over time. To the extent that either left hemisphere specialization for more precise manual skill or for more articulate verbal skill would have selected for similar biases in the neurological substrates, each would have increased the likelihood that the other function would co-localize in the same hemisphere. Lateralization for one or the other may have initially been slight, but their simultaneous co-evolution would have greatly amplified the resultant effect and linkage. One of these abilities need not be the evolutionary prerequisite of the other.

How old is lateralization for language? Lateralized biases in many functions appear to long antedate hominids. For example, corresponding lateralized biases in spatial and sensory processing have been identified in many mammals and birds. Though human lateralization can probably be traced to these roots, the consistency and almost completely dissociated extent of lateralization of language functions that is characteristic of most human brains has probably developed gradually over the entire period of brain-language co-evolution. Since the evolutionary course of the increase in vocal capabilities in hominids was probably protracted, beginning simply and taking more than 1 million years to become sophisticated, lateralized biases with respect to auditory processing have probably only recently reached their modern extremes. In contrast, as we will see in the next chapters, stone tool use was probably around since the very earliest stages of symbolic communication. If this was aided by lateralized biases for manual skills, then they may have been evolving in advance of vocal-auditory lateralization. But the evidence for any strong selective disadvantage of ambidextrous abilities seems weak. Indeed, athletic and manual skills seem at least as well developed in ambidextrous and left-handed individuals as in strongly right-handed individuals. But in language processing, an “ambi-phasic” brain would have become increasingly disadvantageous as speech information transmission rates increased during evolution. Evidence for handedness in stone tool manufacture may thus tell us more about the lateralization advantages for language processing in these ancient toolmakers than anything about selection favoring handedness in their toolmaking. Even though lateralized tool manipulation could have offered an additional source of bias affecting language lateralization, it seems far more likely that the high incidence of right-handedness and left speech-processing biases in modern populations has been driven nearly to genetic fixation mostly by language.
