CHAPTER TWELVE


Symbolic Origins


…the human understanding is greatly indebted to the passions.

—Jean Jacques Rousseau, Discourse on Inequality





A Passion to Communicate


We have some idea what happened to the brain and body in the process of language evolution, and we have an estimate of when this began and how it developed in our prehistory, but none of this answers a more nagging question. Why? What was the spark that kindled the evolution of symbolic communication? If symbolic communication did not arise due to a “hopeful monster” mutation of the brain, it must have been selected for. But by what factors of hominid life? How can we discover the context of this initial push into such a novel form of communication? Can the forces favoring such an unprecedented evolutionary adaptation be reconstructed in hindsight? Or are the conditions underlying the critical transition from indexical to symbolic communication, and from animal to human minds, forever lost to analysis along with with the flesh, blood, and day-to-day behaviors of our fossil ancestors?

On the cover of the Cambridge Encyclopedia of Human Evolution and also on the cover of the book Ape Man, a companion volume to the television series by the same name (produced for the A&E Television network), there appear images of “morphed” faces that are not quite ape and not quite human.1 “Morphing” is a computer image manipulation whereby one generates a spectrum of intermediates between different images that, if animated, smoothly transform the one into the other. These two cover illustrations depict half-morphed stages between an ape and a human face. The eerie realism of these images resonates with a deep predisposition for what we might call “reconstructive hindsight.” In thinking about evolution, we naturally imagine a sort of morphing from one species to another. But we should be wary of letting our images of evolutionary change direct our thinking about it, because hominid evolution doesn’t resemble a 5-million-year morphing from a chimplike species to Homo sapiens. There never was a creature who was half-ape, half-human, who was a bit more dull than most people but slightly more savvy than most chimps, and who communicated with a half-language. We can’t just extrapolate from present species and their adaptations back to a state before language and culture. We must instead try to reconstruct the adaptations of our ancestral species from principles of behavioral ecology, physiology, and information about brain structure and function.

From the perspective of hindsight, almost everything looks as though it might be relevant for explaining the language adaptation. Looking for the adaptive benefits of language is like picking only one dessert in your favorite bakery: there are too many compelling options to choose from. What aspects of human social organization and adaptation wouldn’t benefit from the evolution of language? From this vantage point, symbolic communication appears “overdetermined.” It is as though everything points to it. A plausible story could be woven from almost any of the myriad of advantages that better communication could offer: organizing hunts, sharing food, communicating about distributed food sources, planning warfare and defense, passing on toolmaking skills, sharing important past experiences, establishing social bonds between individuals, manipulating potential sexual competitors or mates, caring for and training young, and on and on. This apparent lack of constraint on what constitutes a plausible hypothesis is one source of the frustration that caused past researchers to be less than charitable toward language origins scenarios. Could any significant reproductive advantage conferred by language be considered a plausible candidate for its prime mover? What would make some more plausible, more supportable, or more falsifiable than others? Though many of the myriad uses for symbolic communication are probably sufficient to provide selection for enhancing symbolic learning and associated speech abilities, they already assume a form of symbolic communication that is intrinsically superior to all preceding forms of social communication. This is precisely what we cannot assume to explain the origin of symbolic communication.

Though modern languages exhibit these assumed communication advantages, the first symbolic systems were almost certainly not full-blown languages, to say the least. We would probably not even recognize them as languages if we encountered them today, though we would recognize them as different in striking ways from the communication of other species. In their earliest forms, it is likely that they lacked both the efficiency and the flexibility that we attribute to modern language. Indeed, I think it is far more realistic to assume that the first symbolic systems would have paled in efficiency and flexibility in comparison to the rich and complex endowment of vocal calls and nonverbal, nonsymbolic gestural displays exhibited by any of our primate cousins. The first symbol learners probably still carried on most of their social communication through call-and-display behaviors much like those of modern apes and monkeys. Symbolic communication was likely only a small part of social communication.

But that’s only half the problem. As we have seen, even learning the simplest symbolic relationships places heavy demands on a rather questionable learning bias. In this trade-off lies the explanation for the failure of languagelike, symbolic communication to evolve in all but one species. The cognitive requirements for efficient associative learning are in many ways in conflict with those that would enhance symbol learning. Attention to higher-order, more distributed associations and away from those based on temporal-spatial correlations may render these other forms of learning somewhat less efficient. And to learn symbols it’s necessary to invest immense effort in learning associations that aren’t much use until the whole system of interdependent associations is sorted out. In other words, for a long time in this symbol-learning process nothing useful can come of it. Only after a complete group (in the logical sense) of interdefined symbols is assembled can any one be used symbolically. To approach most learning problems with the expectations and biases that would aid symbol learning would be very inefficient for most species. Both the difficulty and the costs of learning symbols have kept other species from evolving symbolic abilities. Only if there were significant advantages to symbolic communication, that greatly outweighed these costs, could there be selection that both favored the unusual learning strategy and compensated for the decline in effectiveness of others.

Seen in this light, the problem of explaining symbolic origins is much more challenging. Even a small, inefficient, and inflexible symbol system is very difficult to acquire, depends on significant external social support in order to be learned, and forces one to employ very counterintuitive learning strategies that may interfere with most nonsymbolic learning processes. The first symbol systems were also likely fragile modes of communication: difficult to learn, inefficient, slow, inflexible, and probably applied to a very limited communicative domain. And we must assume that the vast majority of social communication was mediated by a more or less typical primate repertoire of nonsymbolic vocal, olfactory, and gestural displays. If the initial symbolic adaptation was neither more efficient nor more flexible than preexisting forms of communication, then the incredible power that modern languages confer on their users cannot be invoked to explain the origin of language. Neurologically and semiotically, symbolic abilities do not necessarily represent more efficient communication, but instead represent a radical shift in communicative strategy. It is this shift, not any improvements, that we eventually need to explain.

This form of communication must have provided a significant selective advantage to the majority of those who employed it. In what ways would symbolic communication, even if very rudimentary and inefficient, provide a means of adaptation that would be unavailable using other forms of communication, even if far more sophisticated and efficient in comparison? A generally less efficient form of communication could only have gained a foothold if it provided something different, a communicative function that was not available even in a much-elaborated system of vocal and gestural indices. Given these disadvantages, what other possible selective advantage of symbolizing could possibly have led a group of hominids to incur such costs? What difference could have offset the enormous costs in cognitive effort, time, social organization, and reduced efficiency? To answer these questions, we need to know something about the context in which the first symbolic communication evolved.

Before we can begin to understand the circumstances that provided the selection pressures to favor such a radical shift in communicative strategy, we need to understand more generally what circumstances tend to produce significant evolutionary changes in communication in other species. In general, this occurs in the context of intense sexual selection. In the classical terminology of ethology, the process whereby some behavior became progressively modified and specialized for its communicative function was called “ritualization,” by analogy to human ritual and ceremonial embellishments of communication. The elaborate tail feather display of a male peacock, the hanging-upside-down display of a male sulfur-crested cockatoo, or the straw archway elaborately decorated with shiny stones and bright-colored objects pilfered from human societies by a male bovver bird, all are elaborations of communication that have been driven by sexual competition between males in order to attract females. But it is not only males that may be affected. Consider also the incredible part-swimming, part-flying, part-walking display of male and female grebes as they run in paired formation across the surface of a lake, or the head-bobbing conversations of mated penguins meeting on a crowded rookery. These are also forms of sexual communication that evolved to negotiate mate choice and pair-bond maintenance. But in these cases, the behaviors are not just used by males to attract prospective mates, they are used by both sexes to assess each other. In all these examples, we see the evolutionary elaboration of behaviors whose only significant function is communication. They occur at these times because communication is somehow more important for these contexts. How do the specific requirements of assessing prospective mates and choosing mates drive these evolutionary trends?

In evolution, the transmission of genes is the bottom line, and the only way to do this is to reproduce or to help close relatives reproduce. But reproduction in complex animals often involves a lot more than just producing a fertilized ovum. This is particularly true for birds and mammals, where parental care can be a crucial part of reproducing. Not only must an animal grow and mature to the point that it is physiologically competent to reproduce; it also may need considerable social experience to be successful. When caring for offspring demands a contribution from both sexes, competing for access to many mates or finding mates with the best physical traits has less of an impact on reproductive output than does direct care of one’s mate and offspring. The need to exchange information about parenting ability is similar in each sex, whereas obtaining information about desirable physical traits is not crucial. Even in species where only one sex is necessary to care for the offspring (typically, but not always, the female), as is the case in the majority of mammals, the opposite sex (typically males) is not freed from the need for maturity and experience. Natural selection for basic survival abilities is amplified and supplemented by sexual selection for “desirable” traits in these cases. If one sex is essentially freed from the need to care for offspring, its energy can be redirected to maximizing copulatory access to the opposite sex by competing for optimal feeding territories or directly competing over mates. This can have significant reproductive consequences, and in such a case the information-gathering needs of males and females may be quite different.

The most common pattern of reproductive social behavior among mammals is polygynous mating. In most mammals, the immense physiological and time investments of pregnancy and lactation make females and their access to food the limiting resources. Females make the most of their reproductive effort, not by producing as many babies as possible, but by directing as much support as possible to each infant. For a male in such a species, however, the number of fertile females that can be impregnated determines his reproductive potential. From the female’s perspective, since only one male is likely to impregnate her at any one time, and all her efforts will be directed toward his progeny, she must be much more selective in who she accepts as a mate than is the male. This tends to promote the evolution of complex means of extracting information about prospective male mates, and of means for producing information that can influence and otherwise manipulate the female’s choice. In other words, males try to communicate information that favors them, and females try to receive information that gives them a basis to choose between the males and cut through any potential misinformation provided by them.

Often, this transmission and receipt of information is “incidental” to other activities, to the extent that communication is not the sole function. This is the case for fighting behavior. Where extensive competition exists among males for access to fertile females, threats and fighting behavior are common between males. Such species are often said to engage in “tournament” behaviors. Although the point of male aggression in these conditions is to displace an adversary who is also vying for the same territory or the same mates, females can learn a good deal about the physical and mental abilities of the competing males by observing their confrontation, and thus make their choice based on performance. The success of one male or his ability to exclude all others from a valued territory may even be information enough. If the competition accomplishes the assessment for the female, the details of what ensued in the process may add little other useful information. The relative fighting succes of males is a representation—specifically, an index—of their comparable differences. As a result, the direct communication between male and female in such highly combative polygynous species may be minimal. If a female has sufficient information to determine that a male has been the most successful defender of a territory or a group of females (something that may be implicit in the social context), then little else about his state may require cautious interpretation. There will be little selection pressure for females to develop special means of getting more information from the males, or for the males to provide the females with any additional information about their physical state. Their communication mostly involves coordinating copulatory behavior—something that can be accomplished with a minimum of assessment and analysis, and just a few relatively automatic responses. This is why, from a human perspective, sexual communication and copulation in highly polygynous species often appear as perfunctory acts with few preparatory or follow-up interactions.

In contrast to the minimal communication between males and females in tournament systems, the communication between competing males under these circumstances may be extensive and highly elaborate. If a male in a highly polygynous and aggressive species misjudges another’s physical prowess or willingness to risk physical harm, the consequences can be serious. One possible outcome is getting needlessly injured. If losing and being harmed are inevitable, it’s better not to have engaged in conflict in the first place, since this may diminish future reproductive chances. Alternatively, if overcoming one’s opponent is very likely and the chance of harm slight, then failure to engage is costly in direct reproductive terms. For these reasons, it may also be advantageous to provide misinformation to an opponent, to lead him to make a mistake in judgment; and inversely, it may be advantageous to check the information again and again in different ways, for signs of inconsistency.

When the reproductive and health stakes are both high, there is intense selection pressure to provide high levels of disinformation to competitors and to elaborate and prolong the assessment process before aggressive engagement in order to maximize the opportunity of seeing through the other’s deception to gain a reliable estimate of the likely outcome. These complementary pressures cause both deception and detection adaptations to escalate over the course of evolution. This can produce a kind of short-term “runaway” process that is finally stopped when the other costs associated with continued elaboration of communication begin to diminish any value of doing a little better than one’s competitors. In other words, spending too much time and energy deciding whether or not to attack or defend can be just as costly in reproductive terms as making periodic mistakes.

Very different constraints and forces of sexual selection influence the evolution of communicative behaviors in species where both males and females must care for and defend their offspring. Because of their common reproductive interests, dual-parenting species tend to form cooperative pairs with strong exclusive (emotional) attachments to one another—pair bonding. Nevertheless, the underlying dynamic of the evolution of communication is the same: where the potential for inaccurate assessment of the other is high, and the potential costs of misjudgment or the advantages of deception are also high (in reproductive terms), communication will tend to be more elaborate and more complex. Pair-bonding species are under pressure to assess the other’s physical condition, resource defense capabilities, care-giving abilities, and likely fidelity.

However, the interests of prospective mates are not entirely symmetric. A male can still improve his reproduction by cuckolding another male (who will consequently raise young that are not his own), and a female might be able to maximize both care-giving and genetically valued traits by soliciting copulations from multiple males, so long as at least one remains to care for her young. From the other’s perspective, however, either deception is re-productively costly. A philandering male is more likely to abandon one female for another, and a solicitous female is likely to cause her mate to spend time and energy supporting other males’ offspring. Any tendencies that allow these deceptions to slip by unchecked will be strongly selected out. Evolution will therefore favor mechanisms for avoiding getting stuck with an incompetent, unreliable, or unfaithful mate. This requires that one check out prospective mates very carefully ahead of time, and continually recheck them throughout the parenting relationship. Of course, prevention is more advantageous than post facto reliance on punitive responses, once the damage is already done, and so courtship is the most important period in the relationship for accurate assessment.

Thus, it is at the point in the life cycle where choice of mate takes place that evolutionary theory predicts we should find the greatest elaboration of communicative behaviors and psychological mechanisms in both pair-bonding species and polygynous species, though the communicators and the messages may differ significantly in these two extremes. Between these extremes there are many more complex mixtures of reproductive social arrangements that add new possibilities and uncertainties, and thus further intensify selection on the production and assessment of signals. This is especially obvious in primate species living in large multi-male/multi-female groups, such as chimpanzees and baboons. In these species, communication about mate access and mate choice additionally involves group dynamics such as developing and sustaining coalitions between cooperating males or females, even as other aspects of physiology (for example, the highly arousing sexual swelling and solicitous behavior of females in estrus) act to undermine these relationships.





Why Human Societies Shouldn’t Work


Though, on the surface, we might characterize the mating pattern of Homo sapiens as pair bonding, this is a misleading oversimplification. Every fan of human drama—from Sophocles to Shakespeare to television soap opera—knows implicitly that the relationship between the sexes in human societies is at the mercy of powerful social and sexual undercurrents, which both form and destroy human reproductive bonds and so constantly threaten the facade of social stability. The inevitable conflict between sexuality and the constraints of social cooperation has led to elaborate means of regulating reproduction, and has produced the great variety of sanctioned reproductive arrangements in present-day human societies. This aspect of social life is where I suggest we focus our initial efforts at identifying the selection pressures that led to the evolution of such an unlikely and novel means of social communication as the use of symbols. Understanding how we differ in the social negotiation of reproductive activities is likely to provide the most important clue to the forces that shaped our social communication.

Is there anything in the social context of hominid reproductive choices as unusual, compared to other species, as our distinctive mode of communicating? We are forced to turn to modern humans for the first clues, since the evidence of social behavior in our ancestors is only circumstantial at best. But despite the potential for getting misled by our own anthropocentric biases, this may not be a bad place to start, because it is likely that whatever first selected for this otherwise anomalous form of communication is still with us in some form. What trick of social engineering could have been so powerful and so peculiar in the history of animal communication that it required a totally novel form of communication? Such a trick—one that no other species has hit upon—is not likely to have been cast away too quickly in the subsequent evolution of our species.

What do we see when we take an “outsider’s” view of human reproduction and sexual selection? We have a tendency to view other animals’ social and reproductive relationships in the image of our own, and therefore to perceive what we do as normal reproductive behavior; but such comparisons are almost universally erroneous. We humans engage in some quite anomalous patterns of social interaction around the problem of sexual reproduction when compared to other species. This has important implications for that other human anomaly, language. To see how unusual we are in this regard, we need to look into that favorite distinction of anthropologists, the difference between mating and marriage. Consider three of the most consistent facts about human reproductive patterns:

Both males and females usually contribute effort toward the rearing of their offspring, though often to differing extents and in very different ways.

In all societies, the great majority of the adult males and females are bound by long-term, exclusive sexual access rights and prohibitions to particular individuals of the opposite sex.

They maintain these exclusive sexual relationships while living in modest to large-sized, multi-male, multi-female, cooperative social groups.



This pattern, of course, refers to marriage in its most general sense, though I do not mean to imply that monogamy is the rule—far from it—rather only that adult males and females are assigned (sometimes by their kin and sometimes by their own choosing, with the consent of the larger social group) to specific mates, often for life, and that this entails explicit exclusion of sexual access by other group members.2 Exactly who is included or excluded may differ from society to society, particularly along the polygynous dimension (e.g., one male, many female mates), but marriages everywhere have reproductive rights and obligations as their central content, and so specify the reproductive status of the marriage partners within the parameters of the wider community, both family and nonfamily. Marriage is more than a reproductive arrangement, because it additionally establishes new rights and obligations for the larger kin groups to which marrying individuals belong.

There are explicit rules about who can and can’t marry, and these rules have some highly predictable general patterns. In the vast majority of societies, incestuous marriage is prohibited, though what constitutes incest differs somewhat from society to society. Also, in all but a very few societies in the world, two males almost never have simultaneous sexual access to the same reproducing female.3 A major factor contributing to differences in marriage patterns in different societies is the comparative difficulty of obtaining and defending reproductive resources, including women in many societies. Thus, tacit and explicit marriage agreements are about reproductive access not only in the direct sense, but also in the broader sense in which kin group cooperation, property rights, and promises of mutual aid and defense must be understood as factors critical to reproductive success.

In societies that rely mostly on foraged foods, as did all of our prehistoric ancestors until just ten or fifteen thousand years ago, the opportunities to accumulate, appropriate, and defend resources are minimal. Thus, group warfare, competition for polygyny, consolidation of wealth or political power, and so on, were unlikely to have played any significant role in the early stages of symbolic communication. There is one feature of human foraging ecologies that has always stood out as specially related to human origins, because it is uncharacteristic of most other primate societies and because it is associated so closely with many indices of the rise of peculiarly humanlike behaviors. This is the use of meat. Recently, the classic “man the hunter” theories of human origins have been strongly criticized as too narrowly focused on the activities of less than half the members of a society, and because there is a compelling argument to be made for scavenging as the earliest hominid meat-use adaptation. Yet the importance of this radical shift in foraging ecology cannot be ignored. The appearance of the first stone tools nearly 2.5 million years ago almost certainly correlates with a radical shift in foraging behavior in order to gain access to meat. And this clearly marks the beginnings of the shift in selection pressures associated with changes in the brain relevant for symbolic communication. Something about this complex of adaptations is central to the rise of Homo symbolicus. But what? The key to unlocking this mystery, I think, does not have to do with the cognitive difficulties of hunting or the use of communication or increased intelligence for toolmaking. What is important about this shift to a novel food source is the unprecedented demands it placed on the whole fabric of social group organization.

Women in foraging societies provide at least as large a fraction of the calories in the diet as do the men, but a mother carrying a dependent infant makes a comparatively poor scavenger and an even poorer hunter. She suffers from reduced mobility and the difficulty of employing stealth with a young child or infant in tow. Even more limiting is the threat from competing predators and scavengers, who are also attracted by a kill, and might easily turn their attentions to a relatively poorly defended infant. Consequently, men can provide access to a resource that is otherwise unavailable to women and children. Why should this introduce any special conditions into hominid social evolution?

If meat provides a necessary component of the diet of foraging people, even if just to get through otherwise lean times when vegetable sources are poor, a woman foraging with one or more children would be unable to provide adequate essential resources. Under these circumstances, mothers with infants are dependent on hunting by the males for an important and concentrated food source to supplement other gathered foods. But in any species where males provide a significant contribution of resources to help raise infants, there are special selection pressures on certainty of sexual exclusivity and predictability of male provisioning. A female who can’t count on at least one male will have a high probability of losing her children to starvation and disease, and a male who can’t rely on exclusive sexual access to at least some female will have a high probability of supporting the genetic fitness of other males.

In most mammalian species, sexual access is either determined by rank and ongoing competition, and results in polygyny; or else it is a result of a courtship process in which two individuals become “attached” to one another, and then isolate themselves from other members of their species. In order to maximize paternity and minimize cuckoldry in competitive polygynous social groups, males will threaten and fight with potential sexual rivals. Rival males display and threaten the dominant individuals, and will engage in direct physical contests or fights in efforts to depose them and gain access to females. In pair-bonding species, aggression is also a means of enforcing sexual exclusion, but it is often employed by both sexes to keep same-sex interlopers away from their shared territory and their mate. Under these conditions, long-term—even life-long—sexual exclusion can be common. Thus, the social mechanisms for maintaining sexual exclusivity in other mammals are ubiquitous, and exclusive sexual access is often maintained by the threat of physical harm. Almost certainly, such sexually motivated defenses or attacks are among the most intense emotional events in an animals life.

Human reliance on resources that are relatively unavailable to females with infants selects not only for cooperation between a child’s father and mother but also for the cooperation of other relatives and friends, including elderly individuals and juveniles, who can be relied upon for assistance. The special demands of acquiring meat and caring for infants in our own evolution together contribute the underlying impetus for the third characteristic feature of human reproductive patterns: cooperative group living.

Group living is not uncommon in the rest of the primates and in other mammals generally, but it is almost exclusively associated with polygynous reproductive patterns, or very special contexts in which nest sites or breeding grounds are a very limiting resource.4 Reproductive access and reproductive exclusion are determined by ongoing competition in a social group. Males are able successfully to exclude others from sexual access for only a short time, when they are in their prime, so reproductive exclusivity is inevitably transient and unpredictable in mixed social groups. This is one reason why, under conditions where males must put a significant part of their energy into caring for offspring, male and female pairs tend to become isolated. The other reason is that a male contribution to the offspring is more critical in niches where resources are scarce and a larger social group would not have enough to go around. In human foraging societies, these conditions are not linked and pair bonding occurs in the context of group living. Resources are scarce enough that females can only rear their offspring with male support, and meat can only be acquired by groups of men. This pits two critical reproductive problems against one another: the importance of pair isolation to maximize the probability of sexual fidelity, and the importance of group size for access to a critical resource.

From foraging societies to agricultural societies to industrial societies, the same general sexual exclusion and residential patterns persist, despite shifts in the probability of polygyny. What is common to all is something that is exceedingly rare in other species: cooperative, mixed-sex social groups, with significant male care and provisioning of offspring, and relatively stable patterns of reproductive exclusion, mostly in the form of monogamous relationships. Reproductive pairing is not found in exactly this pattern in any other species. Why not? What’s so special or peculiar about this social arrangement? I think that the answer to this question offers important hints about the initial impetus for language evolution, though probably not in ways that anyone might expect. This pattern of social-sexual organization is rare because it tends to undermine itself in the course of evolution. The combination of provisioning and social cooperation produces a highly volatile social structure that is highly susceptible to disintegration.

In evolutionary terms, a male who tends to invest significant time and energy in caring for and providing food for an infant must have a high probability of being its father, otherwise his expenditure of time and energy will benefit the genes of another male. As a result, indiscriminate protection and provisioning of infants will not persist in a social group when there are other reproducing males around who do not provision, but instead direct all their efforts toward copulation. Group size is an important factor because the chance of cuckoldry increases with increasing numbers, even when most are pair-bonded. The probability of cuckoldry should translate into the male’s probability of abandoning a given female, so the complementary reproductive dilemma faced by females in these conditions is equally vexing.

In human foraging societies, meat offers a concentrated food source that is available far more reliably than fruit from season to season; but precisely when it should be most important for a female, when she is nursing an infant, she is least able to get it on her own. In order to be able to rely on this food source, she needs reliable provisioning from an individual or individuals not encumbered with an infant; a male or males. But a male, predisposed to provision females with whom he has copulated, will be an unreliable provider the more sexual access he has to other females. Cooperative hunting and scavenging by groups of males who each are provisioning one or more females and infants inevitably requires that groups of females live and forage cooperatively as well. Group living is a disadvantage both because of the proximity of many other sexually active females and because of their competing demands for the fruits of the hunt. In the face of these imminent reproductive threats, a female must find ways to ensure that some male will reliably provide her with meat and to minimize the probability of his opportunities for philandery.

These problems are further amplified in a context where males and females forage apart a significant fraction of the time. This is inevitable if hunting and scavenging are an important method of procuring food. Males pursuing meat on the savannah can’t defend against cuckoldry, can’t protect females from abduction, and can’t protect their infants from infanticide by outside males. Females can’t ensure that the males they depend on for meat are not copulating with females from another group and giving them meat that would otherwise have supported their own offspring. Hunting and provisioning go together, but they produce an inevitable evolutionary tension that is inherently unstable, especially in the context of group living. Besides ourselves, only social carnivores seem to live this way.

Most carnivores undertake significant food provisioning. But because hunting is a skill that requires a relatively mature body and takes a long time to learn effectively, there is a considerable period in the lifetime of carnivores when the young are too old to survive on mother’s milk and too young to hunt for themselves. Many species cache their babies in dens and hunt for food that they will bring back in some form to feed to the young. In some ways this is analogous to the situation of nesting birds. In some species of carnivores, males and females will pair-bond, and one will stay in the den (more often the female) while the other hunts and brings back some of the meat for the remaining mate and offspring. In other cases, where young can be safely cached, a single female can even raise her young without additional male investment. Such “single parenting” is common in some of the larger cats, such as the leopard and the cheetah. But there are also many carnivore species that engage in cooperative group hunting. Hunting in groups makes it possible to employ a wider range of hunting strategies and to prey on a wider class of animals, including those much larger than the predator itself. Social carnivores include wild dogs, wolves, hyenas, lions, and meer-cats, among others. Certain reproductive and ecological conditions must be met for cooperative hunting with provisioning to be a mutually reinforcing aspect of an evolutionarily stable reproductive pattern. A few examples can help to demonstrate this.

Lions are a well-known species of social hunters, but the cooperation and provisioning that take place largely occur among females within a pride who are likely all closely related (sisters, half sisters, aunts, nieces). Two and rarely three males may cooperate to take over a pride of females and their young from other males, and will defend it against intruders, but they play little role in provisioning the young. The females, however, may take turns remaining with cubs while the remainder of the adult females hunt cooperatively. Although the spoils of the hunt may be made available to the offspring of another female, she is a close relative. This relationship is also eventually reciprocated, since all adult females are reproducing, and maternity certainty is not in question. Because of the females’ kin-based common reproductive interests, their lifetime continuity of membership in a pride, their reciprocally shared defense and feeding of offspring, the males are largely irrelevant to offspring care, except in one way.

Male lions spend a good deal of time and risk their lives to defend the pride against other males, because the usurpers will likely kill the cubs. This infanticide brings lactating females back into estrus sooner and guarantees that the males will not be defending cubs who are not their own. Because males do not provide any significant provisioning to the cubs and have a common interest in female defense, cooperation between two or even three males in pride defense is also favored in evolutionary terms, so long as each has a roughly equal opportunity to mate. Common reproductive interests promote the evolution of cooperative behaviors between males and between females, for different reasons. The ability of the females to provision cubs without male contribution eliminates the value of paternity certainty, and thereby reduces the potentially disruptive effect of male-male copulatory competition within the pride.

In a few carnivore species—for example, wild dogs and wolves—it is common for a cooperative hunting pack to be made up of both males and females. After a kill they may carry bits of a carcass back to a home den, or devour it on the spot and regurgitate it later to feed cubs, the nursing mother, and nonhunting den mates. Young pups will induce the hunters to regurgitate by nipping at their mouths and mobbing them. The mother may also feed on regurgitated food. The crucial feature of these cooperative hunting arrangements is that there is typically only a single reproducing female, who is often also the mother of many of the young hunters. Other females are kept from attaining sexual receptivity by a combination of social behaviors and (probably) pheromones from the breeding female. Even infanticide of “illegitimate” pups may be used by dominant females to maintain their monopoly on the pack’s resources. Only when the mother dies or becomes too old to prevent another fully mature female from becoming sexually active will she be replaced. There is also typically only a single reproducing male in a pack.5 He also uses threat of attack, copulatory exclusion (copulatory “locking” together of male and female genitals for a period after mating to minimize sperm competition from potential rivals), and (possibly) pheromonal signals to suppress sexual behaviors of the other less dominant males.

Unlike lions, male wild dogs and wolves play a major role in provisioning the young even when they are not the father of any pups. There is probably reasonable certainty of caring for others’ offspring in these circumstances. This might appear to be an unstable reproductive strategy if looked at only in a single slice of time. However, as the mated pairs age and are replaced by younger ones, most individuals will get an opportunity to reproduce, and when they do, they will enjoy the benefits that group support confers by being able to raise litters that are much larger than a single female or mated pair alone could raise. Both males and females in these species employ a reproductive “strategy” that has one feature in common with that employed by males in highly polygynous, “tournament” species. Because of the intense male-male competition, males in highly polygynous species don’t gain access to females except for a very short period late in their lives when they have reached their peak fighting ability, but during this brief period they may be immensely successful reproducers. This “waiting” strategy can also lead to very prolific reproduction in social carnivores that rise in status to become reproducers.

The sociality of wild dogs and wolves may also gain additional evolutionary support from kin selection, in the form of “helper-at-the-nest” behavior. This works best when the provisioning individuals are siblings of the infants they provision. If the chances of successful reproduction are slim on your own, it pays to contribute to your parents’ sure thing. Offspring only leave to reproduce on their own when they are mature enough to have the possibility of procuring their own breeding territory and social group, when the advantages of sticking around are providing diminishing returns, or when the chances of inheriting the home territory are slim.

Wild dogs are far more efficient hunters in large groups, and eventually as the dominant reproducing males and females age they are replaced by younger individuals who at last can reap the benefits of being the core of a successful pack. Though they may not have reproduced for many years of their adult life, once they are reproducing they can be exceptionally successful, producing large litters in which the chance of survival to maturity will be quite good, given the support from a whole pack. They can make up in a short time for their “patience” earlier. If considerable excess meat were being produced, it would be advantageous for individuals to split off from the main group and start a separate pack rather than continue to provision another’s offspring, relative or not. Otherwise, contributing to the reproduction of other pack members, biding their time, is the most promising route to successful reproduction for nondominant males and females.

These interesting exceptions to the rule that “male provisioning of young is mutually exclusive of large group size and social cooperation” serve to clarify the underlying principles of such a relationship. Group living and male provisioning can occur together only in instances where reproductive access is completely limited and unambiguous, as in the case of social carnivores. There can be no stable compromise pattern unless this principle is somehow maintained. And even in these cases, we often find that the provisioning comes more consistently from siblings or related females than from potential fathers.

These special adaptations to this problem are critical clues to understanding the ancestral human situation because almost all human societies, beginning probably with Homo habilis and Homo erectus, are exceptions to the general rule. Identification of these hominid species with the shift from polygyny to mostly pair bonding is supported by evidence that the great difference in male and female body sizes among the australopithecines—sexual dimorphism—seems to reduce to modern proportions by the time of Homo erectus.6 This also coincides with the first development of stone tool technologies and the first increase in relative brain size above ape proportions (see Chapter 11). In the few other mammal species that appear to get around this constraint, it is accomplished by virtue of very distinctive social arrangements where specialized social communication plays a key role. In many of these species, we suspect that a major contributor may also be chemical communication—pheromones that may directly regulate the hormonal systems of group members. Unfortunately, as primates with diminutive smell organs, we humans are not well equipped for smell-governed social behavior. It should not be surprising, then, to discover that these intrinsically unstable reproductive arrangements in human societies are stabilized by a unique form of social communication, which can be as powerful and reliable as a social hormone.





A Symbolic Solution


The evolution of hunting among our distant hominid ancestors must be understood in this same social-reproductive context. Other primate species are known to eat meat. Both baboons and chimpanzees periodically capture young ungulates or monkeys and eat them, and chimpanzees have been regularly documented engaging in cooperative hunts. These hunts involve a group of males who intentionally stalk and surround a hapless monkey, cutting off all routes of escape, and then close in until one can grab the animal and kill or immobilize it long enough for others to join in for the grisly feast. But chimpanzee hunting behavior is considerably different from that of human hunter-gatherers in two major respects. First, all human hunters kill their prey and butcher the carcass with the aid of tools. Chimpanzees simply use their overpowering strength to immobilize their prey and dismember it, and use their longer, sharper canines to mortally wound and “butcher” it as they eat. Second, the meat that human hunters take from a felled animal is seldom all devoured on the spot, but rather is cut from the carcass and carried back to be shared with mothers, their young, and others who have not participated directly in the hunt. Chimpanzees engage in what might be called “trickle-down” provisioning of meat to females and their offspring. Only those females and their young who are in the vicinity of the kill site when the meat is being devoured will have a chance of gaining access to it. Typically, a male will allow a familiar female to beg away a remnant that is not prized.

Although we might consider meat as a source of provisioned food for chimpanzees, it is essentially a no-cost provisioning from the males’ perspective, and it is, at best, a sporadic and unreliable resource for females and their young. This may be more evident when we consider how chimpanzees’ hunting and sharing of meat differ in different conditions. Hunting probably increases during times of other food shortages, but the degree of sharing may also decrease during these times as well.

A kind of adventitious hunting and scavenging probably characterized the precondition for the evolution of stone-tool-assisted hunting, which appears to have begun about 2.5 million years ago. The transition to stone tool technology is evidence of a major change in the way meat was incorporated as a food resource. The manufacture and use of stone tools probably indicate that the use of meat took on a much more regular and necessary role in the diet of Pleistocene hominids, including a role as a regular food source for mothers with infants and young children.

Stone tools clearly reflect an important anatomical difference between early hominids and modern chimpanzees: early hominids did not have large canines. This is an unusual adaptation for a primate. Most primates have prominent canines that are used for threat displays, fighting, and to some extent for predator defense; this is true even for pair-bonding species such as gibbons. So why are canines almost completely reduced in all hominid ancestors, including australopithecines who appear to have been as sexually dimorphic as the most highly polygynous and feisty primates alive today? There is little agreement on this question. Some have suggested that it represents a reduction in male-male competition and fighting, or perhaps a shift to the use of hands and fists and wooden weapons. A reduction in male-male competition seems unlikely in the light of the extreme differences in body size of male as compared to female australopithecines, since this is an invariable indication of sexual selection on male fighting capacity with respect to mate competition. The argument that canines were replaced by “better” fighting implements also seems unable to offer a sufficient explanation. Even if we were to pretend that fists and sticks were better weapons than flesh-piercing canines, on the basis of being useful at a safer distance, it would hot select against this formidable last line of defense. What violent man would give up his knife for a club when he could have both? Canines didn’t just fade away; they must have been actively reduced by natural selection.

It seems likely that the loss of large canines in our australopithecine ancestors had more to do with eating than fighting. This is suggested by a look at the rest of the dentition in these species. The other atypical feature of early hominids’ teeth is their incredibly robust and heavily enameled molars. These large, flat grinding surfaces, supported in relatively massive jaws—particularly in the bigger australopithecine species—almost certainly reflect an adaptation for chewing fibrous or hard foods that require considerable masticatory preparation before they can be digested. This suggests that they were eating things like tubers, grain, or even bark and pith. But if these were the dietary mainstay, then maintaining large self-sharpening canines, which must be honed against their upper and lower counterparts as the jaw is opened and closed, would pose a serious problem. It would significantly reduce the lateral mobility of the jaw, which is essential for effective grinding. Constant chewing would also significantly wear away at large canines, and possibly even increase the chances for self-inflicted damage or mouth sores where the canines were repeatedly rubbed. No matter how you look at it, big canines and big grinding teeth do not often go together. The few nonprimate species that are able to manage both large canines and a grinding-feeding strategy grow their canines outward and forward (as in elephants and boars), but this seems not to have been an option for our ancestors, thank goodness. In summary, canines were reduced despite their benefits for aggression and defense.

Almost certainly, given their upright posture, there was a shift from the use of the teeth to a use of the hands and objects in male-male aggression and defense during the evolution of australopithecines, but this was likely a response to the reduction of canines and not its cause. Nevertheless, an increased use of the hands for aggressive displays and physical combat, especially if it involved objects (something also observed among chimpanzees), may have increased the likelihood that eventually some would come to use tools for scavenging and hunting, as well as for male-male competition. In fact, lacking large canines, australopithecines would have likely been quite poor carnivores, even compared to chimpanzees. Stone tools would have been the only means by which they could enter a niche where meat was an essential food source.

The early stone tools indicate a shift to a diet that contains more meat, whether hunted or partly scavenged (stolen from other predators). But why a shift to include more meat? What did it offer? Again, chimpanzee foraging and hunting may provide some hints. As we have noted, there is some evidence that chimpanzees’ hunting behaviors increase when other foods become more scarce. Meat is one alternative food source that can substitute for their preferred food, fruits. It is one component of a complex and variable feeding strategy. Chimpanzees are omnivorous: they eat leaves, insects, the new shoots of plants, bark, and even the pith from the centers of reedlike plants at various times of the year in different areas. Bark and pith are probably lowest on their preference hierarchy and are poor sources of nutrition. They are only turned to when all other foods become scarce, and they may serve more to provide bulk to stave off hunger than to provide nutrients. In fact, it is not clear how calorically expensive it is to extract these nutrients, in terms of processing the energy involved in finding, extracting, chewing, and digesting plant foods. Almost certainly there are diminishing returns if this strategy must be maintained for more than a month or two.

Chimpanzee hunting behavior also seems to increase during lean seasons, but unlike access to these other low-preference subsistence foods, meat is preferentially available to males. As a result, females and their dependent infants are probably the most affected during these periods. From an evolutionary point of view, intentionally directed provisioning of this now limited resource to a particular female and her offspring would carry few advantages to males, given their uncertainty of paternity. Nevertheless, in chimpanzees, there is some evidence of preferential sharing with certain females, and a suggestion that this may increase the chances of future matings between the sharing male and that female. This could offer some route for provisioning, but it would be indirect, irrespective of paternity, and secondary to the competition among males for female access. Such a selfish strategy has costs in terms of infant mortality rates, but the individual genetic/reproductive costs of adopting a nonselfish strategy pose a barrier to achieving a more efficient reproductive pattern overall. This equation could change, however, if scarcity were more extreme and more costly, or if away could be found to gain more reliable access to a high-value subsistence food like meat.

For chimpanzees, hunting is not a major strategy for maintaining reproductive efficiency in the face of significant food shortages during seasonal droughts, primarily because it is not equally available to adult males, females, juveniles, and infants. Hunting or scavenging for meat can only provide a viable strategy for surviving seasonal drought if (1) success is highly predictable and regular, and (2) meat supplements the diets of nursing females and their young offspring. A supplementary food source that is mostly available to adult males or nonreproducing females would offer little or no reproductive benefit to its consumers, if it meant that reproducing individuals suffered an increased mortality rate.

The acquisition and provisioning of meat clearly would be a better strategy for surviving seasonal shortages of more typical foods than shifting to nutrient-poor diets of pith, bark, and poor-quality leaves, as do modern chimpanzees. But this is only possible if there is a way to overcome the sexual competition associated with paternity uncertainty. The dilemma can be summarized as follows: males must hunt cooperatively to be successful hunters; females cannot hunt because of their ongoing reproductive burdens; and yet hunted meat must get to those females least able to gain access to it directly (those with young), if it is to be a critical subsistence food. It must come from males, but it will not be provided in any reliable way unless there is significant assurance that the provisioning is likely to be of reproductive value to the provider. Females must have some guarantee of access to meat for their offspring. For this to evolve, males must maintain constant pair-bonded relationships, and yet for this to evolve, males must have some guarantee that they are provisioning their own progeny. So the socio-ecological problem posed by the transition to a meat-supplemented subsistence strategy is that it cannot be utilized without a social structure which guarantees unambiguous and exclusive mating and is sufficiently egalitarian to sustain cooperation via shared or parallel reproductive interests. This problem can be solved symbolically.

We should not underestimate what can be represented by nonsymbolic means. Almost any objects or events or even particular qualities of objects or events can be signified without symbolic reference, using iconic or indexical means. The more carefully we look at the social behaviors of primates, the more examples we find of calls and gestures that serve to refer to specific types of objects and activities. These include alarm calls that distinguish between types of predators, food calls that distinguish between types of foods, and many less dramatic grunts and gestures that determine identity, social spacing, and behavioral intentions. Almost certainly, individuals who have been long associated with one another in the same social group also develop proficiency at interpreting each other’s subtle gestures and movements or characteristics of vocalization. Reports of the abilities of domesticated species to discern their master’s emotional states have been around for a long time, and are probably only a superficial glimpse into such species’ abilities to interpret the emotions of their own kind. Though there appear to be significant limitations on the numbers of innately preprogrammed calls and gestural signals that can evolve, the ability to supplement this by learning to anticipate the predispositions of specific individuals, and by acquiring certain habits of behavior conditioned by the context of others’ responses, has the power greatly to amplify this set. Even coordinated social behaviors like group hunting appear to be organized quite easily on the basis of animals’ abilities to learn to anticipate one another’s habits of behavior.

But certain things cannot be represented without symbols. Indexical communication can only refer to something else by virtue of a concrete part-whole link with it, even if this has no more basis than just habitual coincidence. Although there is a vast universe of objects and relationships susceptible to nonsymbolic representation, indeed, anything that can be present to the senses, this does not include abstract or otherwise intangible objects of reference. This categorical limitation is the link between the anomalous form of communication that evolved in humans and the anomalous context of human social behavior.

Ultimately, the stability of human social groups is dependent on reciprocity. A relationship in which individuals at times sacrifice reproductive opportunities to others so long as there is a high probability that others will do the same in return at a later date is called “reciprocal altruism.” Reciprocal altruism is found in other species, though it does not appear to be generally widespread. This is because a number of critical conditions must be met for it to persist, all having to do with guaranteeing the reliability of reciprocation. First, animals must be able to recognize individuals and remember their past behaviors. Second, they must be able to detect “cheaters” who do not reciprocate. Third, they must be able to exert control over the cheaters by withholding altruistic acts or ostracizing them. Ideally, there should be some means of preventing cheating from occurring in the first place. Fourth, the advantages gained by cheating must be significantly outweighed by the disadvantageous consequences of being “caught,” and the costs of detecting and “punishing” cheaters must not be too high. One feature of social organization that tends to reduce the threshold for the development of reciprocal altruism is social familiarity. Individuals that spend all their lives in each other’s company can come to recognize each other easily, and develop reliable expectations about each other’s future probability of altruism on the basis of past experiences. Other features that are conducive to the evolution of regular reciprocal altruism include a high degree of relatedness, so that inequities have relatively smaller genetic consequences, and a low cost of helping, so that little is risked at any one time. All in all, these are still rather restrictive conditions, and make reliance on reciprocal altruism as a critical reproductive component a rather fragile evolutionary strategy.

How could these requirements have been met in early hominine social groups in order to maintain a reciprocally exclusive pattern of reproductive and food-sharing relationships? From what we know of other primate social patterns, it can be assumed that these groups were long-term, relatively stable ones, where individuals could come to identify each other, and that their functioning probably depended on the cooperation of either related females and/or related males. But what about the identification of who is following the rule and who is not? Where food sharing is involved, the relationships are all symmetrical and immediate. Food is either given or not. But in the case of sexual relationships it may not be so clear what makes one individual available and another unavailable, if it is not simple physical availability and receptivity or threat of harm.

How can there be reciprocal altruistic access to mates? Essentially, each individual has to give up potential access to most possible mates so that others may have access to them, for a similar sacrifice in return. A reproductive balance must be struck, so that most males and females have a roughly equal probability of access to reproduction or provisioning (respectively), over the course of a lifetime, in order for cooperative provisioning to be a stable strategy. But if there is no unequivocal marker of allowable and unallowable sexual access, or appropriate and inappropriate sharing and provision of resources, how can anyone tell who is cheating and who is not? How does one tell who is obligated to whom?

The first requirement, then, is that there must be a means for marking exclusive sexual relationships in a way that all members of the group recognize. Sexual access and a corresponding obligation to provide resources are not just habits of behavior; they cannot be more or less predictable patterns, or just predictions of probable future behaviors. Sexual access is a prescription for future behaviors. No index or memory of past behaviors can represent this. Nor can any index of present social status or reproductive state mark it. Even the refusal or avoidance of sexual activity only indicates a current state and is not necessarily predictive. Sexual or mating displays are incapable of referring to what might be, or should be. This information can only be given expression symbolically. The pair-bonding relationship in the human lineage is essentially a promise, or rather a set of promises that must be made public. These not only determine what behaviors are probable in the future, but more important, they implicitly determine which future behaviors are allowed and not allowed; that is, which are defined as cheating and may result in retaliation.

The second problem is how to verify and guarantee the assent of the other individuals that could conceivably be involved, both as possible cheaters and as support against cheating. For a male to determine he has exclusive sexual access, and therefore paternity certainty, requires that other males also provide some assurance of their future sexual conduct. Similarly, for a female to be able to give up soliciting provisioning from multiple males, she needs to be sure that she can rely on at least one individual male who is not obligated to other females to the extent that he cannot provide her with sufficient resources. Unlike a pair bond in a species where the male and female remain isolated from other potential sexual competitors, establishing an exclusive sexual bond in a social setting is not just a relationship between two individuals. In the case of gibbon pairs in neighboring territories or pair-bonding birds that nest nearby other pairs, one aspect of maintaining the exclusive mating relationship may require that the female actively fends off other females and the male actively fends off other males that could be sexual competitors. This is only reliable when the mated pair tend to remain in the same vicinity. In the hominid case, however, where males are engaged in an activity that requires regular separation from females in order to hunt, mate guarding of this sort is not sufficient. Males and females must be able to rely both on the promise of a mate and, probably more importantly, on the support and threats of other males and females who are party to the social arrangement and have something to lose if one individual takes advantage of an uncondoned sexual opportunity.

In human societies, the breakdown of sexual exclusivity or even the threat of it often precipitates violent reprisals. Though this parallels interactions that are common in the social behaviors of other polygynous mammal species, the comparison is incomplete. Sexual jealousy may have the same roots in humans and other species, but in humans it involves something more abstract than just a threatening behavior. Though philandery, cuckoldry, and desertion are common consequences of reproductive competition in other species, adultery is more than this. It involves betrayal, and there can be no betrayal without prior explicit or tacit agreements. In nearly all societies, there are not only personal reprisals associated with sexual infidelity but also consequences imposed by the community. Even when explicit codes and punishments are not present in a society, those considered the victims of sexual infidelity are often allowed leeway to commit violent acts that might otherwise be proscribed.

The prevention of cuckoldry is partially supported by the potential of punishment from the entire social group. In no other species is there such direct involvement by the larger community in the maintenance of sexual exclusivity between individuals.7 The problem is how to organize group behavior around something as intangible as a desired future habit of behavior. Each individual must share knowledge of these expectations; but more important, each must also be able to rely on the support of other group members to prevent violations of these patterns of conduct.

What I am essentially describing is, of course, the skeleton of what we recognize as a marriage agreement. As anthropologists have recognized for generations, marriage is not the same as mating, and not the same as a pair bond. Unlike what is found in the animal world, it is a symbolic relationship. But it is also not just a reciprocal set of promises between two individuals regarding sexual access and economics. As the French anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss and many others have emphasized, it is also the establishment of alliances: promises and obligations that link a reproductive pair to the social groups of which they are a part, and often a set of promises and obligations between the kin groups from which they arise. Marriage contracts establish both vertical lineal symbolic relationships and horizontal affinal symbolic relationships. Marriage, in all its incredible variety, is the regulation of reproductive relationships by symbolic means, and it is essentially universal in human societies. It is preeminently a symbolic relationship, and owing to the lack of symbolic abilities, it is totally absent in the rest of the animal kingdom. What I am suggesting here is that a related form of regulation of reproductive relationships by symbolic means was essential for early hominids to take advantage of a hunting-provisioning subsistence strategy.

Establishing such social-sexual relationships cannot be accomplished by indexical communication alone, that is, by systems of animal calls, postures, and display behaviors, no matter how sophisticated and complex. And yet, even extremely crude symbolic communication can serve this need. Only a few types of symbols and only a few classes of combinatorial relationships between them are necessary. But without symbols that refer publicly and unambiguously to certain abstract social relationships and their future extension, including reciprocal obligations and prohibitions, hominids could not have taken advantage of the critical resource available to habitual hunters. The need to mark these reciprocally altruistic (and reciprocally selfish) relationships arose as an adaptation to the extreme evolutionary instability of the combination of group hunting/scavenging and male provisioning of mates and offspring. This was the question for which symbolization was the only viable answer. Symbolic culture was a response to a reproductive problem that only symbols could solve: the imperative of representing a social contract.





Ritual Beginnings


The near synchrony in human prehistory of the first increase in brain size, the first appearance of stone tools for hunting and butchery, and a considerable reduction in sexual dimorphism is not a coincidence. These changes are interdependent. All are symptoms of a fundamental restructuring of the hominid adaptation, which resulted in a significant change in feeding ecology, a radical change in social structure, and an unprecedented (indeed, revolutionary) change in representational abilities. The very first symbols ever thought, or acted out, or uttered on the face of the earth grew out of this socio-ecological dilemma, and so they may not have been very much like speech. They also probably required considerable complexity of social organization to bring the unprepared brains of these apes to comprehend fully what they meant.

The success of Sherman, Austin, and Kanzi at acquiring the ability to use symbolic reference in a limited fashion demonstrates that a modern human brain is not an essential precondition for symbolic communication. Chimpanzees who have learned a modicum of symbols in the laboratory have the benefit of dedicated researchers who can construct an elaborate training context. The first hominids to use symbolic communication were entirely on their own, with very little in the way of external supports. How, then, could they have succeeded with their chimpanzeelike brains in achieving this difficult result? How could a social environment have arisen spontaneously, which possessed the necessary supports for overcoming the immensely difficult and complicated task of teaching symbolic relationships to individuals whose brains were not only unprepared but resistant to learning them? The transition to nascent symbolic culture probably began in fits and starts, with innumerable evolutionary trials and errors, before some semblance of stability was achieved. Some intense social evolution must have been responsible for creating such a context. But what sort of a context was it? Are the requirements for support of symbol transmission in an ape society so unusual that their spontaneous evolution will stretch credulity?

The ape symbol-training experiments provide an indication of what these requirements might be. First, they demonstrate that solving the problem requires a way of maintaining attention on many related indexical associations simultaneously, a way to shift attention to token-token relationships, and an ability selectively to suppress attention on immediate token-object associations. Like the chimps, early hominids were forced to learn a set of associations between signs and objects, repeat them over and over, and eventually unlearn the concrete association in favor of a more abstract one. This process had to be kept up until the complete system of combinatorial relationships between the symbols was discovered. What could have possibly provided comparable support for these needs in the first symbol-learning societies?

In a word, the answer is ritual. Indeed, ritual is still a central component of symbolic “education” in modern human societies, though we are seldom aware of its modern role because of the subtle way it is woven into the fabric of society. The problem for symbol discovery is to shift attention from the concrete to the abstract; from separate indexical links between signs and objects to an organized set of relations between signs. In order to bring the logic of token-token relationships to the fore, a high degree of redundancy is important. This was demonstrated in the experiments with the chimpanzees Sherman and Austin. It was found that getting them to repeat by rote a large number of errorless trials in combining lexigrams enabled them to make the transition from explicit and concrete sign-object associations to implicit sign-sign associations. Repetition of the same set of actions with the same set of objects over and over again in a ritual performance is often used for a similar purpose in modern human societies. Repetition can render the individual details of some performance automatic and minimally conscious, while at the same time the emotional intensity induced by group participation can help focus attention on other aspects of the objects and actions involved. In a ritual frenzy, one can be induced to see everyday activities and objects in a very different light.

This aspect of many ritual activities is often explicitly recognized as a means to help participants discover the “higher meaning” of the otherwise mundane, while at the same time promoting group solidarity. Thus, many ritual activities, from repeated prayer to pubertal initiation ceremonies, quite explicitly take the form of an ideal symbol discovery process. Of course, in all societies of modern humans, most ritual activities are in service of complex symbolic ideas and institutions. They are self-consciously employed for their ability to help define abstract social relationships and inculcate certain habits of thought and action. They are not, in this regard, good models of the earliest symbolic rituals. But they demonstrate one of the major ways that societies establish some of their most difficult symbolic precepts. In general, it is probably fair to conclude that the more difficult the social symbolic problem—either because of intrinsic conceptual difficulties or because of the intensity of the countervailing social forces that must be mediated—the more likely that highly ritualized means will be required to establish appropriate symbolic responses.

One of the most difficult social symbolic relationships to mediate is peace. This is not so much because of a conceptual difficulty, but rather because of the high potential and high cost of deception. The problem of establishing peace after a period of war also demonstrates the importance of the indexical substructure of a symbolic social relationship. Agreements and contracts concerning future behaviors and obligations are intrinsically symbolic. Because the referential link between symbols and their objects is indirect, the very same features that make symbolic reference the only means for definitively representing something that is as abstract and virtual as a promise or contract also open the door to misrepresentation and falsehood. The problem lies in determining whether a symbolic gesture for peace is made in earnest, particularly when it comes from a former enemy who in other circumstances may have employed misrepresentation and misdirection as a ploy.

An interesting example of this comes from the Yanomamö Indians of the rain forests of Venezuela and northern Brazil.8 These slash-and-burn agriculturists live in small, lightly fortified villages with nearby gardens. Such villages are almost constantly at war with each other, and skirmishes are often initiated by surprise attacks. But there are times when it is necessary to cooperate with one’s neighboring villages: for example, when a garden is becoming overgrown and unproductive, and it will soon be necessary to abandon one village and create a new one. At times like these a Yanomamö group might be at high risk of attack. How do you make peace in order to gain allies at this crucial time and decrease the chances of attack? Peacemaking is a difficult problem no matter what the conditions. It is a situation where the major communicative problems are not due to a lack of symbolic ability, but rather because no one is sure that others are using the symbols honestly. The situation is similar to not having reliable symbolic reference at all. What is necessary in order to reestablish reference—to ground it in the real world so to speak—is a reconstruction of the symbolic relationship from its component indexical relationships.

Demonstrating true symbolic reference is analogous to establishing symbolic reference in the first place. Symbols refer to relationships among indices, and are learned by first establishing these indexical associations. Regrounding questionable symbolic reference similarly requires a return to the indices on which it is based. So the question is: What system of indices does peace represent? Indications that members of the groups are not hostile. Indications that they would not engage in violent behavior even if the opportunity were to present itself. And possibly indications that they are disposed to cooperate with one another. Unlike symbols, indices are part of what they refer to, and this makes them reliable in ways that symbols are not.

In the case of the Yanomamö peacemaking process, an elaborate ritual provides the indices that are required. It is known as a “Feast.” First, the hosts who wish to make peace prepare a meal. When their guests are due to arrive, dressed as for war and carrying their weapons, the hosts put their weapons away and the men recline on their hammocks waiting for the guests to enter their village. The guests enter, dancing and chanting, and circle around the camp stopping in front of each host. There they ritually threaten them, raising an ax or drawing a bow and arrow. The hosts must remain unmoved, trying to show no fear and no offense at provocative remarks. After this has been repeated for a while (and latent hostilities have not erupted in violence), the roles are reversed. The guests recline in hammocks, their weapons hidden away, while the hosts circle around the camp dancing and ritually threatening their guests. Finally, when it is clear that nothing untoward is likely to happen, they break off and the guests are offered food. Later they may chant together, barter and exchange goods, or even arrange a marriage.

Notice the similarity to the process that helped the chimps Sherman and Austin over their own symbolic threshold. In a Feast, the participants establish the symbolic relationship of “being at peace” by posing the opportunity of its opposite. Assume the opposite and show that it is not true, or discover that it is. Like the trick used to push the chimpanzee to symbol discovery, the Feast constructs an abstract symbolic relationship using a sort of reductio ad absurdum strategy. Peace and war are negations of one another (not intending to kill and intending to kill); but being unable to trust the symbolic invocation of these abstract relationships, it is necessary to reconstitute the underlying system of negations in a controlled and complete manner. Peace is a generalization over each of the symptoms of being in a state of war (a sort of induction from them), and is only as firm as the indices that implicitly support it. This is a problem that does not go away with better symbolic systems. Establishing peace only gets more complex as societies get more complex. And the indices that are required to produce it only get more difficult to demonstrate fully, as the present state of the world amply shows.

This is an instructive example of how social contracts are implicitly symbolic. As a result, they depend on the same logic of symbol construction that is required at all levels of symbol learning. In either case, extra effort is required to provide the crucial indices in context with each other in such a way that the categorical negation relationships between them are explicitly juxtaposed. This parallel between symbols that are difficult to believe and those that are difficult to grasp also brings us back to ritual. The ritual context allows highly redundant, therefore reliable, associations between the markers of these relationships to become established. Because of this, it is possible to abandon reliance on the indexical associations themselves and come to rely on the symbolic (but virtual) reference to hold. Similarly, symbolic relationships that are difficult to grasp (as in the training of Sherman and Austin) require the highly organized and repetitive presentation of relevant patterns of indexical associations in order to help with the process of discovering the implicit higher-order logic of which they are instances. Not surprisingly, some of the most complex rituals in all societies grow out of efforts to convey some of the most intangible and ineffable symbolic notions: the meaning of existence, the nature of God, what it means to be a member of a particular ethnic tradition, and so on. They are different faces of the very same process, pushed to extremes either by learning difficulties or by mistrust of the virtual reference that symbols provide.

For a hominid species with a fairly typical ape brain, such as the first symbol users must have possessed, any symbolic learning would have been conceptually difficult. Moreover, the social dilemma in need of a stable solution is the sexual equivalent of warfare. In evolutionary terms, mistrust should be built into our sexual emotional responses, as indeed every daytime television soap opera suggests. Around the world, infidelity or the suspicion of cuckoldry is a major cause of violence and homicide. It is what comes of living in this otherwise unstable reproductive context. Thus, both in cognitive terms and in terms of the stakes involved, the otherwise simple symbols which establish the reproductive relationships that are at the core of human societies demand highly ritualized construction processes. Ritualized support is also essential to ensure that all members of a group understand the newly established contract and will behave accordingly. As in peacemaking, demonstrating that these relationships exist and providing some way of marking them for future reference so that they can be invoked and enforced demand the explicit presentation of supportive indices, not just from reproductive partners but from all significant kin and group members. Given both the cognitive and the social difficulties, it wouldn’t be surprising to find that the earliest social symbols for establishing reproductive roles were created in a ritual reductio ad absurdum.

Marriage and puberty rituals serve this function in most human societies (though modern societies replace many of these concrete social symbolic rituals with more abstract religious and legalistic ones). The symbol construction that occurs in these ceremonies is not just a matter of demonstrating certain symbolic relationships, but actually involves the use of individuals and actions as symbol tokens. Social roles are redefined and individuals are explicitly assigned to them. A wife, a husband, a warrior, a father-in-law, an elder—all are symbolic roles, not reproductive roles, and as such are defined with respect to a complete system of alternative or complementary symbolic roles. Unlike social status in other species, which is a more-or-less relationship in potential flux, symbolic status is categorical. As with all symbolic relationships, social roles are defined in the context of a logically complete system of potential transformations; and because of this, all members of a social group (as well as any potential others from the outside) are assigned an implicit symbolic relationship when any one member changes status.

Out of these ritual processes for constructing social symbolic relationships, symptoms of the process itself (exchanged objects, body markings, etc.) can be invested with symbolic reference. Tokens that served an indexical purpose within the ritual symbol construction become symbolic because of it. Rings, ceremonial clothing, and ritual scarring are indices of having participated in a symbolic transition, and thereby can become symbols of the same relationship. Given the universality of human marriage and its embedding ritual and ceremony, it seems reasonable to imagine that hints of the original logical structure of the first symbolic rituals still echo in the marriages men and women make today.

The earliest forms of symbolic communication were therefore likely not speechlike or manual sign languages. They almost certainly included vocalizations along with conventional/ritual gestures, activities, and objects, all of which together formed a heterogeneous melange of indices transformed to symbols, each systematically dependent on the other, and defining a closed set of possible types of relationships. Vocal symbolizing in the earliest stages would probably have played a minor role, owing to the lack of descending motor control until brain size increased. Probably not until Homo erectus were the equivalents of words available. Since these individuals had brains that begin to approach the modern range, it is almost certain that they had some degree of vocal skill, and used it symbolically. What drove this shift to speech was not just constraints on the ease of use of objects and performances and manual gestures, but also the reciprocal effect of cortical enlargement in response to the demands of symbol learning and the consequences for manual and vocal flexibility. Physical object symbols are constrained to highly specific uses and contexts—e.g., use as physical icons or markers—and tend to keep complex performance symbols confined to use in specialized ritual contexts. The manipulation of vocalizations and hand gestures would have been far less constrained. The social evolution of symbolic communication would have selected against symbol systems that required the use of tokens (individual symbol objects or acts) that are difficult to produce or combine in a wide range of circumstances. Speech is by far the least constrained in these ways, and would have come to replace other token systems by social evolution alone as the neurological constraints loosened. The complicated co-evolution of social selection favoring vocalization, along with manipulative-cognitive demands of tool use and symbol learning, would have guaranteed that vocal symbols would not have waited to burst on the evolutionary scene late in the process. More likely a continual drift toward increasingly self-sufficient vocal symbol systems—languages—has always required using our articulatory abilities to their limits.

Nevertheless, we should not lose sight of the fact that symbols are still extensively tied to ritual-like cultural practices and paraphernalia. Though speech is capable of conveying many forms of information independent of any objective supports, in practice there are often extensive physical and social contextual supports that affect what is communicated. Language acquisition still relies on an extensive gamelike ritualization and regimentation of the symbol acquisition context, although the child’s uniquely human computational supports enable this process to take place without explicit reductio ad absurdum grounding of all symbols and possible combinations in the system.

In conclusion, then, the theory of symbolic origins I have outlined is not just a new twist on Rousseau’s “social contract” theory. It is not a theory of the origins of social behavior, but of the translation of social behavior into symbolic form. More important, it is not a scenario for how our intelligence triumphed over our reproductive competition, but rather how unique demands of reproductive competition and cooperation created the conditions that led to our unique form of intelligence. By answering the evolutionary question of how to take advantage of a new foraging trick, our ancestors unwittingly turned the tables of natural selection so that social evolution could reshape the brain in its own image. We reflect on this from the other end of an extensive co-evolutionary process, where the indispensable uses of symbolic communication as a social organizing tool were long ago relegated to being only one among a multitude of selection pressures mutually converging on making this communication more and more efficient. Two and a half million years of sustained selection in an unprecedented socio-ecological niche, maintained by an unprecedented communicational and cognitive trick have taken us far from these beginnings in both the physical changes in the brain that resulted and in the mental and cultural world that co-evolved with them. Figure 12.1 summarizes the parallel threads of adaptation that have ratcheted each other onward in this co-evolutionary process.

This brings us full circle to reconsider the other side of the paradox that began this book: the lack of simple languages in animals and humans. Human languages are immensely complicated and yet easily learned and used. The evolution of language was not the result of simply surmounting the symbolic problem. Solving this problem opened up a whole new realm of adaptive problems, all dependent on efficient and successful symbolic communication. This long co-evolutionary heritage has not just resulted in symbolic communication becoming easier and more efficient, but these simplifications of the task have upped the ante so that ever more efficient acquisition and ever more powerful employment of symbolic communication were an imperative. Although the problem of language origins cannot be answered in terms of a transition from simple to complex, or from less intelligent to more, it is clear that what has resulted is both an incredible enhancement of intellectual abilities and a competence to use a very complex mode of communication.

The origins of the first symbolic communication have nothing intrinsically to do with language per se. Most of the details that characterize modern languages have other later evolutionary causes. The argument I have presented is only an argument for the conditions which required symbolic reference in the first place, and which selected for it despite the great difficulties and costs of collectively producing and maintaining it. Much of the story of this intermediate evolutionary history, extending for over 2 million years from language origins to the present, has yet to be even imagined in any clarity. But putting evolutionary causes and effects in appropriate order and precisely identifying the anatomical correlates of this transition are a prerequisite for providing anything beyond “just so” versions of the process. The key to this is the co-evolutionary perspective which recognizes that the evolution of language took place neither inside nor outside brains, but at the interface where cultural evolutionary processes affect biological evolutionary processes.



Figure 12.1 Timelines of the correlates of brain-language co-evolution in hominid evolution from Australopithecus through Homo habilis and Homo erectus to Homo sapiens. The approximate epochs of each major recent hominid group are indicated by different gray backgrounds; the width of the bars indicates increasing importance/development of the respective features.

The evolution of symbolic communication is special in this regard. It created a mode of extrabiological inheritance with a particularly powerful and complex character, and with a sort of autonomous life of its own. It is for this reason that the co-evolutionary process has played such a major role in shaping human brains and minds. It is simply not possible to understand human anatomy, human neurobiology, or human psychology without recognizing that they have all been shaped by something that could best be described as an idea: the idea of symbolic reference. Though symbolic thinking can be entirely personal and private, symbolic reference itself is intrinsically social. Not only do we individually gain access to this powerful mode of representation through interactions with other members of the society into which we are born, but symbols themselves can be traced to a social origin. Our uniquely human minds are, in a very concrete sense, the products of an unusual reproductive challenge that only symbolic reference was able to address—a concrete internalization of an ancient and persisting social evolutionary predicament that is uniquely human.
