CHAPTER THIRTEEN


A Serendipitous Mind


The real danger is not that computers will begin to think like men, but that men will begin to think like computers.

—Sydney J. Harris





The Fail-Safe Computer


Consider how remarkable it is that almost no human being fails to acquire at least some degree of rudimentary symbolic-linguistic ability—even in the face of considerable perinatal brain damage. Severely retarded people sometimes possess only crude grammatical abilities and a small vocabulary or exhibit difficulty articulating words and sentences, and yet they generally still understand the symbolic content of words and simple sentences. Contrast this with the near unlearnability of symbols by other species, even apparently very intelligent species. This book began by considering the curious lack of natural symbolic systems in all nonhuman species, the limited capacity to gain symbolic understanding in most, and the failure of domesticated animals—immersed in the dense web of human symbolic interactions—to discover more than a few rote associations of words and phrases. What are the implications of this species difference and its associated neurological basis?

Evolution has widened the cognitive gap between the human species and all others into a yawning chasm. Taken together, the near-universal failure of nonhumans and the near-universal success of humans in acquiring symbolic abilities suggest that this shift corresponds to a major reassignment of cognitive resources to help overcome natural barriers to symbol learning. Other species’ failures at symbol learning do not result from the lack of some essential structure present only in human brains. As we have seen, chimpanzees can, under special circumstances, be brought to understand symbolic communication, though at best on a comparatively modest scale. The difference between symbolic and nonsymbolic communication may be a categorical difference in semiotic terms, but the neurological basis of our symbolic advantage is not due to a categorical difference in brain structure, only to a quantitative rearrangement of existing parts. Nevertheless, this shift in proportions spans a critical learning threshold that stands between indexical associations and symbolic reference. Although it is possible for other species to cross this threshold by learning and unlearning sets of associations in just the right way, it is incredibly unlikely. Yet in humans, a restructuring of the brain has acted like a catalyst, making the immensely improbable nearly inevitable.

In evolutionary terms, it would be accurate to say that the genetic basis for symbol-learning abilities has been driven to “fixation.” In other words, it has become a universal trait of the species. Though there may be variations in this ability among people, essentially all of this variability is above the threshold necessary for acquiring symbols. Whenever most variation of a trait is eliminated, we can usually assume that selection for it has been and still is intense. There must have been some very significant reproductive advantages to symbol acquisition, and severe reproductive costs in cases of failure to acquire symbols. An individual born into a symbolic culture with an ape’s bias against acquiring symbolic associations would be deprived of access to most realms of know-how and social influence, and have little chance to reproduce successfully. The ancestral lineages that succeeded best and left the most progeny were those in which symbolic abilities were able to develop despite a wide range of interfering influences. Language acquisition had to become fail-safe. After 2 million years it has clearly reached this status.

The simplest way to make something fail-safe is to design it far beyond the basic requirements. To ensure that a physical structure is totally safe, for example, it must be designed to handle loads that are far greater than those it would normally be called upon to support. It must be built to exceed the requirements of its one most extreme load, not the average load. In a word, it must be overbuilt. I want to suggest that the neuroanatomical evidence of massively altered brain proportions and the anthropological and clinical evidence for universality of symbol learning across a wide spectrum of circumstances indicate that the human brain has been significantly overbuilt for learning symbolic associations. Human brain structure is an exaggerated reflection—a caricature almost—of the special demands imposed by symbol learning. We are not just adapted for symbol learning, but for fail-safe symbol learning.

This symbol-learning insurance policy is provided by a comparatively overdeveloped prefrontal cortex, whose connections have gained the upper hand in numerous synaptic competitions throughout the brain. The extraordinary extent of this disproportional feature reflects its overdesign. It is a not-so-subtle clue to the central learning problems that make symbolic associations so hard for other species: the learning of higher-order conditional associations. But overbuilding for this one function has other consequences. The shift in cognitive strategy that underlies the assurance of symbol learning surfaces in a wide range of otherwise unrelated learning and attentional processes. If this exaggerated adaptation were merely a specialized sensory template or innately preprogrammed motor output, its effects might have been more domain-specific; instead, this peculiar adaptation has a largely supramodal character. It extends its influence into many learning realms. Symbolic abilities were recruited to serve other social and pragmatic functions than those which selected for their initial appearance. These ultimately became parallel “amplifiers” of the symbol-learning adaptations of the brain. This also applies to the component neurological biases that have made symbol learning fail-safe. Once present, these biases have become powerful sources of social evolutionary selection, independently recruited for functions in novel domains unrelated to language.

Important insights into the peculiarly human cognitive style have recently been provided by studies of the cognitive abilities of captive chimpanzees and other primates. Though the more carefully other primates’ mental abilities are investigated, the more they seem able to do, some curiously simple tasks elude them. One characteristic example has recently been described by Sally Boysen of Ohio State University.1 She set up a problem that chimpanzees could not seem to solve. Given a choice between two different-sized piles of a desirable food (like candy), chimpanzees consistently choose the larger pile, just as human children do. Boysen complicated matters by giving the larger pile not to the chimp who chose it but to a second chimp. In effect, one chimp was asked to choose the pile another would get, and by default, which would be left for himself.

When human children are presented with similar choices, most of them quickly catch onto the trick and learn to choose the smaller pile to give away (though infants under two years also have difficulty with the problem). Chimps, however, have extraordinary difficulty discovering the winning strategy. They repeatedly choose the larger pile, only to watch in agitated dismay as it is given away. Of course, one could argue that the chimps are just very unselfish creatures, but their emotional response suggests that generosity is not what they have in mind. I suspect that the task poses a difficulty, not because the chimps are ambivalent about sharing or cannot assess what they want, and probably not because they fail to comprehend the likely outcome after repeated trials, but because the presence of such a salient reward undermines their ability to use the stimulus information against itself. Being completely focused on what they want, they seem unable to stand back from the situation, so to speak, and subjugate their desire to the pragmatic context, which requires them to do the opposite of what they would normally do to achieve the same end. This is a very counterintuitive association for chimps to learn, because the indirect solution is overshadowed by the very powerful influence of its mutually exclusive and otherwise obvious alternative. The highly rewarding nature of the stimulus also reinforces the power of the competing association.

The chimps in Boysen’s study were also trained to associate Arabic numerals with differing quantities, and succeeded in transferring these token-quantity associations to tests in which they used the tokens to make choices between larger or smaller piles of candies.2 These experiments showed that when numerals were used instead of actual piles of candies, the chimps could learn to choose the one associated with less, and thus get the larger pile. Were the chimps able to use symbolic numeric information to overcome this cognitive “conflict”? Possibly, but a simpler account is sufficient to explain the result. If the chimps learned that the numerals were indices associated with perceived differences of quantity, choosing the lowest numeral to get the highest number of candies need no longer be interpreted as a “choose the pile you don’t want” problem. When this associated stimulus is used in place of the candy, the chimp merely needs to learn which numerals correlate with getting the larger reward to succeed. It could thus be treated as a transfer learning problem of a particularly difficult form, because it requires a reversal of the pattern of associations. Irrespective of whether a chimp (or child) uses an indexical or a symbolic solution to this problem, the experiment clearly demonstrates how the indirectness of indexical and symbolic reference helps to reduce the power of the stimulus (icon) to drive behavior. Ascending the representational hierarchy progressively frees responses from stimulus-driven immediacy, thus creating space for the generation and consideration of alternatives.

Choosing the opposite of what you want has all the hallmarks of tests that tend to be sensitive measures of prefrontal cortex damage in humans (similar incapacities to resist impulsive choices in patients with prefrontal damage are described by Antonio Damasio in his book Descartes’ Error). It demonstrates the importance of this brain structure in shifting from a more “natural” habitual response to one that is its opposite; but more important, it also demonstrates that this requires overcoming the emotional immediacy of powerful reinforcers. The more powerful the past reinforcement and the more salient the competing alternatives, the more difficult the shift and the greater the need for prefrontal bias. This emphasizes the complex interdependency of the emotional as well as cognitive aspects of learning, and the special role that prefrontal cortex plays in both realms.

Am I suggesting that chimpanzees are like human patients with brain damage? Only in a metaphoric sense. Though healthy chimpanzees have well-developed and intact prefrontal lobes, and can solve many similar perspective-reversal and response-inhibition problems that other species can’t, they run into difficulty when the power and salience of the alternatives are great. It is only when the solution to a problem demands dominance of prefrontal activities over very strong alternative tendencies that the greater prefrontal dominance in humans becomes evident. Indeed, it is in predicaments where the most intense impulses for immediate personal reward or self-protection are overcome in service of larger aims that we recognize some of the most exalted expressions of humanity. A bias may only be a matter of degree, but in certain contexts the degree of prefrontal bias can make the difference between success and failure. This appears to be the case with symbol learning.

Of course, nothing is entirely fail-safe, and there are certain examples of abnormal human mental development where the human prefrontal bias seems to have been compromised, with both cognitive and emotional consequences. One such example is autism. Autism was discussed in Chapter 9 as an example of symbol acquisition difficulties, but correlated with this there are often both islands of spared “special” abilities and characteristic features of emotional impulsiveness, asociality, and stereotypic ritualized behavior. Islands of spared or enhanced ability occur most often in the realms of spatial cognition, artistic talents, numerical skills, mnemonic fetishes, and even music. Such people are so-called idiot savants or autistic savants, like the character portrayed in the popular film Rain Man. We see in these cases a distorted reflection of what we generally consider to be genius. It is interesting that the most commonly recognized child prodigies tend to be those gifted with mathematical, artistic, or musical abilities. What unites all of these domains is a formal combinatorial system in which it is possible to produce results without interpreting them. Sums can be computed automatically, music can be learned by rote. Interpretation may even get in the way. Both mathematical prodigies and idiot-savant “lightning calculators” seem to do in their heads what normal people can only do with considerable external notational support and much more time. One might characterize the theory I have proposed about language abilities in these terms: prefrontal overdevelopment has made us all savants of language and symbolic learning. While still immature and exhibiting very limited learning abilities in most realms, two- and three-year-old children spontaneously solve symbol-learning problems “in their heads” that other species find essentially impossible even with considerable outside human support.

We humans are all like autistic savants in one other sense. We tend to apply our one favored cognitive style to everything. Like the character portrayed in Rain Man, who sees the world in terms of numbers of objects, we cannot help but see the world in symbolic categorical terms, dividing it up according to opposed features, and organizing our lives according to themes and narratives. From anthropologists studying the mythologies and kinship systems of diverse cultures to developmental psychologists studying young children’s fascination with negation and use of it to regularize an inconsistent language experience or test social rules, we see not just a receptivity to symbolic relationships but a propensity to employ the biases that make symbols possible. We find pleasure in manipulating the world so that it fits into a symbolic Procrustean bed, and when it does fit and seems to obey symbolic rules, we find the result comforting, even beautiful.

But also like the autistic savant, we find that this global shift in cognitive strategy has other serendipitous consequences as well, which extend far beyond the realm of language.





The Sphinx


If language evolution correlated with a restructuring of the human brain on a global level, then there should be important consequences for a theory of the human mind and human nature. On the one hand, if language evolved as the result of the addition to the brain of a modular device whose effect on cognition was confined to a specialized domain, such as grammar and syntax, then we would be justified in thinking of human nature as apelike, except in this one context. We could consider ourselves as chimpanzees-with-grammar. On the other hand, if the changes in the human brain were no more than a consequence of increasing brain size and general intelligence, then we would be justified in considering ourselves genius chimpanzees and thinking of chimpanzees as though they were dull and inept humans. Both of these caricatures of our place in nature have found widespread appeal over the years in popular expositions and even in the scientific literature. But the problem of comprehending where we fit in the context of the evolution of mind is considerably more difficult than either one suggests. Nonhuman minds are not just human minds with some special ability subtracted, nor are they human minds that are just considerably more dull and uninformed. Both views minimize the comparison problem.

The human case is difficult because we can neither rely on the logic of language to explain what happened to the brain, nor can we rely on some incremental increase in a general feature found in other species. Thus, when we use hindsight to analyze our own cognitive evolution—subtracting specific abilities or reducing overall thinking power—the simpler minds that we imagine as a result turn out to be both distorted images of ourselves and poor images of our ancestors and ape relatives. We end up misrepresenting other species’ minds and not recognizing the oddities of our own. The result is an imaginary chimeric creature like those drawn in medieval bestiaries, half human, half animal, with a human head and an animal body like the Sphinx of ancient Egypt.

Because the human brain is organized differently, so is the mind that it gives rise to. The ways we think are the result of a new way of using the brains resources. Brain-language co-evolution has significantly restructured cognition from the top-down, so to speak, when compared to other species. The prominent enlargement of prefrontal cortex and the correlated shifts in connection patterns that occurred during human brain evolution introduced strong biases into the learning process and gave human prefrontal circuits a greater role in many neural processes unrelated to language. Though intense selection was directed toward this one aspect of mind and brain, its secondary effects have also ramified to influence the whole of human cognition. Human beings approach the world of sensory stimuli and motor demands differently from other species, particularly with respect to higher-order learning processes, and these differences are evident even when our symbolic-linguistic abilities are uninvolved.

Let’s begin with one of the most direct counterparts to language: our nonlinguistic vocal communication. With the evolution of language, there would inevitably have been changes in selection pressures affecting the hominid call repertoire. These changes would probably have included reduced selection for referential specificity, since such functions would have been better supported by symbolic communication. There would also be selection for changes in call and display functions that would be complementary to language functions. The effects of these selection pressures would have been unique to human evolution. In addition, there were likely incidental effects on the hominid vocal repertoire as a result of changes in vocalization circuits at the midbrain and brain stem levels.

Most species of primates have a modest repertoire of innate stereotypic calls; estimates range from fifteen to forty by different researchers studying different primate species. Though a small repertoire compared to human vocabularies, it seems large when compared to the few innate human vocalizations. These include laughing, sobbing, screaming with fright, crying with pain, groaning, and sighing. It is difficult to think of others. The list is embarrassingly small compared to call types cited for other primates. Although these primate estimates may be inflated by analytical subdivisions, and this human list does not include any variant subtypes, even conservative estimates of primate calls probably exceed the human repertoire in size. Human calls are not just suppressed or replaced by language. And transiently expressed calls are not produced by infants or released in adults as a consequence of cortical aphasia, though curses and expletive phrases may be.

Speech prosody is essentially a mode of communication that provides a parallel channel to speech. As we noted earlier, there are a number of reasons to suspect that this has been recruited from ancestral call functions. Like these systems, prosodic features are primarily produced by the larynx and lungs, and not articulated by the mouth and tongue. Though tonal shifts can be used as phonemes, the changes in tonality, volume, and phrasing that constitute prosodic features are most often produced without conscious intention. There are also likely to be many universal patterns of prosodic expression, though I am aware of few that have been systematically investigated. Finally, the communicative content of prosodic signals parallels that of other stereotypic vocalizations: they are symptomatic of arousal level, emotional states, and attention. But unlike calls of other species, prosodic vocal modification is continuous and highly correlated with the speech process. It is as though the call circuits are being continuously stimulated by vocal output systems. This may literally be the case. Displacement of midbrain axonal connections by cortical efferents likely includes prefrontal projections to midbrain and brainstem nuclei that also receive limbic and diencephalic inputs and contribute to stereotypic vocal displays in other species. Prefrontal output would be particularly likely to reflect rapid shifts in arousal and attention because of its role in organizing and anticipating the ordering and associative processes in speech production.

Laughter and sobbing are two innate human calls that are quite distinctive from those produced by other species. They are characterized by many invariant features in all normal humans. Their motor programs, like those of most primate calls, appear to depend on localized midbrain and brain stem circuits, and they are principally activated by limbic structures of the forebrain. They are the first two social vocalizations that children make, and they induce responses in others that are highly predictive of emotional states. They are highly contagious in social contexts, whether among adults or infants in a nursery. All of these features suggest that both were shaped by significant selection pressures for the social functions they perform.

As the most elaborated human calls, independent of language functions, laughter and sobbing may offer important clues about the context of language evolution. Laughter is highly socially contagious, and feigned or forced “social” laughter is produced frequently in many social contexts. These features suggest that laughter played an important role in the maintenance of group cohesion and identity during a major phase of hominid evolution. Another important clue is that both crying and laughter play significant roles in the social communication of infants with their caretakers long before language develops later in childhood. I think that it is particularly informative that these two vocalizations involve inverse breathing patterns: spasmodic breathing on inhalation (sobbing) versus spasmodic breathing on exhalation (laughing). This indicates that their sound configurations were selected with respect to one another, as a result of disruptive selection against intermediate ambiguous forms. These two vocalizations must have played very important roles in social communication to have tinned out so distinctive and so independent of speech systems. Both seem to be powerful influences for group cohesion and for promoting shared emotional experience. The fact that both are expressed in infancy, long before any use of language is possible, offers evidence that they may at least in part have played crucial roles in bridging the gap in social communication during the extended period before the brain is able to approach the difficult task of symbol acquisition. But their production also persists into adulthood, and serves to initiate some of the more intense social-affiliation responses humans engage in.

But correlated with the co-evolution of these human calls with language, and the changes this produced in the brain, are some unique features. Sobbing is a call that has many nonhuman counterparts, particularly in young animals separated from their mothers. Its social function and the powerful selection pressures that shape it apply equally to both humans and nonhumans. Curiously, however, human sobbing is also commonly associated with loss, not just fear and isolation. Sorrow is an emotion that almost certainly has been exaggerated and modified by symbolic cognition, due to the power of symbolization to aid the mental representation of what-if scenarios. How much more painful is the loss of loved ones, because we can imagine what life would have been like had they remained?

The same sort of mix of nonsymbolic and symbolic correlates characterizes laughter. The role of laughter and smiling as vehicles for social bonding in parent-infant interactions may be important, but the function of their ubiquitous inclusion in casual adult conversation is less obvious, though probably similar. The role of laughter as a play signal, especially in mock aggression (as in response to tickling), may also offer some hint as to an older evolutionary role. But the ability of jokes and other forms of humor to elicit this stereotypic call is the most curious feature of all. Rather than a function under any selection pressure, it too has probably evolved as an incidental correlate of these other social functions and a somewhat serendipitous connection to the peculiar symbolic pirouette that constitutes humor.

The enigmatic connection between laughter and humor may be a side effect of the adaptation for symbol learning. The hierarchical nature of the processes that determine symbolic reference is particularly well exemplified by a joke, because humor provides an additional layer to the hierarchy of interpretive processes, beyond the level we generally consider word or sentence meaning. This is evident in cases where a person understands the meaning of every word and sentence of a joke and yet still fails to “get” the joke. The interpretive process involves more than understanding what is said. To “get” a joke is to understand the way the logic of the punch line both fulfills and undermines some “expected” conclusion. This ability simultaneously to entertain inconsistent alternative perspectives extrapolated from the same initial context is something that only we humans have. The structure of puns, jokes, and other forms of humor involves conflicts of conditional and hierarchic relationships. The shift of representation from one system of associations to another parallel but previously unrecognized one is common to both interpreting jokes and reconstructing symbolic relationships. Both are discovery processes, or insights, wherein previously acquired information and expectations must be quickly recoded according to a previously obscure but implicit logic. It is probably not accidental that such discovery processes are associated with positive emotions and a kind of release of social tensions.

Consider the intensity with which contemporary humans pursue mysteries, scientific discoveries, puzzles, and humor, and the elation that a solution provides. The apocryphal story of Archimedes running naked through the street yelling “Eureka!” captures this experience well. The positive emotions associated with such insights implicate more than just a cognitive act. The reinforcement that is intrinsic to achieving such a recoding of the familiar may be an important part of the adaptation that biases our thinking to pursue this result. A call that may primarily have been selected for its role as a symptom of “recoding” potentially aggressive actions as friendly social play seems to have been “captured” by the similar recoding process implicit in humor and discovery. In both conditions, insight, surprise, and removal of uncertainty are critical components. These features of humor again implicate prefrontal functions that enable mutually exclusive associations to be juxtaposed. Perhaps the “release” of laughter, like the sudden disinhibition of a suppressed automatic response, reflects the disengaging of prefrontal control. The link between a type of cognitive operation and a stereotypic call is curious and probably reflects the increased cortical control over vocal call production.

It is often the case that jokes have an aggressive social undercurrent to them, and yet they trivialize these tendencies as well. This may be a clue to a presymbolic function. Laughter is probably most common not in humorous contexts but in uncomfortable social contexts, where it displays both a nonaggressive stance and a kind of group assent. But laughter is not just an expression of emotion. It is a public symptom of engaging in a kind of mental conflict resolution. For this reason, whereas continuous crying is taken as a symptom of a seriously depressed state, continuous laughter is seldom interpreted as a sign of continuous elation, but rather as a symptom of a disturbance of reason, such as confusional or delusional states, and the associated conflicted emotions.

The unusual size of the prefrontal cortex in comparison to other not so enlarged brain structures may have costs as well as incidental side effects. These may be realized in the form of susceptibilities to disorders centered on prefrontal dysfunction. Even in resting attentive states, human prefrontal cortex tends to be more metabolically active than most other cortical areas. Human brains may thus be far more sensitive to prefrontal disturbances than are other mammal brains. Schizophrenia, manicdepressive disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorders, panic syndromes, Parkinsonism, and Alzheimer’s disease are all associated with major changes in prefrontal cortex metabolism, and by implication, activity in the prefrontal cortex. Manic states, panic states, and obsessive-compulsive disorders appear to be associated with hyperactivity in the prefrontal cortex, whereas schizophrenia, depression, Parkinsonism, and Alzheimer’s disease appear to be associated with hypoactivity of the prefrontal cortex.

Many of these disorders are associated with neural regulatory systems that serve to rev up or slow down certain general neural processes in different regions during different modes of activity. They are in this sense analogous to hormone systems and autonomic nervous functions in the rest of the body, which selectively tune the levels of visceral processes, repair mechanisms, and metabolic processes to adapt to certain major modes of activity. In the brain, this selective tuning is under the control of a small number of groups of neurons with connections that span many regions of the brain. They also employ a related set of neurotransmitters. Three major groups use aromatic monoamine neurotransmitters (e.g., dopamine, serotonin, and noradrenaline) and have vast branching arbors of axons that extend from small midbrain populations of cells and are distributed over vast forebrain areas. These neurotransmitters play crucial roles in adjusting the gain in the motor system, the experience of reward and pleasure, the regulation of attention, the process of learning, induction and maintenance of sleep, dreaming, and many other global brain processes. They are also the major targets for a great many psychotropic drugs, including cocaine and LSD, used for their mood- and mind-altering effects; L-DOPA, used for Parkinsonism; many antipsychotic agents; and Prozac, which has gained wide appeal as an antidepressant.

It is notable that these populations of neurons are located in the mid-brain and upper brain stem, and these are regions that remain unexpanded in the human brain. Though we do not know yet whether these groups of cells have escaped the cell-number-determination processes of the brain regions they are born into, if they do not, then human brains will possess far less of these regulatory cells per regions of the brain to be regulated than any other mammal. Moreover, one of the major cortical target zones for many of these projections is the prefrontal cortex. This may make this system far more sensitive to slight disturbances of regulation, and more easily driven to pathological states of operation.

From studies of these projection systems in animals, it has become clear that one way the brain compensates for loss of connections or downregulation of neurotransmitter release, as often occurs with the use of psychotropic drugs, is to upregulate the sensitivity of cells that receive inputs from them. Thus during aging, drug sensitization, or pathological degeneration of these systems, the brain can extend the limits of control by becoming hypersensitive to even low-level inputs from these systems. But being close to the edge, so to speak, increases the sensitivity to perturbations and biological mistakes. Because of their brain proportions, humans might be predicted to have prefrontal cortex neurons that are relatively hypersensitive to changes of monoamine inputs. Since other systems of the human brain are also likely to be far more dependent on prefrontal functions than in other species’ brains, it probably makes this entire relationship highly vulnerable to radical malfunction in response to lesions, metabolic disturbances, or genetic abnormalities. Depending on how it is impacted, the effects produce social mood disturbances or disturbed symbolic thought processes. These seem to be part of a spectrum of prefrontally associated disturbances of both social and symbolic cognition that can undermine normal function after the development of symbolic abilities, as compared to Williams syndrome and to autism, which disturb the initial development of social and symbolic abilities.





No Mind Is an Island


Because of our symbolic abilities, we humans have access to a novel higher-order representation system that not only recodes experiences and guides the formation of skills and habits, but also provides a means of representing features of a world that no other creature experiences, the world of the abstract. We do not just live our lives in the physical world and our immediate social group, but also in a world of rules of conduct, beliefs about our histories, and hopes and fears about imagined futures. This world is governed by principles different from any that have selected for neural circuit design in the past eons of evolution. We possess no brain regions specially adapted for handling the immense flood of experiences from this world, only those adapted for life in a concrete world of percepts and actions. These unsuited neural systems have been forced into service, and do the best they can to accommodate to an alien world and recode its input in more familiar forms. The consequences are both marvelous and horrendous.

One of these alien realms is the realm of other minds. Philosophers have long struggled with the problem of how we know that we are in a world populated with other minds. The problem was brought into precise focus by René Descartes in a classic meditation on the problem of whether we can be certain that other people really exist. Though the question merits no practical consideration, it challenges both our conception of self and mind, and is directly relevant to the symbol/nonsymbol distinction. Indeed, it is not just coincidental that Descartes was convinced that only people have minds. Other animals he thought were mere mechanisms, mindless clockworks. The dualistic dichotomy between mind and mechanism, subjective experience and material causation, is implicit in common sense psychology and has been the major theoretical subject of scientific psychology since that time.

Descartes was interested in whether we can ever know beyond any doubt if the bodies of friends and neighbors we encounter daily also have their own subjective experiences. Could it be possible that we are surrounded by the illusions of other beings, as in our dreams? When someone tells me their thoughts, are the words I hear just sounds produced by a biological robot, a mere mechanism? In a serious modern parody of this question, artificial intelligence researchers have constructed programs that are capable of fooling people into thinking that a person rather than a program is communicating with them by computer keyboard. This is what was known as a Turing test, suggested by a thought experiment proposed by the English mathematician Alan Turing as a test of whether a mechanism can be considered intelligent (though Turing actually had a somewhat less ambitious formal problem in mind). Such exercises testify to human ingenuity and gullibility alike: many people are fooled.

The problem with other minds is that the glimpses we get of them are all indirect. We have a subjective experience of our own thought processes, but at best only an imagined representation of what goes on in others’ subjective experience. When we speculate about others’ “inner” states, the only data we have to go on are what they tell us and what we observe of their physical states. Like the subject in the Turing test, we are forced to make assessments on rather limited and indirect data. We can, it seems, have direct knowledge only of ourselves. In philosophy, this argument is aptly termed solipsism (from the Latin solus, alone, and ipse, self).

In the post-psychoanalytic age, we are now painfully aware of a troublesome extension of this problem: we often do not even know ourselves. Not only have we forgotten much about our pasts, but Sigmund Freud convinced us that we can often be wrong about our own memories and beliefs about ourselves (a view that even non-Freudians hold, though disagreeing on the cause or interpretation of the error). The idea that an unconscious process might “rewrite” our personal memories to cover up past trauma puts us in doubt of even our direct experience of self. In other words, if our mental experiences are mediated by representation all the way down, then there is no direct knowledge. In these terms, the problem of representing the subjective experience of another and the problem of representing one’s own subjective experience both entirely depend on the nature of the representational processes involved. The problem is not whether some knowledge is representation and some is direct and unrepresented. The problem is, rather, what sort of representation is involved, and what knowledge this provides of our minds and the minds of others.

If thought and experience are information processes, then the problems of representing other minds and representing our own minds ultimately become the same problem. Both forms of knowledge depend on a person’s or animal’s interpretive abilities. For this reason, as Descartes saw, the human/nonhuman difference in representational abilities inevitably enters into the question of knowledge of minds. If symbolic referential abilities are essentially confined to humans, there should indeed be important implications for animal and human minds, beyond communication alone.

In our everyday dealings with one another, we constantly try to anticipate others’ behavioral plans or decision-making processes, either just to get along with them or else the better to manipulate them. Of course, even human social behavior is at least 90 percent social habit, and most of our actions are probably performed with no more than a fleeting consideration of what “anyone” would tend to do in some situation. Learned social habits provide a sort of unanalyzed folk psychology that gets us by. It is usually only in circumstances where we are especially surprised by others, or when we are intensely motivated by love, anger, fear, or avarice, that we strive to understand the workings of someone else’s thought processes. Our frequent poor guesses about what others are thinking or planning attest both to the mostly “theoretical” nature of the process and to how complicated minds actually are.

Human social institutions, etiquette, and morality are predicated on the assumption that we are capable of such thinking about other minds. Even if this is a very fallible exercise, we expect people to engage in such activity under a variety of circumstances and are rightfully indignant or angered when they don’t. We do not, however, hold other species to these standards. When we observe chimpanzees hunting down, capturing, and dismembering colobus monkeys alive as they devour them, we often feel a mixture of horror and acceptance. We do not call the chimpanzees cruel, as we would a human torturer causing his victim horrific pain. We have the intuition that somehow these otherwise very intelligent creatures fail to empathize with their victims, not out of conscious effort or the intention to cause suffering, but because it just doesn’t occur to them. Of course, we exercise the same restrained judgment with respect to young children’s acts of unkindness. The ability to take another’s perspective is not inborn. It takes time and some degree of enculturation both to develop the ability to think in these terms, and to learn under what circumstances others expect you to apply it.

The problem of other minds has recently found its way into studies of animal social behaviors—often phrased in terms of a “theory of mind.” Basically, the question is whether animals know that there is someone behind their perceptual experience of others. Do animals act socially on the basis of what they think others are thinking? To have a “theory of mind,” in this nonphilosophical sense, is to have a mental representation of the subjective experience of others. A number of ingenious experiments have attempted to test whether animals tend to behave in response to what they infer others know, feel, or desire. Not surprisingly, the results are often hard to interpret.

It is a difficult question to answer experimentally, because it is possible for an intelligent and perceptive animal to learn to anticipate another’s behavior in response to different conditions, irrespective of any model of why they are responding the way they do, and so give a false impression of representing a mental cause as opposed to merely developing an unanalyzed, conditioned response. This experimental difficulty is analogous to the problem we encountered earlier of determining whether a given referential behavior is symbolic or merely indexical. The parallel is not just a superficial one. Both are questions about the mode of representation. Is the representation of the expected behavior of the other mediated simply by a pairing of past instances of others’ responses to similar circumstances, or by some additional representations about how these responses are caused by (recoded as) the hidden experiences of others?

Apart from postulating an innate “theory of mind module,” how could such a mental representation be produced? In other words, what is necessary in order for information from another’s behavior to be interpreted as representing another mind? The nature of this representation will depend on whether the individual is only able to interpret the behavior patterns as indices of future tendencies to behave, or is able also to interpret them as indices of mental states. The lack of symbolic referential abilities in non-human species limits them to representation of associations between stimuli, including the behaviors of others. These relationships can be quite numerous and complex, providing the animal with extensive familiarity with the predispositions of others. Probably most of the intimate behavioral knowledge we gain about friends and family members is of this type.

But the additional step to building an independent mental representation of the subjective experience of another, represented as if one were able to trade places, requires a symbolic jump. Since indexical reference grows out of repeated experiences of explicit pairing of stimuli or events, there is no possibility that pairing with another’s mental state could be learned by association. It is an abstract attribute, inferred from the systematic patterns of the indexical relationships between observed conditions and behaviors, and identified with and opposed to one’s own experiences. Constructing another point of view requires the ability to maintain awareness of the indexical information, and to use this to produce a representation of what it would be like to experience it from a different perspective, a complicated double-negative referential relationship. This is a cognitive task that almost certainly requires prefrontal cortex involvement, and evidence of failure to be able to take the other’s perspective is a common disability of patients with significant prefrontal damage. Some striking examples of related difficulties of taking another “perspective” are described by Antonio Damasio in Descartes’ Error. In this regard the hypersociality of Williams syndrome patients, and their intense monitoring and solicitation of others’ responses in social interactions, may also be understood not just as a function of modified affect but as a shift in cognitive style, in which an exaggerated prefrontal bias may lead to an exaggerated reliance on symbolic prediction of others’ behaviors. This may be particularly important if indexical representation of the predispositions of others is impaired. The inverse argument may also apply to autistic individuals. Because of a difficulty with perspective shifting, they may only develop knowledge of another’s predispositions to be-have by virtue of attention on physical behaviors as indices. Thus, the ability to form a representation of another’s mental experience, as opposed to just their predispositions, is both mediated by symbols and dependent on many of the same mental operations and neural substrates as are critical to symbolic abilities.

As novelists and poets amply demonstrate, the range of personas and experiences that can be conveyed through symbolic media is unbounded. In a very real sense, this gives us the ability to share a virtual common mind. Because symbolic representation maintains reference irrespective of indexical attachment to any particular experiences, when an idea or a narrative of someone’s experience is reconstructed by another, it can be regrounded, so to speak, by interpreting it in terms of the iconic and indexical representations that constitute the listener’s memory. Symbolic reference is interpreter-independent, because each interpreter independently supplies the nonsymbolic ground for it.

Without symbolic representations at their disposal, it seems unlikely that other species could behave according to a theory of others’ minds, much less share representations of others’ experiences. Sharing common intentions, interests, goals, and emotions is the most effective means for coordinating behavior, and being able to imagine and anticipate another’s mental and emotional responses is a powerful tool for social manipulation. If I am correct about the social-reproductive dilemma that served as the initial impetus for symbol evolution, then the ability mentally to represent other minds is one of the primary functions of symbolization.

Animal societies are complex, and animals often cooperate and appear to share common intentions and emotional states. And many species have a well-developed sensitivity to the emotional states of others, even others that are different species. Without the ability to represent others’ experiences, how is this possible? Is it an error of anthropomorphic attribution to see empathy in these cases? The problem of empathy is not necessarily a problem of representing another mind; rather it is a problem of arriving at an emotional state that is the same as, or parallel with, that of another. Empathy involves both communication and interpretation, in which one individual (animal or human) interprets signs produced by another in a way that induces a corresponding emotional state. Symbols are not necessary to this process. The question we must ask is not whether language is a good vehicle for conveying and inducing emotions in others, but rather whether the ability to produce a symbolic interpretation of signs of another’s emotional state provides empathic capabilities that are inaccessible without it.

The problem of empathy is a problem of shared emotions, and although language may play a role in communicating about one’s emotional state, it is far less effective as a means of conveying emotion than the numerous nonverbal forms of communication that evolved for precisely this purpose. Tone of voice, posture, facial expression, and such specialized vocalizations as laughter and crying are incomparably more powerful conveyers of emotional state. This sort of communication is at least as well developed in other species as in ourselves, and as many commentators have observed, we humans are often less in touch with the emotional states of others than are other species such as our own pets. We value the performances of skilled actors precisely for bringing to the words of a play the nonverbal signs that can release our own emotional engagement. It would therefore seem that language evolution could have contributed only modestly to empathic ability, and may even interfere with it. One might be tempted to argue that the development of language abilities goes hand in hand with a decline in emotional sensitivity and empathy. But this only considers language as a medium for communicating emotion. What is also relevant is that language, as the most sophisticated symbolic system, provides a medium for building complex symbolic representations of emotions.

Following the representational hierarchy, we can identify three ways in which the emotional states of individuals can be brought into concert with one another. First, the response can be mediated by spontaneous mimickry (iconic); second, it can be mediated by a reaction to a common extrinsic stimulus (indexical); and third, it can be mediated by a representation of the state of the other (symbolic).

As we have seen, two familiar examples of empathy produced through spontaneous mimickry are the contagiousness of laughing and sobbing. Even newborns in a nursery exhibit this mechanism for producing empathy. Laughter and sobbing are not just evolved stereotypic indices of emotional state, they are vehicles for coordinating the emotions of a social group. Evolution has built in the reference of these innate calls by selecting for a stereotypic response that is concordant with the state of the “caller.” It is a sort of preestablished harmony. Though clearly there are times in which the receptive state of the interpreter is not appropriate to produce a concordant response, even then the tendency to produce it (overcome by conflicting emotions) provides an interpretation.

To put the communication of emotions in context, we need to realize that it is only one facet of a more general process whereby information about one animal’s state influences another’s. Often this is not cooperative. It should be remembered that a large fraction of a species’ communicative repertoire may have evolved for manipulative purposes, and not to solicit another to assume the same state. Whether one responds with empathy, sympathy, or antipathy depends not on the communication but on the specific social and evolutionary context in which it is produced. Evolution has selected for mechanisms of social signaling that are generally reliable indices or symptoms of the state of arousal and mood of the signaler. Ineluctable production of a particular vocalization or display when in a given state of arousal is the best guarantee of reference, but it does not determine the interpretation.

Alarm calling provides an example of a more complex, indexically mediated means for producing concordant arousal and emotion. In addition to sharing a concordant emotional response to the same call, the object of the call becomes an independent determinant of common response. It is significant that in both the iconic aspect of laughter/sobbing and the indexical aspect of alarm calling the representation of a corresponding mentalemotional state is grounded by common physiology and common perception, and as a result need not be an intentional activity. But symbolic information offers no similar guarantee. Listening to other people describe their discomfort or reading a third-person account of someone else’s hardships can induce empathetic or sympathetic responses. Though these responses are often spontaneous, they depend both on the sophistication of the symbolic interpretation and the willingness of the listener or reader to carry on the interpretation process. Not only does this involve symbolic interpretation, but a sort of virtual experience in parallel to one’s own.

The ability to interpret a narrative as a sort of simulated experience often requires the generation of complex mental imagery. Powerful mental images can elicit a vicarious emotional charge that makes them capable of out-competing current sensory stimuli and intrinsic drives for control of attention and emotion, resulting in a kind of virtual emotional experience. The power of mental images to displace arousal on sensorimotor signals doubly depends on the ability of prefrontal activity to predominate over other systems, because of the requirement to maintain linked but opposed mnemonic traces.

This suggests that our most social cognitive capabilities may serendipitously grow out of the learning and attentional biases of the prefrontal bias that made symbolization tractable in the first place. So, although symbolic production of a state of emotion is far less reliable and predictable, it can produce far more profound and complete empathy than any other means. Unfortunately, it also has a dark side that other forms of empathy do not. Being able to imagine the suffering of another, by extrapolation from one’s own subjective experience, is also the source of the most despicable and heinous of human practices. Though many other species harm and threaten one another in service of individual goals, only human beings can conceive of torture and the threat of death as means to an end. Indeed, threatening to cause suffering to another’s loved ones is the most powerful of all forms of coercion—a uniquely human collision of the most base with the most noble powers of symbolic consciousness.

The best and worst of what it means to be human arose with the dawn of symbolic abilities. The slow evolution of prefrontal predominance probably correlated with an equally slow growth of the ability to get inside of one another’s minds. Along with the power to organize reproduction around collectively enforced agreements and expectations of reciprocity, these other abilities inevitably also contributed to selection for the restructuring of the human mind. With increasingly powerful symbolic abilities comes an increasingly sophisticated ability to model the world that symbols enable us to represent. We do not hold young children and animals responsible for their failures to take the feelings of others into account, because we intuitively recognize that they are still limited in their ability to perform the mental gymnastics this requires. We also legally recognize the possibility that under certain states of psychotic delusion, adults too may be unable to model the “other” perspective well enough to make informed moral judgments.

The ethical stance is not, however, intrinsic in human nature. It cannot be innate because of its reliance on symbolic representation. Nor do I think that it is directly rooted in the “simpler” social behaviors of other species. Sophisticated predispositions for cooperative behavior or for caring for other individuals have evolved in many social species, and need not depend on symbolic reflection to anticipate the social consequences of one’s actions. Social manipulation based upon predictions of others’ reactions, and restraint of actions that might lead to negative consequences, can be based on nonsymbolic learning and mental imagery abilities, and tens of millions of years of social evolution have produced a brain whose arousal system is highly sensitive to both anticipated and received social signals. Though there are likely to be significant species differences in the tuning of the social-affect systems which drive attachment, status-seeking, play, aggressive, and appeasement behaviors, it seems unlikely that the human repertoire has added or deleted elements from this collection.

Ethical considerations are something in addition to the complex set of social-emotional responses we have inherited. The symbolic constructions of others’ plausible emotional states, and their likely emotional responses to our future actions, are analogous to a whole new sensory modality feeding into our ancient social-emotional response systems. This ability to let our emotions be activated by the virtual experiences constructed with the aid of symbols probably makes us the only species in which there can be a genuine conflict of simultaneous emotional states. No wonder we often come off as out of touch with our social surroundings and less perceptive of others’ arousal state than our own pets, or that we often feel as though our lives have become unnatural and envy the simpler state of connection to the physical world that we imagine other animals to have. We can easily become overloaded and confused by our ability to generate and respond to multiple what-if worlds. Perhaps this further explains our susceptibility to a range of psychiatric conditions that only superficially correspond to what other species can experience.

The ability to generate models of others’ emotional states, and to exercise restraint or determination with respect to them, must be discovered through the manipulation of symbols. This makes such interpretations conditional on the maturation, experience, and even cognitive capacities of people. We intuitively hold the most intelligent, most educated, and most experienced people to higher ethical standards, and are more willing to give children and even adolescents the benefit of the doubt. This is because we recognize that these symbolic insights require some of the most counter-intuitive shifts of perspective and recoding processes of any symbolic activity. When these cognitive difficulties are considered in the context of choices that may be in conflict with immediate self-interest, it becomes obvious why ethically guided self-control is both uncommon and fragile.
