CHAPTER FOURTEEN


Such Stuff as Dreams Are Made On


Thirty spokes share the wheel’s hub, but it is the hole in the center that provides its usefulness.

—Lao Tsu, from the Tao Te Ching





Ends


As a species, we seem to be preoccupied with ends, in all senses of the word. We organize our actions around imagined extrapolations of the consequences they will produce. We struggle in vain to comprehend the implications of our own impending cessation of life. And we weave marvelously elaborate and beautifully obscure stories to fill our need to find purpose in the fabric of the universe. This fills no obvious adaptive need. Our evolution never included selection favoring anything like this intense and desperate drive. And yet it is so powerful as to be able to overcome some of the most irresistible predispositions that evolution has provided. If we are language savants compared to other species, then a preoccupation with ends is the special exaggerated compulsion that complements our unique gift.

Symbolic analysis is the basis for a remarkable new level of self-determination that human beings alone have stumbled upon. The ability to use virtual reference to build up elaborate internal models of possible futures, and to hold these complex visions in mind with the force of the mnemonic glue of symbolic inference and descriptive shorthands, gives us unprecedented capacity to generate independent adaptive behaviors. Remarkable abstraction from indexically bound experiences is further enhanced by the ability of symbolic reference to pick out tiny fragments of real world processes and arrange them as bouys to chart an inferential course that predicts physical and social events. The price we pay for this is that our symbolically mediated actions can often be in conflict with motivations to act that arise from more concrete and immediate biological sources. Arguments in support of the classic notion of free will frequently cite this capacity to use reason (that is, symbolic inference and model building) to overcome desire and compulsion. One might respond that calling some actions “free” and others not oversimplifies what is really only a matter of the degree of the strengths of competing compulsions to act, some compulsions arising from autonomic and hormonal sources and others from our imagined satisfaction at reaching a symbolized goal. But there is an important sense in which these competing compulsions are not equal.

Those that arise from purely physiological sources, or physiological sources mediated by conditioned associations, could be called bottom-up processes for producing action. They are much more tied to mechanism and thus exhibit few degrees of freedom and limited spontaneous variation. They are comparatively predictable, though any organismic process inevitably exhibits tangled paths of causality. But symbolically mediated compulsions to act are far more chaotic, in the technical sense of that word, far more susceptible to the influence of tiny initial differences in starting assumptions or ways of dividing up experiences and qualities symbolically. This is because symbolically mediated models of things—whether theories, stories, or just rationally argued predictions—exhibit complicated nonlinearity and recursive structure as well as nearly infinite flexibility and capacity for novelty due to their combinatorial nature. It is not so much that our actions arise from a totally unconstrained and compulsion-free center of intentions, but that the potential starting point, the intended purpose we have modeled, can be drawn from such a vast variety of alternatives with little initial difference in motive power.

Final causality, according to Aristotle, is exhibited when processes are driven not by antecedent physical conditions but by ends. In some ways this is like time reversed. In hindsight it is easy to infer that certain past conditions were necessitated by the way things turned out. Deductive inference is a lot like this sort of reflective inversion of temporal and physical order. The consequence is already implicitly included in the premises. In symbolic thinking, this results in what might be called a sort of symbolic compulsion. Certain statements compel certain others. Aristotle reserved another term for such compulsion—formal causality—but I think there is an important way that this links to the other, classic conception of cause in terms of the ways that symbols work. Little of our reasoning is so precise as to be called deductive, and yet the way that certain beliefs compel others can have nearly this force. Ideologies, religions, and just good explanations or stories thus exert a sort of inferential compulsion on us that is hard to resist because of their mutually reinforcing deductive and inductive links. Our end-directed behaviors are in this way often derived from such “compulsions” as are implicit in the form that underlies the flow of inferences. So one might say that thinking in symbols is a means whereby formal causes can determine final causes. The abstract nature of this source makes for a top-down causality, even if implemented on a bottom-up biological machine.

Though the evolution of brains has been about systems for modeling and predicting events in the world, the evolution of symbolic abilities has not just amplified this ability far beyond that in any other species, it has also introduced an insidiously inverted modeling tendency. The symbolic capacity seems to have brought with it a predisposition to project itself into what it models. The savant, instead of seeing a field of wildflowers, sees 247 flowers. Similarly, we don’t just see a world of physical processes, accidents, reproducing organisms, and biological information processors churning out complex plans, desires, and needs. Instead, we see the handiwork of an infinite wisdom, the working out of a divine plan, the children of a creator, and a conflict between those on the side of good and those on the side of evil. We carry a nagging doubt about anything really being accidental. Coincidence isn’t just coincidence, it’s a sign, and bad luck and disease don’t just happen, perhaps a sorcerer has wished harm on the village. Wherever we look, we expect to find purpose. All things can be seen as signs and symbols of an all-knowing consciousness at work, or the marks of mythical events that occur in a dreamtime, behind the scenes of the universe. We are not just applying symbolic interpretations to human words and events; all the universe has become a symbol.

This is the evidence that we have become symbolic savants in the deeper sense of that metaphor. We are not just a species that uses symbols. The symbolic universe has ensnared us in an inescapable web. Like a “mind virus,” the symbolic adaptation has infected us, and now by virtue of the irresistible urge it has instilled in us to turn everything we encounter and everyone we meet into symbols, we have become the means by which it unceremoniously propagates itself throughout the world.

It is clear that we feel more comfortable in a world that is meaningful, living a life that has meaning. The alternative is somehow too frightening. But why? Why should the ability to acquire symbolic abilities and conceive of things symbolically also bring with it a powerful urge to see it in every conceivable context? It could be seen as part of the predisposition to acquire symbols in the first place, part of the overdesign of the mind to ensure that symbols get discovered. But I think it may be a more mundane feature of cognitive and sensorimotor biases in general. The autistic savant is in this way no different from the kitten that sees every small mobile object as a representative prey toy, or the baby who interacts with every hold-able object as a thing to be put into the mouth—for reasons that probably flow ineluctably from the Darwinian-competitive structure of neural information processing. Brains are spontaneously active biological computers in which activity patterns incessantly compete for wider expression throughout each network. Under these conditions, the dominant operation simply runs on its own and assimilates whatever is available. In us, this appears to be the expression of what I have called front-heavy cognition, driven by an overactive, busybody prefrontal cortex. It gets expressed as a need to recode our experiences, to see everything as a representation, to expect there to be a deeper hidden logic. Even when we don’t believe in it, we find ourselves captivated by the lure of numerology, astrology, or the global intrigue of conspiracy theories. This is the characteristic expression of a uniquely human cognitive style; the mark of a thoroughly symbolic species.

One of the essentially universal attributes of human culture is what might be called the mystical or religious inclination. There is no culture I know of that lacks a rich mythical, mystical, and religious tradition. And there is no culture that doesn’t devote much of this intense interpretive enterprise to struggling with the very personal mystery of mortality. Knowledge of death, of the inconceivable possibility that the experiences of life will end, is a datum that only symbolic representation can impart. Other species may experience loss, and the pain of separation, and the difficulty of abandoning a dead companion; yet without the ability to represent this abstract counterfactual (at least for the moment) relationship, there can be no emotional connection to one’s own future death. But this news, which all children eventually discover as they develop their symbolic abilities, provides an unbidden opportunity to turn the naturally evolved social instinct of loss and separation in on itself to create a foreboding sense of fear, sorrow, and impending loss with respect to our own lives, as if looking back from an impossible future. No feature of the limbic system has evolved to handle this ubiquitous virtual sense of loss. Indeed, I wonder if this isn’t one of the most maladaptive of the serendipitous consequences of the evolution of symbolic abilities. What great efforts we exert trying to forget our future fate by submerging the constant angst with innumerable distractions, or trying to convince ourselves that the end isn’t really what it seems by weaving marvelous alternative interpretations of what will happen in “the undiscovered country” on the other side of death.

In many ways this is the source both of what is most noble and most pathological in human behaviors. Supported by these interpretations, reason can recruit the strength to face the threat of emptiness in the service of shared values and aspirations. But the dark side of religious belief and powerful ideology is that they so often provide twisted justifications for arbitrarily sparing or destroying lives. Their symbolic power can trap us in a web of oppression, as we try through ritual action and obsessive devotion to a cause to maintain a psychic safety net that protects us from our fears of purposelessness. The interaction of symbolic cultural evolution and unprepared biology has created some of the most influential and virulent systems of symbols the world has ever known. Few if any societies have ever escaped the grip of powerful beliefs that cloak the impenetrable mystery of human life and death in a cocoon of symbolism and meaning. The history of the twentieth century, like all those recorded before it, is sadly written in the blood that irreconcilable symbol systems have spilt between them. Perhaps this is because the savantlike compulsion to see symbols in everything reaches its most irresistible expression when it comes to the symbolization of our own lives’ end. We inevitably imagine ourselves as symbols, as the tokens of a deeper discourse of the world. But symbols are subject to being rendered meaningless by contradiction, and this makes alternative models of the world direct threats to existence.

Almost certainly this is one of the other defining features of the human mentality: an ever present virtual experience of our own loss. And yet we know so little about what it is that we fear to lose. Perhaps if we understood this symbolic compulsion, and the consciousness it brings with it, we might find this emptiness at the center a bit less disturbing.





To Be or Not to Be: What Is the Difference?


Throughout the history of philosophy one question above all others has constantly occupied center stage. What is the nature of consciousness? Unfortunately, terms like consciousness, mind, thought, and idea have many conflicting meanings, and this question is often confounded with a number of other related philosophical questions about thought, reason, agency, and the existence of an immortal soul. Is consciousness one thing? Is it epiphenomenal? Does consciousness require agency (or free will)? Are nonhuman species conscious? Are there different types or levels of consciousness? Is self-consciousness an essential ingredient of all consciousness? Is reason an essential ingredient in consciousness? Can consciousness only be experienced by living organisms? The absence of answers to such questions attests to the deep confusions that still surround the nature of consciousness. Though the subjective perspective from which each of us views the world is the mystery we ultimately hope to address by these questions, it seems difficult to determine where to begin the investigation because we are not even entirely sure what we mean by the questions.

A number of well-reasoned and elegant arguments about the nature of consciousness have recently brought these questions back into the spotlight of legitimate scientific and philosophical debate. These efforts to rethink this classic mystery are motivated by the growing body of new information from the neurosciences and the computing sciences. The more that is known about how the brain works, and how this might be similar or dissimilar to the operation of the information-processing devices we build, the closer we feel we are coming to the Rosetta Stone for translating subjective accounts of experience into empirical accounts of physical causes and effects.

The whole problem of consciousness is far too complicated to consider in the closing pages of a book on human brain evolution, nor am I prepared to deal with the many incredibly complicated issues it poses. Many of the subquestions that need to be answered first will not be approachable until we have a better understanding of the global information-handling principles around which brains are designed. But it is a question that can be approached in pieces. In contemporary discussions of the relationship between brain process and consciousness, three general problems are often treated separately. The first is often called “the binding problem” and refers to the problem of how the separate activities of millions of brain structures produce a unified subjective experience of self. The second is less often given an explicit name, but is sometimes referred to as “the grounding problem.” It is the problem of explaining how our thoughts and words are guaranteed a correspondence with reality. Much of this book has been concerned with explaining this second problem. The third is often confused with the first two, but also has its own special difficulties. This is the problem of “agency”—explaining the experience we have of originating and controlling our own thoughts and behaviors. It is closely related to the more general concept of sentience. In older philosophical contexts, agency might have been part of the question of whether we have free will.

Many aspects of each question are beyond the scope of this book and my expertise. But the grounding problem is particularly relevant to the language origins problem. Indeed, I have approached the origin of language as essentially a comparative and evolutionary version of the grounding problem, in the sense that it requires us to provide both a mental and a physical account of the crossing from more concrete to more abstract forms of representation. The approach I have taken to the evolutionary question thus suggests a parallel approach to the grounding problem: analyzing the grounding of intentional consciousness in terms of levels of representational relationships.

The distinction that is often made between different levels or types of consciousness is closely related to the classic Cartesian claim that animals are mere mechanisms, whereas human beings have minds and are capable of reason. Few animal behaviorists these days would fully agree with Descartes’ claim. Chimpanzees, dogs, and many other highly social species appear to consider alternative modes of action, anticipate consequences, and give the impression of sharing a similar range of emotional experiences. The minor differences in brain structure between these animals and human beings—which even backed Descartes into a corner (specifically into the pineal gland) in trying to find an essential human difference—provide no support for such a dichotomous view. And yet few would be willing to say that the consciousness of a dog or cat is of the same sort that we ascribe to humans.

Even a very much loosened notion of consciousness as extended to these relatively intelligent mammal species runs into trouble when we begin to probe more distant branches of the phylogenetic tree. Do mice exhibit the same sort of consciousness as apes? Are worms and insects conscious at all? Do lobsters suffer when plunged into a pot of boiling water? Is it more immoral to harm a cat than a fish? And so on. Arguments about comparative intelligence and comparative consciousness appear to overlap in these questions, and almost certainly the intuition we have about the level of consciousness experienced by other brains has influenced our notions about the evolution of intelligence. What we mean by “consciousness” is tied to issues of complexity. We intuitively believe that simple information-processing devices could not be as conscious as more complicated ones.

This brings us back to an argument that has reappeared a number of times in this book: to what extent is the evolution of the human mind adequately explained in terms of an increase in the quantity of information processing that can be supported? I think that the answer is the same as for language. The information-handling capacity of the brain is important, because there are certain minimal numbers of operations that must be performed and minimal memory requirements for symbolic processing. There is, therefore, probably a threshold of neural complexity below which symbolic processes are not possible. It is not, however, clear that our access into symbolic communication was just determined by surmounting this threshold, because there are other critical requirements as well, in the form of a very specifically structured learning and memory organization. In this book I have argued that the restructuring of information processes has been a much more critical determinant of the evolution of symbols. Similarly, I think that the human difference in consciousness is not merely a quantitative difference.

The idea that there must be grades of consciousness in the animal world suggests that the question of what is consciousness might be subject to a separate analysis from the question of whether there can be different extents or types of consciousness. Many species’ brains may be constructed in such a way that they produce some limited conscious experience, and similarities in the neural architectures of human and nonhuman brains offer evidence that this is likely. Those theories of brain evolution that cast intelligence in quantitative terms suggest that the difference is not in some special consciousness-producing neural architecture, but simply in how much of it is present. On this view, it would seem to make better sense to forget the philosopher’s predisposition to use human experience as the starting point, and instead solve the consciousness problem by work with frogs, flies, or leeches—whichever brains are deemed simplest but still capable of some basic level of consciousness. Clearly, the brains of different species can support very different amounts of information processing and storage. This recognition is paralleled by common sense ideas about how much we are conscious of under different circumstances. When asleep, I am not conscious of what is happening elsewhere in the room. When I avoid reading newspapers or watching television news, I am not conscious of what is happening “in the world.” When I inadvertently hurt someone’s feelings, I am not conscious of their needs or expectations. Though this might better be described in terms of “awareness,” the two ideas are obviously entangled with one another in our thinking about the problem. Are animals which are more aware of their surroundings the species that we would call more conscious? Or is awareness only one necessary contributor to consciousness? What a complicated mess!

The question of human origins inevitably finds its way into discussions of the nature of consciousness because of the presumption that there is something special about human minds. The classic dichotomy between conscious and unconscious has been linked with the dichotomy between human and animal minds from the beginning. Religious traditions have historically played a significant role in guiding people’s intuitions on the special nature of human consciousness. In Judeo-Christian tradition, only humans are supposed to have immortal souls, which presumably have something to do with consciousness and “personhood,” but in innumerable tribal traditions and in many Eastern religious traditions, such as Hinduism, which include beliefs about the transmigration of souls, it is imagined that one’s spirit could inhabit the body of any number of “lesser” creatures. The belief that only humans could have an immortal soul has been a major influence in the Western scientific and philosophical traditions, which tend to draw categorical distinctions between animal and human minds, and has therefore contributed to the historic reactions to Cartesian dualism or other claims of human mental uniqueness. But these polar responses—either that only humans have (“true”) consciousness and other species lack it, or that all brainy species have consciousness and humans are not qualitatively different in this regard—are mostly the result of not carefully separating these different dimensions of the consciousness problem.

But are the alternatives posed by contemporary philosophical categories and cognitive science models really able to frame the full range of possibilities, or are we, as Dewey warns, faced with implicit alternatives that don’t divide the world in a useful way? I think that there is a middle ground, but I doubt that any compromise framed in terms of the dichotomous alternatives of mind and mechanism can succeed in discovering it. Without trying to address the many larger philosophical issues that lurk behind these phenomena, I think that a reinterpretation of symbolic cognition can at least help to reframe one important assumption implicit in all these discussions. These arguments are all based on the notion that the different aspects of the mind-brain phenomena are distinguished by requiring opposed and mutually exclusive forms of explanation. The clue to be drawn from the evolutionary transition to symbols is that it must be understood as a difference of levels of representational process.

This leads me to two proposals. First, I suggest that the oppositional form of most mind-brain theories reflects a failure to recognize the intrinsically hierarchical and emergent nature of the referential processes that underlie mental processes. Second, I suggest that the three contrasts implicit in these arguments—mind/body, intentional/mechanical, human/animal—do not all address the same categorical difference. Specifically, I think that the concepts of mind and intention need to be decomposed with respect to level of representation, requiring us separately to consider iconic, indexical, and symbolic aspects with respect to their mechanistic correlates. This allows us to recognize that the human/animal distinction is different from the others, in that it only involves a difference in symbolic ability, and does not address mind/body issues at all. Animals can have conscious minds, without sharing all the attributes of human consciousness. So, in the end, I do not suggest that explaining this transition gets to the heart of the consciousness problem, but it may help pare off some related problems that have been long confused with it. My point can be illustrated by reexamining some current exemplary arguments about the nature of cognition in the context of these representational distinctions.

The dominant alternative to the Cartesian perspective is exemplified by the theoretical claim that the mind is like the sort of “computation” that takes place in electronic computers. In simpler terms, minds are software (programs) run on the hardware (neural circuits) of the brain. The strong version of this materialistic reductionism (i.e., that mind is nothing more than mechanism) has recently been given its clearest expression in a theory called “eliminative materialism.” The claim is that notions such as mind, intention, belief, thought, representation, and so on will eventually be eliminated in discussions of cognitive processes in favor of more mechanistic synonyms that refer to chemical-electrical signaling processes of the brain. Mentalistic terms, it is suggested, are merely glosses for more complex brain processes that we at present do not understand.

An analogy is often made to the relationship between a “high-level” computer programming language like C or Basic and the sets of machine operations that they specify. In the sorts of digital computers that we are most familiar with, the words and phrases of these programming languages are first translated into strings of machine codes, which bear only a vague resemblance to the higher-level language elements, and these are further translated into machine “addresses,” to which a signal can be sent to activate a corresponding processor operation, store or retrieve a certain processing result, and so on. The languagelike structure of high-level code words is merely a convenience, a helpful shorthand. They are completely eliminable because they are nothing more than alternative ways of marking and activating specific machine operations. But is this a good analogy to the way “high-level” cognitive processes map onto brain “operations”?

Cognitive scientists have long argued over whether the ultimate “language of thought” is more like a computer algorithm, or more like collections of images. Our personal experiences of what goes on in the mind during our brief “down times,” when walking between offices or washing dishes, suggest that both are right, that the mind is filled with many sorts of mental objects, and moreover that they overlap and blend into one another almost seamlessly. Arguments that pose mental images and symbolic “computations” as alternative or complementary “codes” for mental processes also miss the point that these are not representational processes at the same level. They are simultaneous facets of representational processes at different levels that are dependent on one another in specific ways.

Part of the danger in current computer metaphors comes from our tendency to call typographical characters “symbols,” as though their referential power was intrinsic, and to call the deterministic switching of signals in an electronic device a “computation,” because it simulates operations we might perform to derive an output string of numbers from an input string according to the laws of mathematics. We fall into the trap of imagining that the sets of electronic tokens (data) that are automatically substituted for one another in a computer according to patterns specified by other sets of tokens (programs or algorithms) are self-sufficient symbols, because of their autonomous parallelism to the surface features of corresponding human activities. This brackets out of the description the critical fact that the “computation” is only a computation to the extent that someone is able to interpret the inputs and outputs as related in this way. As the philosopher John Searle has suggested,1 we might be able to discover a way of mapping numerals and operations of some mathematical schema onto the molecular events occurring in a container of chemicals, and in so doing treat the chemical reaction as a minimal computer as well, but this interpretation applied to what was already disposed to occur in nature would not invest it with any additional intentional properties. It is still just a simple chemical reaction. All the representational properties are vested in the interpreter. Applying this fundamentally incomplete analogy to brain function yields a model of thought as a program, and has suggested to some cognitive scientists that interpretive processes performed by brains are just the results of running neural programs. Though there is likely some sense in which the physical isomorphism between brains and certain kinds of electronic devices holds, this version of a representational isomorphism is empty, because it includes no account of the determination of reference in either part of the analogy.

In a now famous thought experiment that John Searle calls the Chinese Room experiment, he asks us to imagine a man locked in a room with an instruction book containing Chinese character strings in which input strings are paired with output strings.2 The man in the room knows no Chinese, but through a slot in the wall he is given pieces of paper with Chinese characters written on them, and he is expected to respond by looking up that sequence in his book, copying the characters specified for the response onto another piece of notepaper, and handing it back out. If the book provides an exhaustive pairing of inputs to sensible outputs (and the look-up procedure could be complicated in a number of ways to make it more sophisticated), then to those on the outside, whoever or whatever they imagine to be in the box will likely be assumed to be reading, thinking, and responding in Chinese. In short, communicating symbolically. Searle’s point is simple. We can imagine ourselves in this man’s position, and we know that under those circumstances we would not be doing the conscious processes that are attributed to us. We would just be performing a “mindless” procedure that even a machine could do (and indeed we program computers to do similar things all the time). This model of cognition as a set of rule-governed procedures, an algorithm or program, reduces it to mere mechanism. Such a model does not explain cognition or consciousness. It merely simulates input-output relationships that could be produced by actually reading and understanding the messages, and consciously, intentionally answering.

A number of philosophers and cognitive scientists, including Daniel Dennett, have criticized this argument by pointing out that it does not really demonstrate that the man could not himself also be something equivalent to a Chinese Room.3 Inside the room, consciousness and intention are irrelevant to the token-substitution task. So, can we be sure that we too are doing something different when we interpret and respond to similar strings of symbols? Are “consciousness” and “intention” just other labels for such a process? The man inside could be replaced by a computer running a similar kind of look-up translation program. So, just as Searle suggests that such an algorithmic account is insufficient to provide a constructive demonstration of an intention-based cognitive process—consciousness—it can also serve as the basis for computer modelers to retort, “So what! If an algorithmic account can produce language input-output relationships that are indistinguishable from those that people produce, what more is necessary? Isn’t it possible that a similar rule-governed process is all there is to consciousness, irrespective of how we experience it?” Dennett calls the Chinese Room thought experiment an “intuition pump,” because it offers neither a demonstration nor a proof. It doesn’t prove that something is missing from the algorithmic account of mind, it instead challenges us to figure out why it is so unsatisfying. It emphatically begs the question: What’s wrong with this picture? But does it help us to identify what additional kinds of processes underlie the way that we interpret words and sentences?

I suspect that what is missing and what is present in this analogy do not correspond to the difference between mind and mechanism. Minds emerge from the actions of mechanisms, and neither side in this contemporary debate is prepared to deny a link between them, nor is either side willing to adopt a dualistic interpretation. Instead, without its explicitly being described as such, the difference that is being highlighted by this thought experiment is a difference between indexical and symbolic representation processes, irrespective of the underlying mechanism. The man in the Chinese Room is working with indexical relationships, inputs that point to outputs, but he is oblivious to the fact that to those outside, the tokens he shuffles in and out are interpreted symbolically. I want to reinterpret this analogy, then, not as directed at the problem of consciousness in a general sense, but specifically at the problem of those aspects of human consciousness that have a symbolic basis: rational intention, meaning, belief, and so on.

To see the index/symbol distinction that is implicit in this problem more clearly, we can change the story a bit. Instead of following a list of English look-up rules by rote, which muddies the distinction, the man in the Chinese Room can be imagined to have learned these patterns of behavior by trial and error as a result of receiving a shock for wrong answers and food for correct answers. I don’t believe this modification changes Searle’s intent, but it makes clear just how superficial the algorithmic account of symbolic processing actually is. We do not even need to allow the man in the room to have rules or instructions to guide his actions. He could be replaced by a bevy of trained pigeons. It is the assumption of the eliminative materialists that, so long as there are enough pigeons to account for all the possibilities and they have each learned correctly to complete their operation on the Chinese character substitutions, then what they are collectively doing is language processing, even though individually no pigeon knows even a bit of Chinese. Each pigeon’s response characteristics could be precisely specified by an algorithm. Indeed, each pigeon could be replaced by a computer with the appropriate input and output mechanisms running that algorithm.

What I find wrong with this metaphor of the mind as an algorithmic process is that it confuses the map with the territory, the indexical markers of points in a process with the process itself. The tokens and their manipulations are only fragments of the symbolic process. They have been abstracted from their iconic and indexical bases, and these have been discarded due to the isolation of the actor in the room. Symbolic reference is grounded by the relationships between a system of token-token relationships and a system of token-object relationships, but the walls of the Chinese Room make symbolic interpretation impossible because they make it impossible for the man to discover any relationships between the token-token system in the book he has access to and the systems of token-object and object-object relationships that are unavailable to him. The symbolic is reduced to the indexical (this is not unlike an archeologist’s pondering ancient writing with no clue for translation). The only relationships available are the correlations among the typographical stimuli themselves.

It is important to point out that these minimal relationships would only be indexical to a human or animal actor in this thought experiment, because the token-token relationships are not in any way intrinsically indexical either. If the person’s role in this room were instead implemented by some bit of software, I would argue that even indexical reference would be absent. Putting a human being in the room makes the stronger statement that even if we grant the representational capacity of a person in this circumstance, we can still see that the resultant capacity cannot be symbolic. Searle apparently intends this as a model for the more encompassing conscious/nonconscious (or mind/mechanism) distinction, which I would rather describe as a difference between referential and nonreferential processes in general. Maintaining the distinction between these two problems—the symbol problem and the reference problem in general—is important. One thing that makes the symbol problem troublesome is the tendency to confuse these two. This is what Descartes does when describing animal behavior as mere mechanism. And although I think we may be close to explaining the symbol problem, we are further from an answer to the reference problem and an account of the conscious/nonconscious distinction. So, for the moment let’s just consider the simpler problem and see if we can discover how solving it might add insight to the more fundamental problem as a result.

What Searle’s man in the Chinese Room is denied access to are two other levels of systematic indexical relationships that would be necessary to construct the symbolic reference relationships (and abandon the indexical ones). He lacks access to the system of indices implicit in the relationships between Chinese characters and outside objects and events, and he lacks the set of indices that links these outside objects and events to one another. The indexical relationships that are implicit in the combinations, sequences, and substitutions of characters that he receives and prints out cannot therefore be any more than this. A system of symbolic references emerges from the recognition of how all three systems of indices are linked, each iconic (isomorphic) of the other, each indexical of (correlated with) the other. The missing information that would be necessary in order to transform this indexical interpretation process into a symbolic one is between inside and outside. This is why the Chinese Room analogy undermines the argument that a program or algorithm for making token-token associations is the sufficient basis for an understanding of what they mean. Even an algorithmic system that completely captures all possible syntactic relationships between tokens does not in itself provide any representation—only the potential for internally circular indexical association. This is why a self-sufficient mental language or mentalese is an impossibility. No set of preprogrammed algorithms can smuggle symbolic reference into Searle’s Chinese Room, because symbolic reference cannot be solely inside.

Symbolic reference therefore cannot be an intrinsic quality. This is why Searle can claim that there can be no “eliminative” strategy that can reduce intentional (read “symbolic”’) processes to neural programs. The source of symbolic reference is not in the brain at all. This is why it is pointless to look for the basis for symbolic consciousness in a lower-level essence that is only associated with brains, or to invoke special physical laws that undermine the deterministic character of neural mechanisms in order to explain intentional consciousness. Symbolic reference does not derive from anything particularly special about the brain, but from a special sort of relationship that can be constructed by it.

Though the Chinese Room thought experiment implicitly exemplifies the distinction between indexical and symbolic reference, and the differences in consciousness associated with each, it is not a model of the animal mind/human mind distinction, but rather the computer/human mind distinction. These are very different. Though it is common to find researchers referring to simple brains, such as insect brains, as computers, the representational architectures of computers on the one hand and simple brains on the other are essentially inverted. The computer and the Chinese Room are “windowless monads.” The collection of indexical relationships embodied in the program and the set of instructions, respectively, are only internally and circularly referential. Characters point to other characters, strings point to other strings. In contrast, an animal mind, even if it is of minimal computational capacity, constructs and processes internally generated indices with respect to an external world to which it is partially adapted. Its capacity to generate indexical responses may be limited, but the scope of reference is open-ended. Small brains may be capable of only a limited scope of iconic and indexical reference, but it is a mode of representation none the less. Algorithms that are not adaptive in a deep sense have none of this quality. Not all indexical processes are conscious, however. When reference is circular it too is mere mechanism, because there is nothing else for the indices to refer to but themselves. Where there is nothing other to represent, there is nothing to be conscious of. A program—whether in a computer or in a brain—could be an object of consciousness but not its source. These arguments do not really contribute any new explanation of consciousness; they merely illustrate certain minimal conditions for symbolic interpretation. But it is significant that this indexical/symbolic distinction seems central to the problem of consciousness.

No matter what else various theorists might claim about the nature of consciousness, most begin by recognizing that to be conscious of something is to experience a representation of it. The subjective experience of consciousness is always a consciousness of something. This is not to suggest that consciousness is something separate from the representation process itself (a view that Daniel Dennett caricatures as the “Cartesian Theater” perspective).4 It is simply the realization that experiences arise as the brain progressively transforms neural signals which have been modulated by external physical events into correlated patterns of neural activity in other parts of the brain, which themselves modulate other patterns of neural activity, and so on, each re-presenting some formal aspect of the initial interaction in an additional neural context. In very general terms, both the neurophysiological and subjective information processes can be described as generating representations and interpreting them in terms of others.

For example, the pattern of electromagnetic waves reflecting off an object and entering the retina and the pattern of neural signals ramifying through circuits of the visual areas of the brain are both part of the causal chain on which the experiences of color are based. The color does not in-here in the object alone, nor is it merely a mental phantom. Something intrinsic to the object is re-presented in the pattern of light waves and again re-presented in the pattern of neural signals. But it is also re-presented in the subjective experience of color. There is no jump from material stuff to mental stuff in this process. The material and cognitive perspectives both recount relationships in form between successive and simultaneous points in a process, and these formal relationships, I submit, can be either iconic, indexical, or symbolic at various stages and levels of the process.

If consciousness is inevitably representational, then it follows that a change in the nature of the way information gets represented inevitably constitutes a change in consciousness. Consciousness of iconic representations should differ from consciousness of indexical representations, and this in turn should differ from consciousness of symbolic representations. Moreover, since these modes of representation are not alternatives at the same level but hierarchically and coponentially related to one another, this must also be true of these modes of consciousness as well. They form a nested hierarchy, where certain conditions in the lower levels of consciousness are prerequisite to the emergence of consciousness at each higher level.

All nervous systems support iconic and indexical representational processes, irrespective of their size and complexity. They are the basic ingredients for adaptation. To some extent, I suspect that every living nervous system exhibits consciousness with respect to the iconic and indexical representations it can support. It’s just that for some, this is a very limited realm. Their interpretive capacity will determine their capacity for consciousness. The differences between species in this regard are not qualitative, but quantitative. In species with more complex brains, representational states will be more numerous, more diverse, have a greater range of arousal amplitude, and will integrate across signals that cover a greater scope in both space and time. Statistics of large numbers and immense differences in magnitude have a way of making quantitative differences appear to be qualitative differences. It is therefore easy to imagine that the human difference is a difference of this kind, a significant quantum increase in the capacity. And to some extent it is. It’s just not the only or even the major difference.

To appreciate why human beings are able to experience conscious states unprecedented in evolution, we do not need to have solved the mystery of consciousness itself. We do not need to understand the mechanism underlying conscious states in order to recognize that since they are based on representations, any difference in representational ability between species will translate into a difference in the ability to be conscious of different sorts of things. The formal characteristics of the interpretation process, whether iconic, indexical, or symbolic, will define the elements of a creature’s conscious universe. So the development of an unprecedented form of representation—symbolic representation—while not the origin of consciousness, has produced an unprecedented medium for consciousness. This doesn’t deny generic consciousness to other species; it only denies a particular aspect of consciousness that is based on symbolic abilities. Our brains share a common design logic with other vertebrate brains, and so we also share all those aspects of consciousness that are mediated by the iconic and indexical representation that these other species experience. Since iconic and indexical referential relationships are implicit and essential components of symbolic reference, the modes of consciousness that other species experience are an essential ground for consciousness of the symbolic world. We live most of our concrete lives in the subjective realm that is also shared with other species, but our experience of this world is embedded in the vastly more extensive symbolic world.

The evolution of symbolic communication has not just changed the range of possible objects of consciousness, it has also changed the nature of consciousness itself. Common sense psychology suggests that a lot of thinking gets done in the form of talking to oneself, editing and re-editing imaginary future or reconsidered past conversations, even when this also involves writing or typing out these thoughts to see how well the shorthand of imagined monologues translates into a coherent argument. Of course, these sorts of internal conversations must be unique to human brains while the majority of the other modes of thought are not. And given that our brains have only recently been “made over” to aid language processing, it is likely that the proportion of neural space and time dedicated to these various mental activities strongly favors the nonlinguistic. This does not necessarily imply that other species do not “replay” troubling past experiences over and over again, or that they are incapable of actively imagining possible experiences in some immanent future. They simply do not do so with the aid of symbolic reference or linguistic mnemonics. It also does not imply that imagistic thinking in humans lacks symbolic character and symbolic logic, though these forms of cognition are capable of following chains of association that are also uninfluenced by language.

The Russian cognitive psychologist L. S. Vygotsky suggested in the 1930s that a significant number of normal human psychological processes could be understood as internalized versions of processes that are inherently social in nature.5 He gave language a central role to play in this because its fundamentally social nature provides a mental tool for gaining a kind of subjective distance from the contents of thought, that is, from our own subjective experiences. By importing, as it were, an implicit speaker-listener relationship into cognition, we create a tool for self-reflection by a sort of virtual social distancing from our own thought process. Thus we can talk to ourselves as though talking to others. Vygotsky conceived of mental development as a process of condensing and streamlining this internalized social process.

Language functions as a sort of shared code for translating certain essential attributes of memories and images between individuals who otherwise have entirely idiosyncratic experiences. This is possible because symbolic reference strips away any necessary link to the personal experiences and musings that ultimately support it. The dissociation allows individuals to supply their own indexical and iconic mnemonics in order to reground these tokens in new iconic and indexical representations during the process of interpretation. My imagistic and emotional experience in response to the episodes described in a novel is distinct from that of anyone else, though all readers will share a common symbolic understanding of them. The “subjective distance” from what is represented confers a representational freedom to thought processes that is not afforded by the direct recall or imagining of experiences.

This is crucial for the development of self-consciousness, and for the sort of detachment from immediate arousal and compulsion that allows for self-control. Self-representation, in the context of representations of alternative pasts and futures, could not be attained without a means for symbolic representation. It is this representation of self that is held accountable in social agreements, that becomes engaged in the experience of empathy, and that is the source for rational, reflective intentions. According to Vygotsky, this sense of self emerges slowly as children mature. It becomes progressively more facile in perspective shifting and at the same time consolidates greater control over the other aspects of self that derive from nonsocial sources, such as the experience of pain and effort, the arousal of basic drives, or the physical boundaries of control over events. And, as studies of this process in various mentally and socially handicapped children suggest, the extent to which it is developed depends both on the extent of exposure to relevant social-symbolic experiences and on the symbol-processing capacity of the individual.

Unlike the interpretation of icons and indices (a process which is uniquely personal and insular within each brain), symbolic representations are in part externally interpreted—they are shared. For example, though each of us supplies the interpretation of the words and phrases we hear and use, on a moment-by-moment basis, the implicit injunctions and constraints that determine each individual interpretation are borrowed from the society of users, and the symbolic reference that results is only reliable insofar as each interpretation corresponds with those performed by others. Imagine that Washington Irving’s character, Rip Van Winkle, had remained in his magical slumber for many centuries. Upon awakening, not only would he be out of touch culturally, but he would find himself constantly misinterpreting the meaning of many still familiar-sounding words and phrases being spoken by those around him. As languages evolve and meanings and patterns of use drift away from older patterns, reference is maintained by continuity but not fidelity to the past. Symbolic reference is at once a function of the whole web of referential relationships and of the whole network of users extended in space and time. It is as though the symbolic power of words is only on loan to its users. If symbols ultimately derive their representational power, not from the individual, but from a particular society at a particular time, then a person’s symbolic experience of consciousness is to some extent society-dependent—it is borrowed. Its origin is not within the head. It is not implicit in the sum of our concrete experiences.

Consciousness of self in this way implicitly includes consciousness of other selves, and other consciousnesses can only be represented through the virtual reference created by symbols. The self that is the source of one’s experience of intentionality, the self that is judged by itself as well as by others for its moral choices, the self that worries about its impending departure from the world, this self is a symbolic self. It is a final irony that it is the virtual, not actual, reference that symbols provide, which gives rise to this experience of self. This most undeniably real experience is a virtual reality.

In a curious way, this recapitulates an unshakable intuition that has been ubiquitously expressed throughout the ages. This is the belief in a disembodied spirit or immortal “pilgrim soul” that defines that part of a person that is not “of the body” and is not reducible to the stuff of the material world. My ability to appreciate symbolic reference is not “reducible” to the indexical or iconic reference I use to ground my interpretation, though it is dependent on these lower-level modes of reference. Symbolic reference is also independent of any particular interpretive process, and retains its referential invariance despite interpretation by very different iconic and indexical processes in different minds. Its virtual nature notwithstanding, it is the symbolic realm of consciousness that we most identify with and from which our sense of agency and self-control originate. This self is indeed not bounded within a mind or body, and derives its existence from outside—from other minds and other times. It is implicitly part of a larger whole, and to the extent that it too contributes to the formation of other virtual selves and worlds, it is virtually present independent of the existence of the particular brain and body that support it. This may seem a shallow sort of disembodiment that pales in compared to mystical images of “out of the body experience”—it is more similar to the legacy of self composers leave in their music or great teachers bequeath to their students—but this symbolic aspect of self is nonetheless the source of our internal experience of free will and agency.

Abstract symbolic objects, like the Pythagorean theorem, guide the design and construction of innumerable human artifacts every day. Imagining counterfactual conditions, like what I might have done if I were the one who had stumbled on a reported accident scene, can cause me to enroll in medical first-aid training and perhaps some day aid an accident victim. Even imagined worlds—Olympus, Valhalla, Heaven, Hell, the “Other Side”—influence people’s behavior in this world. Indeed, assumptions about the “will” of an ineffable God have been among the most powerful tools for shaping historical changes. These abstract representations have physical efficacy. They can and do change the world. They are as real and concrete as the force of gravity or the impact of a projectile.

On the other hand, the self that persists to influence others and continue shaping the world independent of the brain and body that originally animated it is detached from the specific iconic and indexical experiences that once grounded it in a personal subjective experience. This is precisely what makes it available for regrounding in the subjective experience of others, of becoming part of the self that controls, and feels, and connects with yet other selves from the locus of a different body and brain. In this regard, this part of personal identity is intersubjective in the most thoroughgoing sense of the term, and is capable of true transmigration, though not necessarily as a unified whole.

By this twist of logic, or rather its untangling, we also again return to Descartes’ elaboration of the religious insight that only humans have a soul, and that this core of the self derives from a realm that is of the nature of language, pure mathematics, or geometry. Descartes’ insight, currently maligned as archaic and antiscientific, seems to have more than a passing similarity to the notion I have developed here. But his rationalist assumptions—like those represented in theories of innate knowledge of language, computational theories of mind, or claims that human brains have a special essence that imbues them with intentional ability—reflected an implicit analytic or top-down perspective on the nature of symbolic reference. By failing to appreciate the constitutive role of lower forms of reference, iconic and indexical reference, this perspective kicks the ladder away after climbing up to the symbolic realm and then imagines that there never was a ladder in the first place. This leaves symbolic reference ungrounded and forces us to introduce additional top-down causal hypotheses, such as the existence of an ephemeral soul or the assumption that there can be forms of computation or mental language (mentalese) that are intrinsically meaningful, in order to fill in for this missing causal role in the explanation.

But unlike the eliminative materialist alternative, the perspective I have outlined does not suggest that this top-down experience of self is all epiphenomenal nor that some of the claims about the nature of the mind which derive from it are based on mystical notions. The symbolic representation of self is solidly grounded in simpler representations of self, derived from simpler forms of representation, and yet the arrow of cognitive processes points neither from lower to higher nor from higher to lower forms of reference. As symbolic reference and symbol minds co-evolved from the non-symbolic, each level of process drawing adaptive novelty from the other, so do the levels of self-representation that constitute our experience bring themselves into being in a moment-by-moment coevolutionary process. As the symbolic process can be the co-author of our unanticipated brains, so can the symbolic self be the co-author of the component neural processes that support it. We live in a world that is both entirely physical and virtual at the same time. Remarkably, this virtual facet of the world came into existence relatively recently, as evolutionary time is measured, and it has provided human selves with an unprecedented sort of autonomy or freedom to wander from the constraints of concrete reference, and a unique power for self-determination that derives from this increasingly indirect linkage between symbolic mental representation and its grounds of reference. With it has come a more indirect linkage between mind and body, as well. So this provides a somewhat different perspective on that curious human intuition that our minds are somehow independent of our bodies; an intuition which is often translated into beliefs about disembodied spirit and souls that persist beyond death. The experience we have of ourselves as symbols is in at least a minimal sense an experience of just this sort of virtual independence—it’s just not an independence from corporeal embodiment altogether. Though this might seem like a weak consolation in comparison to the freely transmigrating homunculus of mythical tradition, we should not underestimate the miraculous power of symbols to break down even vast barriers of space, time, and idiosyncratic experience that would otherwise separate us impenetrably.

As we have seen, the symbolic threshold is not intrinsic to the human-nonhuman difference. It is probably crossable to some extent in many different ways by many species. This means that we are not the only species that could possess such a “pilgrim soul,” to use William Butler Yeats’s elegantly descriptive phrase. It was a Darwinian accident, or miracle, of nature that this ability arose once and persisted for so long; but it has provided each of us with the opportunity to participate in bringing new “souls” into the world, not by procreation, but by allowing our own symbolic selves to be shared by other human beings, and perhaps by other animals, or perhaps eventually even by artifacts of our own creation.





Reinventing the Mind


Will we someday build devices that understand symbols, that have symbolic consciousness? Yes, I think so. And it probably will happen in the not too distant future. Will they look like human brains? No, probably not. Silicon would do. But the logical design, the way they acquire and “compute” symbolic relationships will of necessity be the same. This probably will not significantly constrain their physical design, however, or whether they are built from artificial neurons or transistors. Are present-day computing devices anything like this? No, mostly not. What’s missing is not just symbolic interpretation, but something that is a prerequisite to all representational processes: sentience. I think this property of mental processes is analytically separable from the mode of representation that is used to achieve it. Though we commonly fail to distinguish sentience from consciousness, I think it makes sense to use the term sentience to refer to a more generic property of organisms with brains—their spontaneously adaptive, self-versus-nonself organization—and to use the term consciousness to refer to the way they represent aspects of the world to themselves.

The computer on my desk that is assimilating these notes as I type them in is not sentient, much less capable of comprehending symbolic relationships. It does not comprehend icons or indices either, because its informational architecture is essentially passive and closed. But this is not because of what it is made of. I suspect that even my 80-megaherz, slow electronic substitute for paper and pencil could run software able to exhibit some inkling of sentience; could generate some modicum of iconic and indexical representations, though it may be too simple to run software capable of symbolic processes. The key to this trick is not in the machinery itself but in the flow of patterns through it.

The first requirement in building a device capable of iconic and indexical processes is that it must be actively and spontaneously adaptive. It must continuously evolve new means of fitting with and anticipating its environment, even if this environment is constrained by whatever very limited input (keyboard?) and output (video screen?) devices can assess and respond to. And I really mean evolve, not in a genetic or phylogenetic sense, but through a moment-to-moment natural selection of patterned information. It must be capable of generating new patterned information where none previously existed. This is very different from the sort of data architecture comprising a massive list of templates to which an input is compared and matched. The latter is the way most computing is done these days, and many people have envisioned brains as doing just this: matching an input to a set of models in memory—some learned, some innately prespecified. Indeed, there is an approximation to this sort of process going on in most of what brains do. Most cognitive processes aim to achieve just this: completely automated, unconscious, mechanical, input-output matching. It is the goal of most cognitive processes to make information processing unconscious and automatic—as quick, easy, and efficient as possible—because these sorts of processes take comparatively little in the way of neural representation and energy to manage, compared to the active adaptational processes we experience as consciousness.

Like any evolutionary process, consciousness is messy, anything but streamlined and efficient. Vast numbers of alternative patterns, corrupted and modified by the incessant noisiness of the molecular processes underlying neural activity, must be generated, set into competition with one another for recruiting neural substrates, and mostly culled by selective processes due to their lack of correlation with sensory and mnemonic information. Out of this “bloomin’, buzzing confusion,” the temporary winners become the recognition processes and responses of each moment. This neural microevolution (microgenesis, it is sometimes called) is the generator of representations: that process to which sensory input patterns are represented and with respect to which they are re-cognized as icons. Such iconicity is, as we have seen, the bottom step of the hierarchy of representational processes in which symbolic representations are a distant possibility.

A microevolutionary basis for mind follows inevitably from the way brains are constructed in the first place. As we have seen, at every step the design logic of brains is a Darwinian logic: overproduction, variation, competition, selection. And ultimately, these biological processes are mediated by the information that flows through the nervous system. Brains are built using their own information processing—raised by their own bootstraps, so to speak. This design logic is the key to understanding how functional capabilities shifted in our own evolution, and also how symbolic and linguistic functions distribute themselves in our mature brains. It should not come as a surprise that this same logic is also the basis for the normal millisecond-by-millisecond information processing that continues to adapt neural software to the world.

There have been many recent insightful speculations on this notion of mind as a “Darwin machine,” as many authors refer to the process. It has been around in some form for generations: it was obliquely suggested in some of the holistic psychologies of the early twentieth century, and was vaguely implicit in Donald Hebb’s conception of how synapses become strengthened or weakened. However, with the maturation of evolutionary theory since the discovery of molecular genetics, and especially after the growth of interest in nongenetic evolutionary processes made popular by Richard Dawkins’s coining of the term meme to refer to units of cultural evolution, many have recognized that Darwinian processes could also account for the evolution of ideas within the brain as well as without. A number of book-length discussions of Darwinian models of neural/cognitive processes are available that demonstrate the range of possibilities. Unfortunately, though it would touch on many of the problems I have addressed in this book, a detailed discussion of the Darwinian nature of neural information processing would take us too far from the theme of the book—symbolic processes. Rather than review these diverse approaches to what the Nobel Prize-winning biologist Gerald Edelman has called Neural Darwinism, and what others have called Darwin machines, I will focus on two aspects of this process that offer particularly useful insights about the relationship between Darwinian neural-processing models and the symbol acquisition problem.

The first insight, discussed at some length in chapters 9 and 10, is the recognition that different neuronal computations may be in competition with one another for representation in the brain both during development and within each cognitive activity. But if brains are designed by competitive processes, then the resulting architectures reflect a sort of stable microevolutionary balance between competing signal processing pathways. The differentiation of functions from one another and the segregation of competing computations is never quite complete. They are always in flux at some level. This probably results in considerable functional redundancy between nearby regions, even in adult brains, and probably also dictates that many functions are multiply and fractionally represented in diverse distributed networks. This should be especially true of computational processes that are somewhat abstracted from direct sensorimotor experiences, as symbolic processes are. It also predicts that representation of specific symbolic operations will dynamically shift depending on cognitive demand, recruiting additional computational support from regions more commonly recruited for other functions. All of these features seem to be reflected by data from brain-imaging studies (see Chapter 10). Thus, the cognitive experience of internal conflicts, interferences, resonances, and ambiguities among ideas and mental images has a direct correspondence to underlying patterns of neural signal processing.

But there is a second aspect of the subjective experience of consciousness that is well modeled by the Darwinian model of mind. Unlike the mechanistic view of mind that is suggested by digital computer metaphors, mind as evolution provides a way of understanding that aspect of our experience that is least like clockwork: our experience of being the originators of our own thoughts, perceptions, and actions. We do not experience ourselves as merely devices on which prespecified operations are “run,” like programs in a computer—of being vehicles of cognition only. Some have suggested that these subjective introspections of self-determination and intention are unreliable epiphenomena. But a Darwinian interpretation of neural information processing offers two general reasons to suspect that we genuinely are self-determining and intentional creatures: one, because the operations are not prespecified; and two, because there is no clear dividing line between neural signal processing and neural architecture in a system where the circuits are created by patterns of signal processing. Evolution is the one kind of process able to produce something out of nothing, or, more accurately, able to create adaptive structural information where none previously existed. And the raw materials are the ubiquitous noise and context of the process. So an evolutionary process is an origination process—perhaps, as Richard Dawkins once remarked, the only known mechanism capable of being one. Evolution is the author of its spontaneous creations. In this regard, we do not need to explain away the subjective experience. We are what we experience ourselves to be. Our self-experience of intentions and “will” are not epiphenomenal illusions. They are what we should expect an evolutionlike process to feel like!

Symbolic representation processes have added a new level to this evolutionlike process. Their power of condensing representational relationships, and supporting extended flights of virtual reference, creates a whole new landscape in which the evolutionary process of mind can wander. By internalizing much of the physical trial and error, and even internalizing abstract models of physical processes that can be extrapolated to their possible and impossible extremes, we are capable of what genetic evolution is not: forethought. Representational processes are the substrate for “final causality,” that everyday use of imagined ends to guide the selection of present means. Symbolic processes have freed this process from the bounds of the immediate present and possible.

But building a sentient symbolic processing device need not recapitulate the tortured path that humans took to this capability. The evolution of symbolic abilities in our species was a freak rarity only because of the way natural selection had biased brain evolution against its ever occurring. Most of what determines the structure of human brains was baggage accumulated on this meandering course prior to the evolution of symbolic communication. In designing an artificial symbolic device, it may be possible to take many shortcuts that avoid much of the presymbolic and visceral regulatory baggage that human brains carry to this process. Indeed, symbolic processing in a very simplified domain—adapting to a limited “environment” of potential signals—may not require anywhere near the massive information storage and retrieval capacity that human brains utilize. Neither mnemonic capacity nor learning rate blocked the evolution of this ability in other lineages; indeed, these capacities were to some extent a source of impediments. Symbolic capacities might be within the grasp of far less sophisticated computing devices than those that even the simplest mammals possess, so long as they were strongly biased toward the peculiarities of symbolic analysis and the symbol system was of only modest complexity.

This sort of mind is something with which we do not yet have any familiarity: a simple symbol processor. It might seem quite alien and odd. However, Williams syndrome may offer a human analogue to this sort of shortcut to symbolic abilities. Recall that this genetic abnormality produces individuals who are severely mentally handicapped in most ways but are relatively spared in certain language abilities. Their vocabularies are not nearly so severely reduced as their low IQ would suggest, and they can produce remarkably sophisticated lexical associations and grammatical analyses. But their lexical (symbol-token to symbol-token) understanding is supported on a very minimalistic iconic and indexical base as demonstrated by a poor ability to understand the pragmatic correlates of words and sentences. This, in a far more exaggerated form, is what we should expect from a man-made device capable of symbolic learning: not highly concrete rote (indexical) associations between tokens and their referents, as is typical of most animals, but in some ways the opposite. Symbolic representation with a minimum of iconic and indexical support could be creative, productive, and complex, but mostly vacuuous and circularly referential—almost pure language games. Nevertheless, there may be many contexts where this might be a useful tool.

How much further do we need to progress in our knowledge of brains and computing architectures to reach this stage? Probably not as far as one might think. In laboratories throughout the world, molecular biologists are capable of shuttling selected genes from organism to organism in order to study their effects or take advantage of their expression in a novel context. They do this with only a basic understanding of the way the complex molecular machinery of life operates, but ignorance of the global logic of the process does not preclude an ability to manipulate some of the details to see what happens. In a similar way, “neural network” designers are able to copy the organization of isolated bits of neural circuits and simulate their logic in software or in electronic circuits without really understanding what they are copying. Even if informed by only a dim understanding of the function of these circuit patterns in living brains, scientists are not precluded from studying the pieces to see how they work. Although a simulation must simplify many attributes of what it models, it is quite possible that those attributes of neural circuits that are essential to many high-level mental operations do not require any “deep” isomorphism with neural cellular properties. The isomorphism necessary for mental-like functions may only depend critically on aspects of the overall architecture and basic synaptic response properties, and not on the details. Evidence from human evolution has demonstrated that the achievement of symbolic referential abilities did not spontaneously emerge simply because of a threshold increase in computing power. So we should not expect symbolic capabilities simply to jump out as bigger, faster, and more sophisticated computing devices are built. It is not the size of the network that is crucial to symbolic processes, but the special logic of the relationships between learning processes. This is a global network feature, not a function of microarchitecture, and the design strategy may only need attend to rather large-scale network structures to succeed.

I have no doubt that nonbiological devices with nonbiological minds can, and probably will, be built. Nature itself produced minds by blind trial and error. So we know that a theoretical understanding of the nature of minds is not an essential ingredient for producing them. The science of “mental” engineering could proceed in a parallel trial-and-error fashion. Even without ever sorting out the theoretical issues, we may eventually achieve the physical result simply by copying nature. Mind is a physical process, and physical processes can be copied whether we understand what we are copying or not.

So, does it matter whether or not we have a complete account of consciousness, if it can be achieved without it? Is there more than an aesthetic value, a satisfaction of a deep curiosity, to be derived from pursuing a deeptheoretical understanding of the relationship between mechanism and mind? Finding a way out of the philosophical maze presented by the problem of mind could, of course, greatly aid in the design and engineering of intelligent machines, but I do not believe this is the most pressing reason for pursuing the issue. Eventually, we will be forced to make judgments that distinguish between a simulation and the real thing—ethical judgments. Someday, these may be relevant to objects designed and built in factories. Will we know when we have crossed this line?

This leads us back once more to the mystery of subjective experience, and the extent to which we can know of it in another. The question of whether there could be independent, nonsubjective means for determining the presence of consciousness has long plagued philosophers. As we have seen, this mystery led to one of the most troubling doubts that confronted Descartes in his skeptical meditations on the nature of mind: how can we be sure that there are other minds in the world? A more mundane way to put this question is to ask whether we can ever truly share subjective experiences, as opposed to simply imagining that we do. In more recent times, the Turing test has addressed the parallel question of whether a machine can be determined to have intelligence. The Cartesian version of the Turing test might be phrased: how would I know if my computer program were conscious? Many computer scientists continue to debate this in a framework that is in many ways only a modern rephrasing of Descartes’ problem. In the Turing test the question is whether a computational system can produce answers to queries that cannot be distinguished from those a person would provide under the same conditions. If a sophisticated questioner with extensive resouces can be entirely fooled into mistaking a device for a person, then the test purportedly indicates that the device possesses intelligence analogous to that of a person. In the Cartesian version of the Turing test, we might ask the examiner to judge whether or not the respondent is conscious and responding intentionally.

As Turing test competitions for programmers have demonstrated, people can be fooled in this regard, though generally they can still outwit most programs. This begs Descartes’ question. Is it possible for a program to fool everyone all the time and still not be either intelligent or conscious? And likewise, is a person just a naturally-evolved program suffering from delusions of intentional consciousness in itself and other persons? Because the information available to assess this is circumstantial and indirect, in theory it should be possible for a program to fool everyone, including itself! The simple thought experiment of collating millions and millions of interviews between people and implementing them in a supercomputer as a look-up table of possible questions and relevant responses (as also might be imagined in a Chinese Room set up with access to such a supercomputer data base) suggests a trivial answer to the question. In principle, given enough data from prior interviews between real people and enough computing power to store and search through them, it will always be possible to fool even the most sophisticated questioner and yet do so without any semblance of consciousness or sentience. This is the gist of Searle’s critique.

If we expand the nature of the “test” a bit, perhaps we can find a way beyond this impasse. Searle’s test for the “merely algorithmic” is a clue about which information handling procedures are insufficient. An understanding of the way that symbolic interpretive processes are structured differently from this might provide a test for what is sufficient, irrespective of the answers produced (this is important, because human respondents in Turing tests can be mistaken for mindless computers!). In daily life, we sidestep the Cartesian dilemma simply by recognizing that the people we live among are physically just like us, and assuming that this means they have thought processes like our own, that they too are persons with conscious, intelligent minds. Descartes and Turing have disallowed this shortcut: it is in principle no more reliable a guide than the information provided in a Turing test. The questioner in a Turing test is denied knowledge of whether the answers come from a human subject or an electronic gadget, but if we are asking whether the output is the result of conscious intelligence it does not matter. However, I think there is a way that information about the architecture of the device (like knowing about sharing a common architecture with another human subject) can be independently informative.

Ultimately, the structure of the Chinese Room situation was the key to assessing the presence or absence of symbolic representation. This is because symbolic processes have a particular structure that defines and determines them. Similarly, I would argue that sentient processes in general have an identifiable structure—a Darwinian structure—the absence of which would mean the absence of subjective experience, and the presence of which would attest to the presence of at least a minimal form of subjective experience. If the features of this structure can be discovered by investigating the logic of underlying signal processing relationships in a device or organism, then it should be possible to discover something about the sentience and level of mental representation of that device or organism. In other words, an indirect inductive inference—a guess—would not be the only way to assess the possible subjective experience of another being or mechanism. I think that there can be an empirical basis for making that judgement, if one has access to the right information about the underlying information-processing architecture. Another way to put this is that, in principle, we can hope to determine the nature of the consciousness of another more reliably from bottom-up information than we ever could from top-down information, which Descartes and Turing showed can at best only provide a plausible guess. The process of symbolic interpretation will have distinctive physical attributes as well as produce appropriately interpretable signs. If we know how to recognize its logical architecture, we can know if it is there or not. The determination of subjectivity may not be merely a subjective matter.

We don’t just need to know this in order to assess whether our computers are thinking or not. Many contemporary ethical dilemmas are unresolvable due to our inability to think clearly about the distinctions between mind and non-mind, conscious and nonconscious states, and the boundaries of personhood. Abortion and euthanasia, animal rights, the insanity plea in criminal justice, and care for the severely mentally retarded are just a few of the circumstances that force us to make ethical decisions without sufficient knowledge of this most relevant fact. These cases raise troubling questions about when a person begins and ends existence, which aspects of brain function are essential to personhood, what constitutes human rationality, and to what extent other animals share the experience of subjective consciousness. It is not clear that understanding these distinctions will make any of our choices easier, but at least we will know the consequences.

Albert Einstein once remarked that what is most miraculous about the universe is its understandability. This is also one of the most unsettling things about science: its ability to lift the veil of mystery, only to replace what was once magical and miraculous with dry, cold clockwork. An understanding of the basis of human consciousness will signal the final surrender in a long-fought Copernican revolution that has progressively usurped our privileged place in the universe. What are the ethical and aesthetic consequences for us, if consciousness and the capacity for the subjective and intersubjective experience of self are features that can be built into machines? Would this know-how somehow cheapen the value of our subjective experience of self? Would it diminish the intrinsic value we ascribe to conscious beings to know that they could be produced from silicon and wire?

On the one hand, like an audience unwilling to hear an explanation of a joke that they didn’t get, we fear that this prospective fact almost certainly will diminish the sense of specialness we feel about our sentience. Something of the sanctity of personhood may be violated, if we ever succeed in explaining how it works and how it came about. However, it should be remarked that without this knowledge we currently mass-produce new consciousnesses anyway in a free-for-all of out-of-control population growth. Our cherished belief in the specialness of human consciousness has not prevented us from thoughtlessly treating people as throw-away tools. On the other hand, how much less thought will we give to the mistreatment of conscious devices, mass-produced in factories? The question before us is whether we will begin to treat people like unconscious computers, or come to treat conscious computers like people.

There is also a possibility that in a more accurate knowledge of the basis and nature of consciousness we will discover the cure for the angst that has been growing in Western societies ever since we began to doubt the Cartesian dichotomy of mind and body. If we conceive of human consciousness as an alien addition to an otherwise dead world filled with clockwork mechanisms, discovering that we ourselves are mechanisms appears to imply that we don’t really exist, at least not as the intentional, self-determining persons we thought we were, and that there is no one else out there either. But discovering how such mechanisms work may be what is necessary to shatter this persistent belief. Unmasking the source of the subjective experience behind human consciousness is less likely to demonstrate how mental processes can be eliminated from material explanations than to demonstrate how they are implicit in them. And this may help us to recognize that the universe isn’t, after all, the soulless, blindly spinning clockwork we fear we are a part of, but is, instead, nascent heart and mind.
