Notes


Part One

CHAPTER 1

1 This cult classic science fiction movie was based on the notion that in the earth’s future, other apes would evolve upright posture and speech, and would recapitulate a sort of ape version of human societies.

2 For an excellent recent review of studies of animal communication in the wild, see Marc Hauser (1996), The Evolution of Communication.

3 Some linguists, however, argue that language is so human-specific and dependent on innately built-in language knowledge that translation to and from a truly alien language would be impossible. We will return later to the question of how radically different symbolic languages could be from one another, probably the most extreme examples are between spoken and manual signed languages like American Sign Language. Though manual languages such as this have to some extent evolved with respect to local spoken languages, borrowing some words in translated form, most of these are not fragmentary, partial, or parasitic languages, but complete and unique forms that often differ significantly in structure from those spoken around them. See Bellugi and Klima (1982).

4 One recent sophisticated addition to this genre, extrapolating from animal behavior to language, is presented in a recent book by Robin Dunbar (1997), Grooming, Gossip and the Evolution of Language. See also Dunbar (1992 a, b).

5 The hopeful monster approach to major evolutionary innovations was championed by the evolutionary theorist Richard Goldschmidt. See his 1952 review in American Scientist.

6 Moliére’s play The Imaginary Invalid (Le Malade Imaginaire) can be found in The Misanthrope and Other Plays, translated by John Wood (Baltimore: Penguin Books; 1953).

CHAPTER 2

1 See, for example, Bickerton (1990).

2 Seyfarth, Cheney, and Marler (1980).

3 For example, a number of different species of birds use similar-sounding alarm calls to distinguish between such predators as hawks and owls. Peter Marler (1959) suggested many years ago that the localizability of these calls may have been a critical factor shaping their evolution. Calls that are used for “mobbing” a raptor need to be localizable, but those for warning of a stealthy, nearby predator need to be difficult to localize. Consequently, it is argued that the sound structures of alarm calls in different species probably resemble one another due to convergent evolution under these influences (and possibly also to the advantages of being able to recruit support from more than one species). See a recent review of other examples in Hauser (1996).

4 Such a scenario has been explicitly outlined by a number of researchers, including the linguist Derek Bickerton, in his book Language and Species (1990); and with a very different emphasis by the cognitive psychologist Philip Lieberman, in his book Uniquely Human (1991).

5 Cheney and Seyfarth (1990).

6 See Grice (1969). I would argue that this is incidental to linguistic communication, though almost ubiquitously present. In the next chapter and again in the final chapter, the role of symbolic reference for the development of knowledge about other minds and its relevance to intentionality will come up again.

7 Frege (1879).

8 This example provides an interesting exception that demonstrates a general rule about the assignment of word meanings in a language. Seldom do two words in the same language share the same exact scope of reference. This particular exception snuck past the general tendency in English and in many other languages precisely because the common reference is not generally known. So these terms appear on the surface to have different references when in reality they do not. The debatable question is whether this tendency derives from a predisposition to avoid redundant reference or redundant sense.

9 Most notably these views are argued by the philosophers Saul Kripke (1972) and Hilary Putnam (1975).

10 An excellent short selection of Peirce’s writings has been edited by Buchler (1955), including a number of his semiotics writings.

11 See Herrnstein, et al. (1980).

CHAPTER 3

1 de Saussure (1916). I have simplified this account considerably from what de Saussure described. He recognized an orthogonal “plane” to that of reference, associated with the combinatorial and diachronic (time-dependent) processes of language.

2 Though I will avoid most of Peirce’s complex terminology and only obliquely suggest the unique philosophical context in which he embedded his semiotic theory, I believe the following analysis will stay close to his original insights, which focused on representation as process, not as a static relationship, and recognized these sign types as hierarchical levels of representation, not as opposed categorical alternatives. For a brief set of excerpts of some of Peirce’s core writings on the topic, I recommend Buchler, ed. (1955). Many of Peirce’s major writings on the semiotic basis of logic were compiled in the Hartshorne and Weiss, eds., collection of Peirce’s papers (1978), especially Vol. II.

3 The symbolic nature of humor will be discussed in some more detail in Chapter 13.

4 See Savage-Rumbaugh, et al. (1978; 1980); and Savage-Rumbaugh (1986). In the stripped-down account presented here, I focus only on the two of the four chimps who were most successful (Sherman and Austin) and who continued to participate in subsequent language experiments.

5 Described in Savage-Rumbaugh and Lewin (1994).

6 Rumbaugh (1977).

7 I have simplified the paradigm a bit by omitting mention of an additional key that signaled the start of a trial (sometimes glossed in a sort of tongue-in-cheek fashion as “Please”) and one to signify its end (sometimes glossed as a period). These were essentially irrelevant to the problem except as added abstractors, since they did not vary from trial to trial, and such glosses could be quite misleading.

8 Savage-Rumbaugh and Lewin (1994).

9 Köhler (1927).

10 Piaget (1952).

CHAPTER 4

1 Chomsky (1972; 1980; 1988).

2 See an early formalization of this argument by Chomsky and Miller (1963).

3 Christiansen (in press). The analogy of language to an organism has been used as a heuristic principle for understanding language change by comparative linguists since early in the last century. One of the most prominent was the linguist August Schleicher, who in the middle of the nineteenth century proposed that languages should be analyzed as organisms with their own family trees, which could be traced like phylogenetic trees, using common inherited traits.

4 Berlin and Kay (1969).

5 Rosch (1978); and see other discussions in the same volume for more details and examples.

6 I have borrowed this term from Nelson Goodman’s (1955) discussion of a similar point about the problems of accurately “projecting” color reference to future uses, where he argues that there is insufficient basis in past exemplars to guarantee consistency of reference into the future. This is part of a more general critique on the nature and weakness of the argument from induction. Goodman suggests that only social “entrenchment” (essentially habit) is responsible for stability of word reference projection to future uses, and that this is far too fragile to provide a basis for referential certainty. The co-evolutionary argument suggests an alternative source of entrenchment that can provide an incredibly robust projectability. Since Goodman’s intention was also to question the projectability of scientific induction, a similar argument can be made about the evolution of scientific terms and theories.

7 Jackendoff (1992; 1994).

8 See Savage-Rumbaugh and Lewin (1994).

9 Greenfield and Savage-Rumbaugh (1990; 1991).

10 Gold (1967).

11 A long history of debate in the philosophy of science has pursued this theoretical problem of projecting general rules from a finite set of instances. There is general agreement that rules which we apply to describe natural events (e.g., the laws of physics) are inevitably underdetermined by the inductive inferences that we use to justify them, and that in general extrinsic constraints or special conditions are implicit in general rules that predict real-world regularities. So real-world inductions invariably rest on a very infirm foundation of assumptions. See also note 6 on Goodman’s critique of induction.

12 Ramsey and Stich (1991).

13 Newport (1990; 1991).

14 For example, a fragment from the lower-left corner of a hologram of a face would need to be viewed obliquely from its lower left, and only a view of the face as seen from below and to the left would be possible. Unfortunately, the sort of holograms used on credit cards or sold as pictures (known as white light holograms) provide a far more limited range of perspectives than true laser-illuminated holograms, and can be viewed at only a few angles. In these partial holograms, full holographic recording of information must to be sacrificed in order for the hologram to be viewable in the mix of frequencies and phases found in normal light.

15 Elman (1991; 1993). See also Elman, et al. (1996), Rethinking Innateness, for a more detailed discussion of how neural network models can help explain the role of learning biases in language development.

16 Consequently it would not be expected to avoid grammatically correct nonsense sentences, as exemplified by Noam Chomsky’s well-known example: “Colorless green ideas sleep furiously.” However, if the input strings avoided such syntactically correct nonsense, the statistical likelihood of the network predicting it would be minimal. This further exemplifies the fact that the network has not embodied abstract rules that can be applied arbitrarily and generatively to any possible novel input, but rather has internalized the positional statistics of patterns in the input strings. It is a little like having a vast list of possible word combinations to choose from, each ranked in order of their statistical likelihood.

17 A kernel sentence is a completely simplified (i.e., not compound) sentence such as “A dog chases the ball,” “The dog is playful,” “The ball rolls under the chair,” etc., that can be combined with other tense and phrase markers to form a compound sentence such as “The ball that rolled under the chair was chased by a playful dog.”

18 For a more detailed review of these differences between learning problems, the tricks used to overcome them, and the relevance this has for all sorts of normal biological learning problems, I refer the reader to a recent paper by Clark and Thornton (in press). They distinguish two types of learning problems, designated type 1 and type 2, where type-1 problems are solvable directly using statistical regularities present in input patterns, but type-2 problems have highly distributed and therefore marginally presented regularities in any part of the input corpus. In general, they demonstrate that type-2 problems cannot be solved by any sort of “uninformed” learning paradigm, no matter how powerful, but that specific information (as suggested by strong nativism) need not be required if there are ways to constrain learning parallel to the ways regularities are “buried” in the input. Incremental learning (as in Elman’s simulations), and recoding strategies, essentially accomplish the same reduction of type-2 problems to type-1 problems and render them solvable.

19 The term refers to “the spandrels of San Marco,” a metaphor from Gould and Lewontin’s (1979) paper on the dangers of pan-selectionist arguments in evolution. Spandrels are the symmetric, triangular arch structures that support the upper domed roof of the cathedral of San Marco in Venice, and are elaborately decorated in ways that attempt to integrate their number, shape, and symmetries into the content of the religious icons decorating the cathedral. The point of this example is that the integration of these structures into the artistic design may make them appear as necessary thematic elements, when instead they just happened to be unavoidably part of the background and so were incorporated into the artwork after the fact.

20 Bickerton (1981; 1984; 1990). For a summary, see also Bickerton (1983).

21 For a detailed survey, see Todd (1974). A brief overview of some the major arguments (not completely up-to-date) and numerous examples are also provided by David Crystal in the Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language (1989).

Part Two

CHAPTER 5

1 Holloway (1995).

2 There have been studies which suggest that under supernormal levels of stimulation, often referred to as “enrichment,” brain size and other measures of brain structure such as cortical thickness can be induced to increase. In general, however, this difference has been determined with respect to “control” animals that have been housed in stimulus-impoverished environments (typical laboratory cages), and so I think it likely that what has been demonstrated might more accurately be interpreted as the effects of sensorimotor deprivation. I think it is a good bet that lab animals housed in “enriched” environments are also somewhat deprived of stimulation and environmental challenges when compared to their feral cousins.

3 The idea of assessing species intelligence by brain/body ratio rather than total brain size was first promoted by the eighteenth-century physiologist Albrecht von Haller and his contemporary, the great comparative anatomist Georges Cuvier. By the latter half of the nineteenth century, biologists had heated debates over the validity of absolute brain size versus brain/body ratio in studies of human intelligence differences and the ways they were linked with sexual, ethnic, or racial differences. Because different analyses produced differing trends, it was nearly always possible to find an analysis that fit one’s intuitions (or ideological biases). Stephen Jay Gould provides a cautionary treatment of the effect of these biases on the brain science of the last two centuries in his book The Mismeasure of Man (1996).

4 It is unclear whether Snell (1891) actually knew about Brandt’s (1867) analysis.

5 Harry Jerison, The Evolution of the Brain and Intelligence (1973).

6 Related anatomical interpretations had previously been offered in slightly different terms by two of Jerison’s famous predecessors in the brain size/intelligence field, E. Dubois (1913) and G. von Bonin (1937).

7 I generally think that the relative metabolic cost of possessing a large brain tends to get overemphasized in evolutionary arguments. It has been cited as a major cause of heat production and heat dissipation problems in the “radiator” theory of hominid brain size increase (Falk, 1990), as the major constraint affecting foraging requirements (Allielo and Wheeler, 1995), and as limited in size by the amount of energy that a body can supply (Armstrong, 1990). These assumptions are extrapolated from the order of magnitude of greater brain metabolism per mass at rest compared to that of other tissues. But the key phrase is “at rest.” Resting or basal metabolism may not be the most useful measure in evolutionary terms. Just what fraction of the energy of overall metabolism is demanded by brains under normal active conditions is difficult to answer, but compared to total energy consumption it is periodically dwarfed by what is required when we are not at rest and need to make extensive use of muscles, even in daily activities, such as foraging. Unlike muscles, which can fluctuate from minimal metabolism to vastly more than the brain during peak exertion, the brain’s highs and lows of energy use exhibit a much narrower range from sleep to active cognition. It’s easy to work up a sweat just climbing a few flights of stairs, but few people work up a sweat solving the New York Times crossword puzzle. Indeed, neural activity alone is most likely to generate perspiration only during times of intense emotional arousal when the fight or flight response triggers the sympathetic nervous system to prepare the body for imminent intense physical exertion. Nevertheless, the approximately 10% of resting metabolism that is accounted for by the brain’s energy demand cannot be ignored in the overall metabolic economy of the body, especially when whole life history estimates are considered.

8 D’Arcy Thompson (1917).

9 Ewen Macphail (1982).

10 See Bitterman (1975; 1988) on vertebrate/nonvertebrate comparisons of learning.

11 This work is reviewed by Duane Rumbaugh and colleagues in a 1996 paper in Japanese Psychological Research. The theory and experiments behind the work are also discussed in Rumbaugh and Pate, 1996.

CHAPTER 6

1 However, see the recent book by Stanley Coren, The Intelligence of Dogs (1995), for a lively discussion and some comparative tests of canine IQ.

2 The slope for brain size/body size scaling within a species is only about 0.1 to 0.2, in contrast to the 0.6–0.8 slopes observed within whole orders of mammals. This was first demonstrated at the beginning of this century by Lapicque (1907a, b), in a study of dogs.

3 Coren (1995).

4 Kruska (1988).

5 The first of these genes were discovered by investigating the causes of fruit-fly mutations that produced duplicated additional body segments, such as one that produces an additional thorax segment with a duplicated set of wings, called Ultrabithorax.

6 It should be noted, however, that this vertebrate/invertebrate comparison is complicated by two curious and still poorly understood differences: the HOM genes in flies form a linked group or family and are arranged in serial order along the same chromosome. This order corresponds to the front-to-back order of their expression along the body axis. But in vertebrates there appear to be duplicate families of corresponding Hox genes (four in mice and humans), and although their expression is segmental, it is also overlapping, whereas in flies it is more strictly segmental.

7 General overviews of the significance of these homeotic genes is provided by Holland (1992), and Finkelstein and Boncinelli (1994). Reports of Emx and Otx gene expression in the developing brain are from Boncinelli, et al. (1993a, b). Here I describe the expression of these genes in the embryonic brain, where they are most prominent, but some of these genes are also expressed in other regions of the body and change their expression patterns over developmental time. This is characteristic of many homeotic genes, and demonstrates a kind of diverse multifunctionality, which belies any claim that they are like brain blueprint genes. They are probably better thought of as surveyor genes, whose function is to establish borders and property rights that constrain which other genes can “settle” where.

8 These headless Lim I knockouts actually develop in the womb but die after birth apparently due to a failure to breathe normally. See the discussion of Williams syndrome in Chapter 9 for discussion of a related human gene “knockout” (of the gene Lim 1-kinase) that occurs naturally and affects language and cognition.

9 One continually recurring error is a failure to control for the effect of confounding a part with the whole when the part in question is a significant fraction of the whole. Though this is the only way to track what fraction of the whole is made up by the part, assessing the scaling relationship in such terms can lead to very misleading claims about underlying causes. The figure below graphically depicts the artifactual consequences of including the part in the whole in allometric analyses. One particularly troublesome example of this artifact involves predictions about the scaling of the cerebral cortex with brain size. The cerebral cortex comprises as much as 70% of the whole brain in a large primate, when considered with underlying white matter. A number of recent analyses of primate and nonprimate brains fail to correct for this, however, with the result that they greatly underestimate the variance among species, underestimate the human divergence from the trend, and bias the assessment of the trend to appear close to isometry (Deacon, 1990a). This error can be avoided by restricting comparisons to nonoverlapping structures, or else only by comparing part-whole relationships where the part is a small fraction of the whole (and where the non-independent variables contribute only insignificant biases). The graphs I have included in the text, which compare brain structure scaling relationships, have all been calculated from nonoverlapping measurements.

10 These problems have been dealt with in more detail, along with other allometric difficulties of comparing brains, in Deacon, 1989 and 1990.



Figure i. Analytical problem of confusing part and whole in statistical analyses of brain structure sizes.

A: Part and whole are confounded, artificially shifting the trend and reducing the apparent the variances from it.

B: Segregating units of analysis avoids this problem and often produces very different results.

11 In this process, called neurulation, the outer cell layer (ectoderm) is induced to fold inward to form a tube, by the signals produced by contact with inducer cells from the middle layer (mesoderm).

12 Work by Balaban, et al., 1988.

13 Deacon, et al., 1994.

CHAPTER 7

1 Deacon, et al. (1994); Isacson, et al. (1995); Isacson and Deacon (1996).

2 This view shares many points in common with Gerald Edelman’s (1987) theory of “neural Darwinism,” which attempts to frame a global theory of brain functions on a Darwinian-like theory of neuronal group interactions. The Darwinian nature of neural developmental processes plays a critical role in this theory, since Edelman hypothesizes that the initial nonspecificity of connections provides the total initial variety upon which selection processes (in the form of learning) can later act. Though my approach also models neural function on Darwinian-like competitive neural processes during development, I make no assumptions about the sources of variation available to the selective processes. Specifically, whereas Edelman begins with the assumption that the entire source of informational variety available during cognition derives from the early nonspecificity of axonal and dendritic growth, I suspect that initial nonspecific connectivity accounts for only a small initial fraction of the variety of information available to selection/learning processes during mature function. The rest is supplied “on line” by continuous, spontaneous, nonspecific sources, including the effects of metabolic noise on random neural activity and continuous axodendritic growth processes. More important, I argue that the initial connectional nonspecificity and axonal competition principally influences cognitive processes by introducing global biases in neural computations that result from global patterns of regional parcellation. Large-scale quantitative relationships determined by this developmental Darwinism thus play a major role in producing species differences.

3 Hebb (1949) originally envisioned his theory as a way to explain basic reinforced learning processes in the brain: how connections could become altered in their relative signal transduction “strength” in response to the patterning of signals carried on these connections. Much of his original insight has survived the test of time. Many neural net computing paradigms (see the discussion in Chapter 4) employ Hebbian learning rules and demonstrate their effectiveness as a substrate for learning. The general theory Hebb proposed applies not only to processes thought to play a major role in modifying synaptic strengths during learning, but also to those that determine which synapses are preserved and which are lost as connections are formed during early development. The continuity of mechanisms at these two levels of information generation in the brain lends support for a more global Darwinian theory of the logic of neural information processing, in which early wiring and later learning processes are considered two ends of the same spectrum.

4 The neonatal cortical translant experiments reported by Stanfield and O’Leary (1985) offered a powerful demonstration of the absence of any strong connectional predispositions distinguishing the different areas of the neocortex. Many related studies have followed and are reviewed in O’Leary (1992).

5 This developmental displacement approach to brain evolution is presented in an extensive review of problems and theories of mammalian brain evolution in a paper entitled Rethinking Mammalian Brain Evolution (Deacon, 1990b).

6 O’Leary (1992).

7 See the studies by Doron and Wollberg (1994) and Heil, et al. (1991), on the connections between the visual and auditory centers of the brain of the blind mole rat. Though this is one of the most easily recognizable examples of evolutionary displacement of neural circuits, more subtle variants on this process are likely very widespread. Other likely natural examples are offered by Taylor, et al. (1995), on frog species in arboreal, aquatic, and subterranean habitats by; and by Rodi, et al. (1993; 1995), on miniaturization effects on the brain structure in amphibians.

8 Among the many reasons for not taking this story too seriously is the fact that it would require a number of only partially successful transplant experiments to explain the numerous intermediate changes that paleontologists observe in hominid brain size evolution.

9 Holloway (1979) showed that human visual areas were disproportionately smaller than predictions extrapolated from the trend observed in other primates. This was noted previously by Passingham and Ettlinger (1974), though not emphasized as a divergence. The original data were collected by Heinz Stephan and his colleagues some years earlier (1969; see also Stephan, et al., 1981, for an updated data set, used in the analyses in this book) but had not been subjected to statistical analyses that could specifically discern the divergence of human from primate brain structure proportions. Nevertheless, Holloway’s insight was largely ignored at the time and was not noticed by me until I again independently derived the same result a few years later.

10 A posterior shift of the lunate sulcus (marking the anterior boundary of primary visual cortex) in australopithecine endocasts was interpreted by Ralph Holloway (see Holloway, 1985, for an extensive review, and Holloway and Shapiro, 1992, for recent evidence) to mean that australopithecines had a proportional reduction of visual areas, similar to that he had noted in modern human brains (see also note above). Thus, he concluded that this species exhibited reorganization toward a “humanlike” pattern, even prior to evolutionary increases in brain size. Another paleoneurologist, Dean Falk (see her review of this same controversy in Falk, 1989), has disputed his identification of this feature and argues that australopithecine brains retain the morphology characteristic of ape brains in this regard.

Though I believe that Holloway’s identification of this endocast feature is probably correct, developmental analysis leads me to doubt his interpretation of its cause and significance. Since australopithecine brain/body proportions were far more typical of modern apes (and they had ape-size eyes), neurodevelopmental mechanisms should not produce a reduction in the neural proportions of this area. This does not rule out morphological reorganization of the brain, however, which I suspect may have been produced by the shift to upright posture in australopithecines. Vertical orientation of the skull with respect to the spinal cord would have caused the brain stem and cerebellum to become oriented more directly below the cerebrum than in living apes. Since the cerebellum fills a considerable part of the space below and between the cerebral hemispheres posteriorly, a shift of this structure downward and forward in australopithecine brains would vacate some of this interhemispheric space and allow the posterior cortical areas, mostly visual cortex, to become more folded into the posterior midline. The morphological consequence would be a shift of the lunate sulcus to a more posterior position. Additionally relevant in this case is the fact that most of the debate is based on assessment of the natural endocast from the Taung specimen, which was a young child at the time of death. Since the cerebellum is the last major brain structure to complete its growth and grows extensively during postnatal development, at this stage it probably occupied even less interhemispheric space than in an adult australopithecine brain, thus exaggerating the relative posteriorization of the lunate sulcus even further. So, I conclude that both antagonists in this debate are half right. The morphology of the brain does share posterior features that are humanlike rather than apelike, but the actual neural proportions and internal organization were probably more apelike than human (see also Deacon, 1992c). For views of endocast data used to discuss the evolution of language, see also Holloway (1983), Tobias (1981; 1987), and Falk (1983).'

11 An interesting complication of the evolution of the human motor system is that the thalamic motor nuclei (the ventro-anterior and ventro-lateral nuclei) are not as reduced (data from Armstrong, 1980b; see also Deacon, 1988b, for a review of other data as well). Although these thalamic nuclei provide the principal projections to the motor and premotor cortical areas, they receive their afferent inputs from a number of structures of varying sizes. One major source of inputs to this nuclear complex is the cerebellum, one of the most enlarged structures of the human brain. Thus, the neurons of motor and premotor cortex are at the connectional juncture between expanded input projections and reduced output targets. Though the expanse of motor cortex appears to be constrained by its targets (depicted in Fig. 7.7), it seems likely that the projection fields of these thalamic nuclei extend beyond their ancestral motor targets, probably into prefrontal and somatic fields on either side. The functional consequences of this are not obvious.

12 Thus, efforts to correlate the size of any given brain structure with some behavior run the risk of the anatomical equivalent of quoting something out of context. The sizes of brain structures are not independently determined, but are competitively parceled by afferent axons with respect to other brain areas during development. Ignoring the systemic interdependence of the sizes of these many brain structures creates the false impression that there has been independent size determination of this one brain region to subserve some highly modular localized function.

13 Not all quantitative analyses of human prefrontal proportions have concluded that they are disproportionately enlarged above typical primate proportions on the basis of MRI reconstructions, and mammal trends. For example, Semendeferi, et al. (1997), have suggested that frontal cortex is of equal proportions in ape and human brains, and Uylings, et al. (1990), suggests that its proportion changes little from rats to humans. However, the identification of a disproportion is entirely dependent on (a) how the analysis controls for species variance (unless the nonhuman species included in the analysis contained considerably more varaince than between the human and the average nonhuman value, including the human value would strongly bias the assessment); (b) the identification of homology of architectonic boundaries across diverse species (it is not clear, for example, that the relevant architectonic distinctions are actually homologous in primates and rodents and the analysis by Semendeferi, et al., lumped motor, premotor, and prefrontal areas because of MRI limitations); and (c) whether the confounding effects of part/whole errors are controlled for (the prefrontal area is roughly 25% of the cortical surface in large apes). When these sources of analytical artifact are controlled for, these data sets do not produce conflicting results and human prefrontal cortex is found to be divergent from nonhuman trends.

My own assessments (see also Deacon, 1984; 1988) are based on primate data sets collected decades ago by careful architectonic neuroanatomists (see Brodmann, 1912; Blinkov and Glezer, 1968). Data sets were analyzed separately, controlling for part/whole and extrapolation effects (trend lines are produced separately, including and excluding the human data to test for a bias effect). Both analyses converge on a value that is roughly two times greater than predicted by nonhuman primate trends. An assessment of the degree of gyrification in human and other primate brains by Armstrong, Zilles, and colleagues (1989, 1995a, 1995b) also found that the prefrontal region in the human brain is a significant outlier with respect to primate trends, because of its increased folding. This would be expected from the typical allometry of increasing cortical folding with brain size. Finally, these findings are in agreement with many qualitative assessments of neuroanatomists for over a century, and are consistent with the predictions of developmental parcellation processes discussed above. So I believe that a twofold increase above the trend is a reliable estimate. Nevertheless, a more current and complete data set would be valuable for settling lingering questions and also could provide a more detailed assessment of the differences between primate and nonprimate prefrontal areas.

14 The fibers in question are called mossy fibers and they extend from a structure called the dentate gyrus to the part of the hippocampus called the CA fields. Some of these learning trade-offs are described in Schenk, et al. (1995), and in terms of strain differences in learning in Lipp, et al. (1995).

CHAPTER 8

1 For reviews, see Jurgens (1979), Ploog (1981), and see Deacon (1992) for a theoretical discussion of the relationships of midbrain call systems to language. Jurgens and Pratt (1979) provided some of the most detailed evidence for central gray vocalization control.

2 For example, Newman and MacLean (1982) showed that lesions of the tegmental regions adjacent to the central gray area could modify the form of certain calls.

3 Balaban, et al. (1988), used transplants of midbrain from very young quail embryos to chick embryos whose midbrain regions had been previously removed (also discussed in Chapter 6). The quail-chick chimeras produced a number of typically quail fixed-action patterns after hatching, including quail vocalizations. Not only does this demonstrate a localized representation of these motor programs, but also that the remainder of the brain, even from another species, can interact with it as a sort of module—a feature that is unlikely to be true of brain regions supporting language (see discussion in Chapter 10).

4 Studies of circuits controlling tongue and facial musculature are from Sokoloff and Deacon (1989; 1990; 1992). Related information from a broad comparative study of corticospinal connections is provided by Nudo, et al. (1995).

5 For detailed examples, see Jane Goodall’s book The Chimpanzees of Gombe: Patterns of Behavior (1986).

6 Jurgens and Pratt (1979).

7 Jurgens, et al. (1982).

8 Much of this work on the psychology and physiology of laughter comes from the research of Robert Provine, University of Maryland. See his 1996 review of this work.

CHAPTER 9

1 Goldman-Rakic (1987).

2 Barbas and Mesulam (1981).

3 Barbas and Mesulam (1981); Pandyaand Barnes (1987); Deacon (1992).

4 For in-depth reviews of prefrontal deficits and theories about prefrontal function, see Fuster (1980); Perecman (1987); Stuss and Benson (1986).

5 Jacobsen (1936).

6 This is very similar to the hidden object problems demonstrated in young children by Jean Piaget (1952).

7 Passingham (1985).

8 Reviews in Luria (1980); Kolb and Whishaw (1990); Stuss and Benson (1986); and Perecman (1987). Particularly relevant studies are reported by Grossman (1980; 1982), who demonstrates human Broca’s area defects in hierarchical and reversal-learning problems, and by Petrides (1982; 1985; 1986), who reports localized primate prefrontal lesion defects on a number of conditional learning paradigms that involve dependent combinatorial analysis.

9 See Guilford (1967).

10 An explanation of some of these techniques and more detailed examples are provided later in this chapter and in Posner and Raichle’s book The Illuminated Brain (1994).

11 Ojemann (1979).

12 The case for a neuroanatomical dichotomy was most clearly articulated by Myers (1976), and a more detailed description of how these systems are anatomically linked in language function is provided in Deacon (1992d).

13 Hydrocephaly can result from an occlusion of the canal linking the forebrain ventricles with their outlet to the brain stem and spinal cord. This blocks cerebrospinal fluid drainage, which can cause the ventricles to expand and compress the temporal and parietal cortex (hydrocephaly). The condition has been associated with a number of cases of hyperlexia with relatively poor comprehension.

14 The LIM1 kinase gene deletion in Williams syndrome is reported in Frangiskakis, et al. (1996).

15 There are many excellent books discussing autism, including autobiographical texts by Temple Grandin (1986, 1995). See also Frith (1989, 1991) for detailed accounts, and Trefert (1989) for an excellent nontechnical description.

16 Prefrontal abnormalities associated with schizophrenia, depression, and obsessive compulsive disorders are reviewed in Kolb and Whishaw (1990); Posner and Raichle (1994); Stuss and Bensen (1986). For an insightful account of frontal lobe disturbances of emotion, emotional assessment, and social cognition, see Antonio Damasio’s book Descartes’ Error (1994).

17 Cerebellar contributions to nonmotor cognitive processes have been demonstrated by PET studies of word retrieval (Petersen, et al., 1988) and in response to cerebellar damage (Leiner, et al., 1989 and 1993; Barinaga, 1996; also see discussion in the next chapter).

CHAPTER 10

1 The classic studies for which these aphasic syndromes are named are Paul Broca’s Sur la faculté du langage articule (1865) and Carl Wernicke’s Der aphasische Symptomencomplex. (1874). An excellent historical review of aphasia research is provided in Lecours, et al. (1983).

2 For the original discussion of Broca’s aphasia agrammatism, see Goodglass (1968; 1972; 1973), and for alternative explanations see Kean (1977); for current in vivo imaging of Broca’s aphasic brain impairment, see Tramo, et al. (1988).

3 Regional cerebral blood flow studies are from Larsen, et al. (1978); Lassen, et al. (1979; 1980); and Roland (1985). PET studies use a radioactively labeled glucose analogue, 2-deoxy-glucose, which is taken up by cells but does not get readily broken down in the normal metabolic machinery of the cell. As a result, it accumulates in metabolically active tissues. Though all tissues take it up, more highly active tissues take up more of it over time (usually activity is assessed over many minutes), and this allows researchers to measure relative metabolism reflected in differences in radioactive output (original studies reported by Posner, et al., 1988, and Petersen, et al., 1988; reviewed with additional examples and explanations in Posner and Raichle, 1994).

4 Wilder Penfield first demonstrated that stimulating the supplementary motor area could interrupt speech. He provides a summary of his research in his book, with L. Roberts, Speech and Brain Mechanisms (1959).

5 Broca’s original demarcation of the frontal language region included the entire inferior third of the frontal and prefrontal cortex on the left side; but over the years researchers have progressively restricted the designation of the effective site to include only the premotor region, just in front of the motor mouth region.

6 As does functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which is also based on blood flow changes but allows data to be collected during much shorter intervals, thus making it possible to avoid repetitive tasks necessary for cumulative effects in other techniques. The general agreement with rCBF and PET data is quite good and so these will not be described separately. See the brief comparative description of methodology in Posner and Raichle (1994).

7 These are summary schematizations of data that are a bit more complex.

8 This brief account simplifies and summarizes neuroanatomical studies by the author (Deacon, 1984; 1992).

9 The syntagmatic/paradigmatic distinction was introduced to linguistics by the theories of Roman Jakobson (1956), who also predicted that frontal and prefrontal brain damage should disturb the former and posterior brain damage should disturb the latter. Numerous brain damage studies have shown that at least in general terms, this dichotomy is accurate.

10 Recent reviews of research on lateralization of language can be found in Corballis (1992), MacNeilage (1995), and see Kolb and Whishaw (1990) for a review of evidence of the role of cerebral asymmetries. Gainotti (1972) and Heilman, et al. (1983), provide reviews of asymmetric affective functions. See also Kinsbourne (1978) for an evolutionary perspective on the origins of the crossed pattern of connections.

11 For an interesting example of right hemisphere language comprehension, see Gardner, et al. (1983); also see Larsen, et al. (1978; 1980), for evidence of right hemispheric functions contributing to speech.

12 See Fabbro (1992) for a review of this bilingual brain research.

Part Three

CHAPTER 11

1 Baldwin (1895; 1896a–d; 1902). See also the excellent historical account of Baldwin’s work in Robert Richards’s (1987) book on late nineteenth-century theories of the evolution of mind.

2 Durham (1994).

3 Many are also discussed by Durham (1994).

4 Pinker (1994). See also his short (1990) summary.

5 These adaptations for speech are discussed in more detail below.

6 Casts of the inner surface of the skull show it to be subtly shaped by the pressures of the developing brain. Bumps and depressions on the bone record the slight differential in pressure of underlying gyri and sulci (bumps and fissures, respectively). Fossil skulls retain this impression, though their interpretation is often not without ambiguity.

7 See Philip Tobias’s (1981) and Dean Falk’s (1983) assessment of the gyral and sulcal landmarks on endocasts in the position of the modern Broca’s area.

8 The most suggestive evidence was provided by a fossil designated KMNER 1470, one of the exemplar specimens of Homo habilis (though recent proposals suggest placing this individual in a separate species designated Homo rudolfensis because of its many other australopithecinelike features), who had a brain size of approximately 750 cc.

9 Though many have tried to draw the debate into posing these as opposed alternatives, I leave it to paleontologists to quibble over the number and size of the “increments.”

10 Baldwinian evolutionary processes are also involved in the process of language evolution discussed in Chapter 4 (though I focused on change without a Baldwinian effect) and so have also played a role in the evolution of children’s learning biases as well.

11 For example, the archeologist Nick Toth taught Kanzi (the bonobo chimpanzee who spontaneously learned lexigram communication) to make and use stone flake tools in order to cut a rope and open a box hiding food.

12 A wonderful compendium of such examples is provided by the historian James Burke in his television series and book, Connections (1978).

13 Gould and Vrba (1982).

14 Philip Lieberman (1984; 1991).

15 See the excellent historical review by Gordon Hewes in Rumbaugh (1977). A recent version of the hypothesis that gestural language preceded vocal language is outlined by Corbalis (1992).

16 An excellent survey of the evolution of the larynx is provided by Wind (1970).

17 Initial strong claims about Neanderthal’s inability to speak were presented by Lieberman and Crelin (1971). Later, more cautious claims about the correlation with speech evolution can be found in Lieberman (1984; 1991), and evidence for incremental changes in this morphology throughout the last 2 million years of hominine evolution is presented by Laitman, et al. (1992).

18 See Liberman, et al. (1967), Liberman and Mattingly (1985; 1989), and Liberman (1984) for extensive examples. (Note: Liberman and Lieberman are not the same.)

19 See Lisker and Abramson (1971).

20 Chinchillas were the first animals to show a voice-onset time categorical perception like that shown for humans (Kuhl and Miller, 1975).

21 This follows for the same reason that a number encoded in binary notation (i.e., using only the numerals 0 and 1), used for computer memory addresses, is on average composed of many more digits than its representation as a decimal (i.e., base 10) or hexadecimal (i.e., base 16 code, also used for computing and made up of the numerals, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D, E, F) number. For example, 11, 111, 110 in binary = 254 in decimal = FE in hexadecimal.

22 See the insightful and critical reflection on assuptions influencing paleontological theories of human origins by Misia Landau (1991).

23 Hublin, et al. (1996), recently verified that these complex cultural artifacts from the late middle Paleolithic were associated with Neanderthal skeletal materials. This is one more piece of evidence which undermines the traditional view that Neanderthal culture was lacking in tool variety and artistic expression. It does not support the view that Neanderthal cultural communication was distinctly inferior to that of contemporary anatomically modern populations.

24 See also Holloway (1981; 1983).

25 Arensberg and Tillier (1991) review the evolutionary significance of the discovery of a Neanderthal hyoid bone that demonstrates modern anatomical structure (first described in Arensberg, et al., 1989), and specifically conclude that Neanderthals would not have exhibited any significant difficulties producing speech.

CHAPTER 12

1 Jones (1993) and Caird (1994).

2 Statistically speaking, most human marriage relationships are monogamous, even though most societies allow or encourage polygynous marriages. Even within a highly polygynous society, most relationships are monogamous for the simple reason that polygyny requires significant accumulation of resources and power by particular males at the expense of many others, leaving the rest with insufficient resources to become polygynous. Introductory summaries of these patterns can be found in Daly and Wilson (1978) and Durham (1994).

3 The special status of prostitution and the rarity of polyandry in human societies are two exceptions that prove the rule. In the few societies where polyandry is practiced, husbands of the same wife are often close relatives, such as brothers (for details, see Durham, 1994).

4 This is evident in the special case of large rookeries, where hundreds of pair-bonded bird “couples” are forced to roost together because of limited nest sites. Despite the absolutely critical need for biparental care, the degree of cuckoldry increases as group size increases; in addition, infanticide of neighbors’ chicks, nest destruction, and nest site stealing are common noncooperative behaviors in these conditions.

5 Some social carnivore species with large litters can produce littermates from multiple fathers. In these cases, the pattern is more complicated. So long as the dominant male is able to sire more of the offspring than his genetic competitors, the cooperative social arrangement is evolutionarily stable.

6 High degrees of sexual dimorphism (difference in male versus female body size) are highly correlated with degree of polygyny in a species. This is favored by sexual selection mediated by threat and fighting behaviors, where being larger confers an advantage for gaining access to mates.

7 Unfortunately, such negative consequences are seldom applied equitably to men and women or to rich and poor.

8 A Yanomamo Feast and the warfare context in which this method of peacemaking occurs is decribed in Chagnon (1983).

CHAPTER 13

1 This experiment is reported in Boysen, et al. (1995 and 1996), and was part of a study investigating numerical abilities in chimps. See also Boysen, et al. (1993), for the first report of ordinality and transitivity learning by chimps.

2 A parallel study by Hauser, et al., 1995, showed ordinality learning ability in wild rhesus monkeys. The ability to learn transitive associations has also been demonstrated in rats (Eichenbaum, et al., 1996) in an ABC paradigm where choosing A over B and B over C can yield knowledge that A over C is also correct. This can be expanded to a series of at least 5 ordered stimuli (ABCDE), and rats can still generalize to the novel choice of BC on probe trials (Eichenbaum, personal communication). Though ordinality and transitivity can each be acquired as indexical associations, they are (respectively) the token-object and token-token associative components of numerical symbols, and so can under the right conditions serve as the basis for generating the concept of number. Whether any of these or the chimp experiments accomplish this step is uncertain, but it could be demonstrated if the animals could generalize from known ordinal associations to novel transitive relationships. However, not only has this not been shown, as far as I know, but all experimental results to date seem to approach a ceiling in abilities when quantity exceeds about 5. This suggests to me that there is no symbolic generalization in these cases and we should not too quickly jump to the conclusion that ordinal discrimination of quantity necessary implies symbol ration.

CHAPTER 14

1 Searle (1980) notes that computational interpretations could be mapped onto manipulations of many objects, for example, manipulations of collections of bottles and cans, and yet such a mapping would not demonstrate this to be a cognitive process. A mapping of symbolic representations onto semiconductor currents and potentials in a computer is no different from this and therefore is not intrinsically more mindlike. I believe the logic of my example is essentially parallel. In fact, many chemical reactions can occur at thresholds of relative concentration, heat, or time, and so can produce essentially digital responses to initial conditions, analogous to those in a computer. Indeed, a number of molecular biology labs are currently experimenting with the use of biological macromolecular systems as simple computing elements for exactly these reasons.

2 The Chinese Room analogy proposed by John Searle in a 1980 paper has been argued and reargued many times by philosophers and cognitive scientists. Searle provides a retrospective interpretation in his more recent (1992) book.

3 Dennett (1991).

4 Dennett (1991).

5 Vygotsky(1978).
