Preface to the Second Edition


In offering Philosophy in a New Key to the public once more,
this time tO a larger part of the English-speaking world, I have
made no changes (except tor small corrections) in the original
text. After nine \ears one naturally sees the imperfections of
a work and wishes it were better; but so long as one can still
subscribe to its contents as a whole it is more important, per-
haps, to cury the intellectual venture forward than to revise
small details of its first formulation.
   Modern theory of knowledge, leading naturally to a critique
of science, represents the best philosophical work of our time.
But "knowledge" is not synonymous with "human mentality."
It is the intent of this book to establish a theory of mind which

shall support that excellent treatment of science, and further-
more lead to an equally serious and detailed critique of art.
Chapters 8 and 9
                   —     "On Significance in Music" and "The
Genesis of Artistic Import" —    purport to point the way to that
second inquiry. They are, of course, no more than preliminary
and limited studies, and do not establish the power of the
premises here assumed to cope with the entire problem of the
nature and structure of art; but they assay the new ground.
  A    book which is the beginning of a line of thought can be
judged only in retrospect, when the relative importance of its
several ideas emerges by virtue of the further developments
of which they show themselves capable and any major>defecty
in their foundations have had time to come to light. In the
years which have elapsed since the first edition of this book
appeared, I have put its general tenets to the test by working
out the philosophy of art they promised, and so far I have
found them amazingly fertile, leading from novelty to novelty
in a realm of theory that has long been imponderable or
purely academic. It is with this pragmatic assurance, there-
fore, that I reaffirm my little work by offering it to the public
once more in unaltered form.
   If, however, I were writing it now, there would be at least
one difference in terminology, affecting especially Chapter
3, "The Logic of Signs and Symbols"; that chapter heading
would read "The Logic of Signals and Symbols." Charles
Morris, in his Signs, Language and Behavior, employed a
usage which I find superior to my own and have accordingly
 adopted since the publication of his book. Morris uses the
word "signal" for what 1 called "sign." The term "signal" is
vi                           Preface
stretched, of course, to cover not only explicitly recognized
signals—  red lights, bells, et cetera—but also those phenom-
ena which we tacitly respect as signals to our sense, e.g. the
sight of objects and windows whereby we are oriented in a
room, the sensation evoked by a fork in a person's hand that
guides him in raising it to his mouth; in short, to cover every-
thing that I called "sign." But such a stretching of a semi-
technical term is easily accepted and perfectly legitimate.
The great advantage of Morris's usage is that it leaves us the
word "sign" to denote any vehicle of meaning, signal or
symbol, whereas in my own vocabulary there was no generic
term, and the need of it was sometimes obvious.
   Another, intellectually much more important, change I
should like to make, if I could have twenty-four hours' "sec-
ond chance" like Sartre's shades from Limbo, is to replace the
unsatisfactory notion of music as an essentially ambiguous
symbol by a much more precise, though somewhat difficult,
concept of musical significance, involving a theory (not yet
quite completed) of artistic abstraction in general. This I
would consider a distinct advance in the theory of art as "ex-
pressive form"; but it has to wait upon the later elaboration
of certain ideas that are still young and therefore half poetic
in Philosophy in a New Key. The process of philosophical
thought moves typically from a first, inadequate, but ardent
apprehension of some novel idea, figuratively expressed, to
more and more precise comprehension, until language catches
up to logical insight, the figure is dispensed with, and literal
expression takes its place. Really new concepts, having no
names in current language, always make their earliest appear-
ance in metaphorical statements; therefore the beginning of
any theoretical structure is inevitably marked by fantastic in-
ventions. There is an air of such metaphor, or "philosophical
myth," in the treatment of musical "meaning," which I think
I could improve on were I given another fling at it today.
   Yet perhaps not; perhaps, in the course of rendering that
mild extravaganza more literally and logically, one would
necessarily raise new issues, which again would invite the
imagination to project their answers in a tentative, figurative
                                                   —
way; for all the vastly ramified questions of art of creation,
abstraction, and import  —   are still in the offing. So it may be
wiser to let the book go out just as it was before, even with its
unfinished thoughts and half -spoken answers, instead of tink-
ering with any part. A book is like a life: all that is in it is
really of a piece. Les jeux sont fait.
                                                        S. K. L.
Columbus, Ohio
May 7, 1951
