Preface to the First Edition


The "new key" in Philosophy is not one which I have struck.
Other people have struck it, quite clearly and repeatedly. This
book purports merely to demonstrate the unrecognized fact
that it ij a new key, and to show how the main themes of our
thought tend to be transposed into it. As every shift of tonal-
ity gives a new sense to previous passages, so the reorientation
of philosophy which is taking place in our age bestows new
aspects on the ideas and arguments of the past. Our thinking
stems from that past, but does not continue it in the ways that
were foreseen. Its cleavages cut across the old lines, and sud-
denly bring out new motifs that were not felt to be implicit
in the premises of the schools at all; for it changes the ques-
tions of philosophy.
   The universality of the great key-change in our thinking
is shown by the fact that its tonic chord could ring true
for a mind essentially preoccupied with logic, scientific lan-
guage, and empirical fact, although that chord was actually
first sounded by thinkers of a very different school. Logic
and science had indeed prepared the harmony for it, un-
wittingly; for the study of mathematical "transformations"
and "projections," the construction of alternative descriptive*
systems, etc.,^aad raised the issue of symbolic modes and of the
variable relationship of form and content. But the people
who recognized the importance of expressive forms for all
human understanding were those who saw that not only
science, but myth, analogy, metaphorical thinking, and art
are intellectual activities determined by "symbolic modes";
and those people were for the most part of the idealist school.
The relation of art to epistemology was first revealed to them
through reflection on the phenomenal character of experience,
in  the course of the great transcendentalist "adventure of
ideas" launched by Immanuel Kant. And, even now, prac-
tically all serious and penetrating philosophy of art is related
somehow to the idealistic tradition. Most studies of artistic
significance, of art as a symbolic form and a vehicle of con-
ception, have been made in the spirit of post-Kantian meta-
physics.
   Yet I do not believe an idealistic interpretation of Reality
                              vii
viii                              Preface
is necessary to the recognition of art as a symbolic form. Pro-
fessor Urban speaks of "the assumption that the more richly
and energetically the human spirit builds its languages and
symbolisms, the nearer it comes ... to its ultimate being
and reality," as "the idealistic minimum necessary for any
adequate theory of symbolism." If there be such a "Reality"
as the idealists assume, then access to it, as to any other in-
tellectual goal, must be through some adequate symbolism;
but I cannot see that any access to the source or "principle"
of man's being is presupposed in the logical and psychological
study of symbolism itself.        We
                                 need not assume the presence
of a transcendental "human spirit," if we recognize, for in-
stance, the function of symbolic transformation as a natural
activity, a high form of nervous response, characteristic of
man among the animals. The study of symbol and meaning is
a starting-point of philosophy, not a derivative from Car-
tesian,  Humean, or Kantian premises; and the recognition
of its fecundity and depth may be reached from various posi-
tions, though it is a historical fact that the idealists reached
it       and have given us the most illuminating literature
     first,
                                       —
on non-discursive symbolisms myth, ritual, and art. Their
studies, however, are so intimately linked with their meta-
physical speculations that the new key they have struck in
philosophy impresses one, at first, as a mere modulation within
their old strain. Its real vitality is most evident when one
realizes that even studies like the present essay, springing
from      logical   rather than   from     ethical   or metaphysical in-
terests, may be actuated by the same generative idea, the
essentially transformational nature of human understanding.
   The scholars to whom I owe, directly or indirectly, the
material of my thoughts represent many schools and even
many fields of scholarship; and the final expression of those
thoughts does not always give credit to their influence. The
writings of the sage to whom this book is dedicated receive
but scant explicit mention; the same thing holds for the
works of Ernst Cassirer, that pioneer in the philosophy of
symbolism, and of Heinrich Schenker, Louis Arnaud Reid,
Kurt Goldstein, and many others. Sometimes a mere article
or essay, like Max Kraussold's "Musik und Mythus in ihrem
Verhaltnis" (Die Musik, 1925), Etienne Rabaud's "Les
hommes au point de vue biologique" (Journal de Psychologic,
1931), Sir Henry Head's "Disorders of Symbolic Thinking
and Expression" (British Journal of Psychology, 1920), or
Hermann Nohl's Stil und Weltanschauung, can give one's
thinking a new slant or suddenly organize one's scattered
knowledge into a significant idea, yet be completely swallowed
up in the theories it has influenced so that no specific reference
                                Preface                               ix

    can be made to it at any particular point of their exposition.
    Inevitably, the philosophical ideas of every thinker stem from
    all he has read as well as all he has heard and seen, and if
    consequently little of his material is really original, that only
t
    lends his doctrines the continuity of an old intellectual heritage.
    Respectable ancestors, after all, are never to be despised.
       Though I cannot acknowledge all       my  literary debts, I do
    wish to express  my   thanks to several friends who have given
    me the benefit of their judgment or of their aid:       to Miss
    Helen Sewell for the comments of an artist on the whole
    theory of non-discursive symbolism, and especially on chap-
    ters 8 and 9; to Mr. Carl Schorske for his literary criti-
    cism of those same long chapters; to my sister, Mrs. Dunbar,
    for some valuable suggestions; to Mrs. Dan Fenn for reading
    the page proofs, and to Miss Theodora Long and my son
    Leonard for their help with the index. Above all I want to
    thank Mrs. Penfield Roberts, who has read the entire manu-
    script, even after every extensive revision, and given me
    not only intellectual help, but the constant moral support
    of enthusiasm and friendship, confirming for me the truth
    of what one lover of the arts, J. M. Thorburn, has said
    that "all the genuine, deep delight of life is in showing
    people the mud-pies you have made; and life is at its best when
    we confidingly recommend our mud-pies to each other's
    sympathetic consideration."
                                                           S. K. L.

    Cambridge, 1941


                                                                s+
