i.    The New Key


Every age in the history of philosophy has its own preoccu-
pation. Its problems are peculiar to it, not for obvious prac-
tical reasons— political or social     —
                                   but for deeper reasons of
intellectual growth. we look back on the slow formation
                        If
and accumulation of doctrines which mark that history, we
may see certain groupings of ideas within it, not by subject-
matter, but by a subtler common factor which may be called
their "technique." It is the mode of handling problems, rather
than what they are about, that assigns them to an age. Their
subject-matter may be fortuitous, and depend on conquests,
discoveries, plagues, or governments; their treatment derives
from a steadier source.
   The "technique," or treatment, of a problem begins with its
first expression as a question. The way a question is asked
limits and disposes the ways in which any answer to it  —right
or wrong —   may be given. If we are asked: "Who made the
world?" we may answer:     "God made it," "Chance made it,"
"Love and hate made it," or what you will. We may be right
or we may be wrong. But if we reply: "Nobody made it," we
will be accused of trying to be cryptic, smart, or "unsympa-
thetic." For in this last instance, we have only seemingly
given an answer; in reality we have rejected the question. The
questioner feels^called upon to repeat his problem. "Therr'tlow
did the world become as. it is?" If now we answer: "It has
not 'become' at all," he will be really disturbed. This "answer"
clearly repudiates the very framework of his thinking, the
orientation of his mind, the basic assumptions he has always
entertained as common-sense notions about things in general.
Everything has become what it is; everything has a cause;
every change must be to some end; the world is a thing, and
must have been made by some agency, out of some original
stuff, for some reason. These are natural ways of thinking.
Such implicit "ways" are not avowed by the average man,
but simply followed. He is not conscious of assuming any
basic principles. They are what a German would call his
"Weltanschauung," his attitude of mind, rather than specific
articles of faith. They constitute his outlook; they are deeper
than facts he may note or propositions he may moot.
   But, though they are not stated, they find expression in
the forms of his questions.   A question is really an ambiguous
                                  15
16                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
proposition; the answer is its determination. 1 There can be only
a certain number of alternatives that will complete its sense.
In this way the intellectual treatment of any datum, any ex-
perience, any subject, is determined by the nature of our
questions, and only carried out in the answers.
   In philosophy this disposition of problems is the most im-
portant thing that a school, a movement, or an age contributes.
This is the "genius" of a great philosophy; in its light, systems
arise and rule and die. Therefore a philosophy is characterized
more by the formulation of its problems than by its solution
of them. Its answers establish an edifice of facts; but its ques-
tions make the frame in which its picture of facts is plotted.
They make more than the frame; they give the angle of per-
spective, the palette, the style in which the picture is drawn
everything except the subject. In our questions lie our prin-
ciples of analysis, and our answers may express whatever
those principles are able to yield.
   There is a passage in Whitehead's Science and the Modern
World, setting forth this predetermination of thought, which
is at once its scaffolding and its limit. "When you are criti-
cizing the philosophy of an epoch," Professor Whitehead says,
"do not chiefly direct your attention to those intellectual
positions which its exponents feel it necessary explicitly to
defend. There will be some fundamental assumptions which
adherents of all the variant systems within the epoch uncon-
sciously presuppose. Such assumptions appear so obvious that
people do not know what they are assuming because no other
way of putting things has ever occurred to them. With these
assumptions a certain limited number of types of philosophic
systems are possible, and this group of systems constitutes
the philosophy of the epoch." 2
   Some years ago, Professor C. D. Burns published an ex-
cellent little article called "The Sense of the Horizon," in
which he made a somewhat wider application of the same
principle; for here he pointed out that every civilization has
its limits of knowledge      —
                             of perceptions, reactions, feelings,
and ideas. To quote his own words, "The experience of any
moment has its horizon. Today's experience, which is not
tomorrow's, has in it some hints and implications which are
tomorrow on the horizon of today. Each man's experience
may be added to by the experience of other men, who are
living in his day or have lived before; and so a common
world of experience, larger than that of his own observation,

  i Cf. Felix Cohen,   "What is a Question?" The Monist, XXXIX (1929),
3: 350-364.
  2 From Chapter III The Century of Genius. By permission of The
                        :


Macmillan Company, publishers.
                        THE NEW KEY                             17
can be lived in by each man. But however wide it may be,
that common world also has its horizon; and on that horizon
new experience is always appearing.     ." 3
                                        .   .


   "Philosophers in every age have attempted to give an ac-
count of as much experience as they could. Some have indeed
pretended that what they could not explain did not exist;
but all the great philosophers have allowed for more than
they could explain, and have, therefore, signed beforehand,
if not dated, the death-warrant of their philosophies." 4
   "..   The history of Western philosophy begins in a period
         .


in which the sense of the horizon lifts men's eyes from the
myths and rituals, the current beliefs and customs of the
Greek tradition in Asia Minor. ... In a settled civilization,
the regularity of natural phenomena and their connection over
large areas of experience became significant. The myths were
too disconnected; but behind them lay the conception of Fate.
This perhaps provided Thales and the other early philosophers
with the first hint of the new formulation, which was an
attempt to allow for a larger scale of certainty in the current
attitude toward the world. From this point of view the early
philosophers are conceived to have been not so much disturbed
by the contradictions in the tradition as attracted by certain
factors on the horizon of experience, of which their tradition
gave no adequate account. They began the new formulation
in order to include the new factors, and they boldly said that
                                          5
'all' was water or 'all' was in flux."

    The formulation of experience which is contained within
the intellectual horizon of an age and a society is determined,
I believe, not so much by events and desires, as by the basic
concepts at people's disposal for analyzing and describing*theuf
adventures to uieir own understanding. Of course, such con-
cepts arise as they are needed, to deal with political or domes-
tic experience; but the same experiences could be seen in
many different lights, so the light in which they do appear
depends on the genius of a people as well as on the demands
of the external occasion. Different minds will take the same
events in very different ways.   A   tribe of Congo Negroes will
react quite differently to (say) its first introduction to the story
of Christ's passion, than did the equally untutored descendants
of Norsemen, or the American Indians. Every society meets a
new idea with its own concepts, its own tacit, fundamental
way of seeing things; that is to say, with its own questions,
its peculiar curiosity.


  3 Philosophy, VIII (1933), 31: 301-317. This preliminary essay was
followed by his book, The Horizon of Experience (1934). See p. 301.
  * "The Sense of the Horizon," pp. 303-304.
  5 Ibid., pp. 306-307.
18                     PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
   The horizon to which Professor Burns makes reference is
the limit of clear and sensible questions that we can ask.
When the Ionian philosophers, whom he cites as the inno-
vators of Greek thought, asked what "all" was made of, or
how "all" matter behaved, they were assuming a general no-
tion, namely that of a parent substance, a final, universal
matter to which all sorts of accidents could happen. This
notion dictated the terms of their inquiries: what things were,
and how they changed. Problems of right and wrong, of
wealth and poverty, slavery and freedom, were beyond their
scientific horizon. On these matters they undoubtedly adopted
the wordless, unconscious attitudes dictated by social usage.
The concepts that preoccupied them had no application in
those realms, and therefore did not give rise to new, interest-
ing, leading questions about social or moral affairs.
   Professor Burns regards all Greek thought as one vast for-
mulation of experience. "In spite of continual struggles with
violent reversals in conventional habits and in the use of
words," he says, "work upon the formulation of Greek ex-
perience culminated in the magnificent doctrines of Plato and
Aristotle. Both had their source in Socrates. He had turned
from the mere assertions of the earlier philosophers to the
question of the validity of any assertion at all. Not what the
world was but how one could know what it was, and therefore
what one could know about one's self seemed to him to be
the fundamental question.       .  The formulation begun by
                                    .   .



Thales was comoleted by Aristotle." 6
   I think the historical continuity and compactness of Hel-
lenic civilization influences this judgment. Certainly between
Thales and the Academy there is at least one further shift of
the horizon, namely with the advent of the Sophists. The
questions Socrates asked were as new to Greek thought in his
day as those of Thales and Anaximenes had been to their ear-
lier age. Socra f es did not continue and complete Ionian
thought; he cared very little about the speculative physics that
was the very breath of life to the nature-philosophers, and
his lifework did not further that ancient enterprise by even a
step. He had not new answers, but new questions, and there-
with he brought a new conceptual framework, an entirely
different perspective, into Greek philosophy. His problems had
arisen in the law-courts and the Sophists' courses of oratory;
they were, in the main, and in their significant features, irrel-
evant to the academic tradition. The validity of knowledge
was only one of his new puzzles; the value of knowing, the
purpose of science, of political life, practical arts, and finally

  e Ibid., p.   307.
                       THE NEW KEY                           19
of the course of nature, all became problematical to him. For
he was operating with a new idea. Not prime matter and its
disguises, its virtual products, its laws of change and its ulti-
mate identity, constituted the terms of his discourse, but the
notion of value. That everything had a value was too obvious
to require statement. It was so obvious that the Ionians had
not even given it one thought, and Socrates did not bother to
state it; but his questions centered on what values things had
—   whether they were good or evil, in themselves or in their
relations to other things, for all men or for few, or for the
gods alone. In the light of that newly-enlisted old concept,
value, a whole world of new questions opened up. The phil-
osophical horizon widened in all directions at once, as hori-
zons do with every upward step.
    The limits of thought are not so much set from outside, by
the fullness or poverty of experiences that meet the mind, as
from within, by the power of conception, the wealth of for-
mulative notions with which the mind meets experiences. Most
new discoveries are suddenly-seen things that were always
there.  A   new idea is a light that illuminates presences which
simply had no form for us before the light fell on them.    We
turn the light here, there, and everywhere, and the limits of
 thought recede before it.A   new science, a new art, or a young
and vigorous system of philosophy, is generated by such a basic
innovation. Such ideas as identity of matter and change of
 form, or as value, validity, virtue, or as outer world and inner
 consciousness, are not theories; they are the terms in which
theories are conceived; they give rise to specific questions, and
 are articulated only in the form of these questions. Therefore
 one may call^hem generative ideas in the history of ttfdughtT
    A   tremendous philosophical vista opened when Thales, or
 perhaps one of his predecessors not known to us, asked:
 "What is the world made of?" For centuries men turned their
 eyes upon the changes of matter, the problem of growth and
 decay, the laws of transformation in nature. When the possi-
 bilities of that primitive science were exhausted, speculations
 deadlocked, and the many alternative answers were stored in
 every learned mind to its confusion, Socrates propounded his
 simple and disconcerting questions  —    not, "Which answer is
 true?" but: "What is Truth?" "What is Knowledge, and why
 do we want to acquire it?" His questions were disconcerting
 because they contained the new principle of explanation, the
 notion of value. Not to describe the motion and matter of a
 thing, but to see its purpose, is to understand it. From this
 conception a host of new inquiries were born. What is the
 highest good of man? Of the universe? What are the proper
 principles of art, education, government, medicine? To what
20                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
purpose do planets and heavens revolve, animals procreate,
empires rise? Wherefore does man have hands and eyes and
the gift of language?
   To the physicists, eyes and hands were no more interesting
than sticks and stones. They were all just varieties of Prime
Matter. The Socratic conception of purpose went beyond the
old physical notions in that it gave importance to the differ-
ences between men's hands and other "mixtures of elements."
Socrates was ready to accept tradition on the subject of ele-
ments, but asked in his turn: "Why are we made of fire and
water, earth and air? Why have we passions, and a dream of
                                               —
Truth? Why do we live? Why do we die?" Plato's ideal
commonwealth and Aristotle's science rose in reply. But no
one stopped to explain what "ultimate good" or "purpose"
meant; these were the generative ideas of all the new, vital,
philosophical problems, the measures of explanation, and be-
longed to common sense.
   The end of a philosophical epoch comes with the exhaus-
tion of its motive concepts. When all answerable questions
that can be formulated in its terms have been exploited, we
are left with only those problems that are sometimes called
"metaphysical" in a slurring sense—   insoluble problems whose
very statement harbors a paradox. The peculiarity of such
pseudo-questions is that they are capable of two or more
equally good answers, which defeat each other. An answer
once propounded wins a certain number of adherents who
subscribe to it despite the fact that other people have shown
conclusively how wrong or inadequate it is; since its rival
solutions suffer from the same defect, a choice among them
really restson temperamental grounds. They are not intellec-
tual discoveries, like good answers to appropriate questions,
but doctrines. At this point philosophy becomes academic; its
watchword henceforth is Refutation, its life is argument rather
than private thinking, fair-mindedness is deemed more im-
portant than single-mindedness, and the whole center of
gravity shifts from actual philosophical issues to peripheral
subjects—  methodology, mental progress, the philosopher's
place in society, and apologetics.
   The eclectic period in Greco-Roman philosophy was just
such a tag-end of an inspired epoch. People took sides on old
questions instead of carrying suggested ideas on to their fur-
ther implications. They sought a reasoned belief, not new
things to think about. Doctrines seemed to lie around all
ready-made, waiting to be adopted or rejected, or perhaps dis-
sected and recombined in novel aggregates. The consolations
of philosophy were more in the spirit of that time than the
disturbing whispers of a Socratic daemon.
                        THE NEW KEY                            21
  Yet the human mind is always active. When philosophy lies
fallow,  other fields bring abundance of fruit. The end of
Hellenism was the beginning of Christianity, a period of deep
emotional life, military and political enterprise, rapid civiliza-
tion of barbarous hordes, possession of new lands. Wild
northern Europe was opened to the Mediterranean world. Of
course the old cultural interests flagged, and old concepts
paled, in the face of such activity, novelty, and bewildering
challenge. A footloose, capricious modernity took the place of
deep-rooted philosophical thought. All the strength of good
minds was consumed by the practical and moral problems of
the day, and metaphysics seemed a venerable but bootless re-
finement of rather sheltered, educated people, a peculiar and
lonely amusement of old-fashioned scholars. It took several
centuries before the great novelties became an established
order, the emotional fires burned themselves out, the modern
notions matured to something like permanent principles; then
natural curiosity turned once more toward these principles of
life, and sought their essence, their inward ramifications, and
the grounds of their security. Interpretations of doctrines and
commandments became more and more urgent. But interpre-
tation of general propositions is nothing more nor less than
philosophy; and so another vital age of Reason began.
   The wonderful flights of imagination and feeling inspired
by the rise and triumph of Christianity, the questions to which
its profound revolutionary attitude gave rise, provided for
nearly a thousand years of philosophical growth, beginning
with the early Church Fathers and culminating in the great
Scholastics. But, at last, its generative ideas — sin and salva--.
tion, nature arfid grace, unity, infinity, and kingdom     — had
done their work. Vast systems of thought had been formulated,
and all relevant problems had been mooted. Then came the
unanswerable puzzles, the paradoxes that always mark the
limit of what a generative idea, an intellectual vision, will do.
The exhausted Christian mind rested its case and philosophy
became a reiteration and ever-weakening justification of faith.
   Again "pure thought" appeared as a jejune and academic
business. History teachers like to tell us that learned men in
the Middle Ages would solemnly discuss how many angels
could dance on the point of a needle. Of course that question,
and others like it, had perfectly respectable deeper meanings
—  in this case the answer hinged on the material or im-
material nature of angels (if they were incorporeal, then an
infinite number of them could occupy a dimensionless point).
Yet such problems, ienorantly or maliciously misunderstood,
undoubtedly furnished jokes in the banquet hall when they
were still seriously propounded in the classroom. The fact
22                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
that the average person who heard them did not try to under-
stand them but regarded them as cryptic inventions of an
                 —
academic class "too deep for us," as our Man in the Street
             —
would say shows that the issues of metaphysical speculation
were no longer vital to the general literate public. Scholastic
thought was gradually suffocating under the pressure of new
interests,                 —
             new emotions the crowding modern             ideas   and
artistic inspirationwe call the Renaissance.
   After several centuries of    sterile tradition,   logic-chopping,
and partisanship in philosophy, the wealth of nameless, hereti-
cal, often inconsistent notions born of the Renaissance crystal-
lized into general  and ultimate problems.      A  new outlook on
life challenged the human mind to make sense out of its
bewildering world; and the Cartesian age of "natural and
mental philosophy" succeeded to the realm.
   This new epoch had a mighty and revolutionary generative
idea: the dichotomy of all reality into inner experience and
outer world, subject and object, private reality and public
truth. The very language of what is now traditional epis-
temology betrays this basic notion; when we speak of the
"given," of "sense-data," "the phenomenon," or "other selves,"
we take for granted the immediacy of an internal experience
and the continuity of the external world. Our fundamental
questions are framed in these terms: What is actually given
to the mind? What guarantees the truth of sense-data? What
lies behind the observable order of phenomena? What is the
relation of the mind to the brain? How can we know other
selves?—  All these are familiar problems of today. Their
answers have been elaborated into whole systems of thought:
empiricism, idealism, realism, phenomenology, Existenz-Phi-
losophie, and logical positivism. The most complete and
characteristic of all these doctrines are the earliest ones:
empiricism and idealism. They are the full, unguarded, vigor-
ous formulations of the new generative notion, Experience;
their proponents were the enthusiasts inspired by the Cartesian
method, and their doctrines are the obvious implications de-
rived by that principle, from such a starting-point. Each
school in its turn took the intellectual world by storm. Not
only the universities, but all literary circles, felt the liberation
from time-worn, oppressive concepts, from baffling limits of
inquiry, and hailed the new world-picture with a hope of
truer orientation in life, art, and action.
   After a while the confusions and shadows inherent in the
new vision became apparent, and subsequent doctrines sought
in various ways to escape between the horns of the dilemma
created by the subject-object dichotomy, which Professor
Whitehead has called "the bifurcation of nature." Since then,
                        THE NEW KEY                          23
our theories have become more and more refined, circum-
spect, and clever; no one can be quite frankly an idealist, or
go the whole way with empiricism; the early forms of realism
are now known as the "naive" varieties, and have been super-
seded by "critical" or "new" realisms. Many philosophers
vehemently deny any systematic Weltanschauung, and re-
pudiate metaphysics in principle.
   The springs of philosophical thought have run dry once
more. For fifty years at least, we have witnessed all the char-
acteristic symptoms that mark the end of an epoch     — the in-
corporation of thought in more and more variegated "isms,"
the clamor of their respective adherents to be heard and
judged side by side, the defense of philosophy as a respectable
and important pursuit, the increase of congresses and sym-
posia, and a flood of text-criticism, surveys, popularizations,
and collaborative studies. The educated layman does not
pounce upon a new philosophy book as people pounced upon
Leviathan or the great Critiques or even The World as Will
and Idea. He does not expect enough intellectual news from
a college professor. What he expects is, rather, to be argued
into accepting idealism or realism, pragmatism or irrational-
ism, as his own belief. We have arrived once more at that
counsel of despair, to find a reasoned faith.
   But the average person who has any faith does not really
care whether it is reasoned or not. He uses reason only to
                    —
satisfy his curiosity   and philosophy, at present, does not
even arouse, let alone satisfy, his curiosity. It only confuses
him with impractical puzzles. The reason is not that he is
dull, or really too busy (as he says he is) to enjoy philosophy..^

    —
It is simply that the generative ideas of the seventeenth cen-
tury    "the century of genius," Professor Whitehead calls it
have served their term. The difficulties inherent in their con-
stitutive concepts balk us now; their paradoxes clog our
thinking. If we would have new knowledge, we must get us
a whole world of new questions!
   Meanwhile, the dying philosophical epoch is eclipsed by
a tremendously active age of science and technology. The
roots of our scientific thinking reach far back, through the
whole period of subjective philosophy, further back than any
explicit empiricism, to the brilliant, extravert genius of the
Renaissance. Modern science is often said to have sprung
from empiricism; but Hobbes and Locke have given us no
physics, and Bacon, who expressed the scientists' creed to
perfection, was neither an active philosopher nor a scientist;
he was essentially a man of letters and a critic of current
thought. The only philosophy that rose directly out of a con-
templation of science is positivism, and it is probably the
24                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
least interesting of all doctrines,   an appeal to common-sense
against the difficulties of establishing metaphysical or logical
"first principles."
   Genuine empiricism is above all a reflection on the validity
of sense-knowledge, a speculation on the ways our concepts
and beliefs are built up out of the fleeting and disconnected
reports our eyes and ears actually make to the mind. Posi-
tivism, the scientists' metaphysic, entertains no such doubts,
and raises no epistemological problems; its belief in the
veracity of sense is implicit and dogmatic. Therefore it is
really out of the running with post-Cartesian philosophy. It
repudiates the basic problems of epistemology, and creates
nothing but elbow-room for laboratory work. The very fact
that it rejects problems, not answers, shows that the growing
physical sciences were geared to an entirely different outlook
on reality. They had their own so-called "working notions";
and the strongest of these was the concept of fact.
   This central concept effected the rapprochement between
science and empiricism, despite the latter's subjective tend-
encies. No matter what problems may lurk in vision and
hearing, there is something final about the guarantees of
sense. Sheer observation is hard to contradict, for sense-data
have an inalienable semblance of "fact." And such a court of
last appeal, where verdicts are quick and ultimate, was ex-
actly what scientists needed if their vast and complicated work
was to go forward. Epistemology might produce intriguing
puzzles, but it could never furnish facts for conviction to rest
upon. A naive faith in sense-evidence, on the other hand,
provided just such terminals to thought. Facts are something
we can all observe, identify, and hold in common; in the last
resort, seeing is believing. And science, as against philosophy
even in that eager and active philosophical age, professed to
look exclusively to the visible world for its unquestioned pos-
tulates.
  The results were astounding enough to lend the new atti-
tude   full force. Despite the objections of philosophical
thinkers, despite the outcry of moralists and theologians
against the "crass materialism" and "sensationalism" of the
         physical science grew like Jack's beanstalk, and
scientists,
overshadowed everything else that human thought produced
to rival it.  A passion for observation displaced the scholarly
love of learned dispute, and quickly developed the experi-
mental technique that kept humanity supplied thrice over with
facts. Practical applications of the new mechanical knowledge
soon popularized and established it beyond the universities.
Here the traditional interests of philosophy could not follow
it any more; for they had become definitely relegated to that
                       THE NEW KEY                           25

haven of unpopular lore, the schoolroom. No one really cared
much about consistency or definition of terms, about precise
conceptions, or formal deduction. The senses, long despised
and attributed to the interesting but improper domain of the
devil, were recognized as man's most valuable servants, and
were rescued from their classical disgrace to wait on him in
his new venture. They were so efficient that they not only
supplied the human mind with an incredible amount of food
for thought, but seemed presently to have most of its cogni-
tive business in hand. Knowledge from sensory experience
was deemed the only knowledge that carried any affidavit of
truth; for truth  became identified, for all vigorous modern
minds, with empirical fact.
   And so, a scientific culture succeeded to the exhausted
philosophical vision. An undisputed and uncritical empiri-
    —                                —
cism not skeptical, but positivistic became its official meta-
physical creed, experiment its avowed method, a vast hoard
of "data" its capital, and correct prediction of future occur-
rences its proof. The programmatic account of this great
adventure, beautifully put forth in Bacon's Novum Organum
was followed only a few centuries later by the complete,
triumphant summary of all that was scientifically respectable,
in J. S. Mill's Canons of Induction — a sort of methodological
manifesto.
   As the physical world-picture grew and technology ad-
vanced, those disciplines which rested squarely on "rational"
instead of "empirical" principles were threatened with com-
plete extinction, and were soon denied even the honorable
name of science. Logic and metaphysics, aesthetics and ethics,
seemed to have seen their day. One by one the vaffous
branches of philosophy—natural, mental, social, or religious
—  -set up  as autonomous sciences; the natural ones with
miraculous success, the humanistic ones with more hope and
fanfare than actual achievement. The physical sciences found
their stride without much hesitation; psychology and sociology
tried hard and seriously to "catch the tune and keep the
step," but with mathematical laws they were never really
handy. Psychologists have probably spent almost as much time
and type avowing their empiricism, their factual premises,
their experimental techniques, as recording experiments and
making general inductions. They still tell us that their lack of
laws and calculable results is due to the fact that psychology
is but young. When physics was as old as psychology is now,

it was a definite, systematic body of highly general facts, and

the possibilities of its future expansion were clearly visible in
every line of its natural progress. It could say of itself, like
Topsy, "I wasn't made, I growed." But our scientific psy-
26               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
chology is made in the laboratory, and especially in the
methodological forum. A good deal has, indeed, been made;
but the synthetic organism still does not grow like a wild
plant; its technical triumphs are apt to be discoveries in physi-
ology or chemistry instead of psychological "facts."
   Theology, which could not possibly submit to scientific
methods, has simply been crowded out of the intellectual
arena and gone into retreat in the cloistered libraries of its
seminaries. As for logic, once the very model and norm of
science, its only salvation seemed to lie in repudiating its most
precious stock-in-trade, the "clear and distinct ideas," and
professing to argue only from empirical facts to equally fac-
tual implications. The logician, once an investor in the greatest
enterprise of human thought, found himself reduced to a sort
of railroad linesman, charged with the task of keeping the
tracks and switches of scientific reasoning clear for sensory
reports to make their proper connections. Logic, it seemed,
could never have a life of its own; for it had no foundation
of facts, except the psychological fact that we do think thus
and so, that such-and-such forms of argument lead to correct
or incorrect predictions of further experience, and so forth.
Logic became a mere reflection on tried and useful methods
of fact-finding, and an official warrant for that technically
fallacious process of generalizing known as "induction."
   Yes, the heyday of science has stifled and killed our rather
worn-out philosophical interests, born three and a half cen-
turies ago from that great generative idea, the bifurcation
of nature, into an inner and an outer world. To the gener-
ations of Comte, Mill, and Spencer, it certainly seemed as
though all human knowledge could be cast in the new mold;
certainly as though nothing in any other mold could hope
to jell. And indeed, nothing much has jelled in any other
mold; but neither have the non-physical disciplines been
able to adopt and thrive on the scientific methods that did
such wonders for physics and its obvious derivatives. The
truth is that science has not really fructified and activated
all human thought. If humanity has really passed the philo-
sophical stage of learning, as Comte hopefully declared, and
is evolving no more fantastic ideas, then we have certainly
left many interesting brain-children stillborn along the way.
   But the mind of man is always fertile, ever creating and
discarding, like the earth. There is always new life under
old decay. Last year's dead leaves hide not merely the seeds,
but the full-fledged green plants of this year's spring, ready
to bloom almost as soon as they are uncovered. It is the
same with the seasons of civilization: under cover of a weary
Greco-Roman eclecticism, a baffled cynicism, Christianity
                       THE NEW KEY                          27
grew to its conquering force of conception and its clear
interpretation of life; obscured by creed, canon, and curricu-
lum, by learned disputation and demonstration, was born the
great ideal of personal experience, the "rediscovery of the
inner life," as Rudolph Eucken termed it, that was to inspire
philosophy from Descartes's day to the end of German
idealism. And beneath our rival "isms," our methodologies,
conferences, and symposia, of course there is something
brewing, too.
   No one observed, amid the first passion of empirical fact-
finding, that the ancient science of mathematics still went its
undisturbed way of pure reason. It fell in so nicely with the
needs of scientific thought, it fitted the observed world of
fact so neatly, that those who learned and used it never
stopped to accuse those who had invented and evolved it of
being mere reasoners, and lacking tangible data. Yet the few
conscientious empiricists who thought that factual bases
must be established for mathematics made a notoriously
poor job of it. Few mathematicians have really held that
numbers were discovered by observation, or even that geo-
metrical relationships are known to us by inductive reason-
ing from many observed instances. Physicists may think of
certain facts in place of constants and variables, but the
same constants and variables will serve somewhere else to
calculate other facts, and the mathematicians themselves
give no set of data their preference. They deal only with
items whose sensory qualities are quite irrelevant: their
"data" are arbitrary sounds or marks called symbols.
   Behind these symbols lie the boldest, purest, coolest ab-
stractions manl^nd has ever made. No schoolman speculating
on essences and attributes ever approached anything like
the abstractness of algebra. Yet those same scientists who
prided themselves on their concrete factual knowledge, who
claimed to reject every proof except empirical evidence,
never hesitated to accept the demonstrations and calculations,
the bodiless, sometimes avowedly "fictitious" entities of the
mathematicians. Zero and infinity, square roots of negative
numbers, incommensurable lengths and fourth dimensions,
all found unquestioned welcome in the laboratory, when the
average thoughtful layman, who could still take an invisible
soul-substance on faith, doubted their logical respectability.
   What is the secret power of mathematics, to win hard-
headed empiricists, against their most ardent beliefs, to its
purely rational speculations and intangible "facts"? Mathe-
maticians are rarely practical people, or good observers of
events. They are apt to be cloistered souls, like philosophers
and theologians. Why are their abstractions taken not only
28                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
seriously, but as indispensable, fundamental facts, by men
who   observe the stars or experiment with chemical com-
pounds?
   The secret lies in the fact that a mathematician does not
profess to say anything about the existence, reality, or effi-
cacy of things at all. His concern is the possibility of symbol-
izing things, and of symbolizing the relations into which
they might enter with each other. His "entities" are not
"data," but concepts. That is why such elements as "im-
aginary numbers" and "infinite decimals" are tolerated by
scientists to whom invisible agents, powers, and "principles"
are anathema. Mathematical constructions are only sym-
bols; they have meanings in terms of relationships, not of
substance; something in reality answers to them, but they
are not supposed to be items in that reality. To the true
mathematician, numbers do not "inhere in" denumerable
things, nor do circular objects "contain" degrees. Numbers
and degrees and all their ilk only mean the real properties
of real objects. It is entirely at the discretion of the scientist
to say, "Let x mean this, let v mean that." All that mathe-
matics determines is that then x and y must be related thus
and thus. If experience belies the conclusion, then the
formula does not express the relation of this x and that y;
then x and y may not mean this thing and that. But no
mathematician in his professional capacity will ever tell us
that this is x, and has therefore such and such properties.
   The faith of scientists in the power and truth of mathe-
matics is so implicit that their work has gradually become less
and less observation, and more and more calculation. The
promiscuous collection and tabulation of data have given
way to a process of assigning possible meanings, merely sup-
posed real entities, to mathematical terms, working out the
logical results,and then staging certain crucial experiments
to check the hypothesis against the actual, empirical results.
But the facts which are accepted by virtue of these tests are
not actually observed at all. With the advance of mathe-
matical technique in physics, the tangible results of experi-
ment have become less and less spectacular; on the other
hand, their significance has grown in inverse proportion. The
men in the laboratory have departed so far from the old
                           —
forms of experimentation typified by Galileo's weights and
Franklin's kite    —
                  that they cannot be said to observe the ac-
tual objects of their curiosity at all; instead, they are watch-
ing index needles, revolving drums, and sensitive plates. No
psychology of "association" of sense-experiences can relate
these data to the objects they signify, for in most cases the
objects have never been experienced. Observation has be-
                          THE   NEW KEY                          29
come almost entirely indirect; and readings take the place of
genuine witness. The sense-data on which the propositions
of modern science rest are, for the most part, little photo-
graphic spots and blurs, or inky curved lines on paper. These
data are empirical enough, but of course they are not them-
selves the phenomena in question; the actual phenomena
stand behind them as their supposed causes. Instead of
watching the process that interests us, that is to be verified
say, a course of celestial events, or the behavior of such ob-
jects as molecules and ether-waves    —  we really see only the
fluctuations of a tiny arrow, the trailing path of a stylus, or
the appearance of a speck of light, and calculate to the "facts"
of our science. What is directly observable is only a sign of
the "physical fact"; it requires interpretation to yield scien-
tific propositions. Not simply seeing is believing, but seeing
and calculating, seeing and translating.
   This is bad, of course, for a thoroughgoing empiricism.
Sense-data certainly do not make up the whole, or even the
major part, of a scientist's material. The events that are given
for his inspection could be "faked" in a dozen ways      —
                                                         that is,
the same visible events could be made to occur, but with a
different significance. We may at any time be wrong about
their significance,    even where no one   is   duping us; we   may
be nature's   fools.Yet if we did not attribute an elaborate,
purely reasoned, and hypothetical history of causes to the
little shivers and wiggles of our apparatus, we really could
not record them as momentous results of experiment. The
problem of observation is all but eclipsed by the problem of
meaning. And the triumph of empiricism in science is jeopar-
dized by the surprising truth that our sense-data are primarily
                *•
symbols.
   Here, suddenly, it becomes apparent that the age of sci-
ence has begotten a new philosophical issue, inestimably
more profound than its original empiricism: for in all
quietness, along purely rational .lines, mathematics has de-
veloped just as brilliantly and vitally as any experimental
technique, and, step by step, has kept abreast of discovery
and observation; and all at once, the edifice of human knowl-
edge stands before us, not as a vast collection of sense re-
ports, but as a structure of facts that are symbols and laws
that are their meanings.        A  new philosophical theme has
been set forth to a coming age: an epistemological theme,
the comprehension of science. The power of symbolism is
its cue, as the finality of sense-data was the cue of a former
epoch.
   In epistemology    —really all that is left of a worn-out philo-
sophical heritage     —
                      a new generative idea has dawned. Its
30                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
power is hardly recognized yet, but if we look at the actual
trend of thought   —   always the surest index to a general pros-
pect —  the growing preoccupation with that new theme is
quite apparent. One needs only to look at the titles of some
philosophical books that have appeared within the last fifteen
or twenty years: The Meaning of Meaning; 7 Symbolism and
Truth; 8 Die Philosophie der symbolischen Formen; 9 Lan-
guage, Truth and Logic; 10 Symbol und Existenz der Wissen-
schaft; X1 The Logical Syntax of Language; l2 Philosophy and
Logical Syntax; 13 Meaning and Change of Meaning; 14 Sym-
bolism: Its Meaning and Effects; 15 Foundations of the
Theory of Signs; 16 Seele als Ausserung; 17 La pensee con-
crete: essai sur le symbolisme intellectuel; 18 Zeichen, die
Fundamente des Wissens; 19 and recently, Language and
Reality. 20 The list is not nearly exhaustive. There are many
books whose titles do not betray a preoccupation with se-
mantic, for instance Wittgenstein's Tractatus Logico-Philo-
sophicus, 21 or Grudin's A Primer of Aesthetics. 22 And were
we to take an inventory of articles, even on the symbolism
of science alone, we would soon have a formidable bibli-
ography.
    But it is not only in philosophy proper that the new key-
note has been struck. There are at least two limited and
technical fields, which have suddenly been developed be-
yond all prediction, by the discovery of the all-importance
of symbol-using or symbol-reading. They are widely separate
fields, and their problems and procedures do not seem to
belong together in any way at all: one is modern psychology,
the other modern logic.
    In the former we are disturbed       —   thrilled or irritated, ac-
cording to our temperaments          —  by the advent of psycho-
analysis. In the latter we witness the rise of a new technique
known as symbolic logic. The coincidence of these two pur-
suits seems entirely fortuitous; one stems from medicine
and the other from mathematics, and there is nothing what-
ever on which they would care to compare notes or hold
debate. Yet I believe they both embody the same generative
   7 C. K. Ogden and I. A. Richards (1923).
  8 Ralph Munroe Eaton (1925).
  e Ernst Cassirer, 3 vols. (1923, 1924, 1929).     io A. J. Aver (1936).
  11 H. Noack, Symbol und Existenz der Wissenschaft: Untersuchungen
zur Grundlegung einer philosophischen Wissenschaftslehre (1936).
   12 Rudolf Carnap (1935; German ed. 1934).
  is Rudolf Carnap (1935; German ed. 1934).
  i^Gustav Stern (1931).                    is A. N. Whitehead (1927).
  is Charles W. Morris (1938).                  i? Paul Helwig (1936).
  isA. Spaier (1927).                    is R, Gatschenberger (1932).
  20 Wilbur M. Urban, Language and Reality; the Philosophy of Lan-
guage and the Principles of Symbolism (1939).
  2iLudwig Wittgenstein (1922).                22 Louis Grudin (1930).
                       THE NEW KEY                          31
idea, which is to preoccupy and inspire our philosophical age:
for each in its own fashion has discovered the power of sym-
bolization.
  They have different conceptions of symbolism and its func-
tions. Symbolic logic is not "symbolic" in the sense of Freud-
ian psychology, and The Analysis of Dreams makes no
contribution to logical syntax. The emphasis on symbolism
derives from entirely different interests, in their respective
contexts. As yet, the cautious critic may well regard the one
as a fantastic experiment of "mental philosophy," and the
other as a mere fashion in logic and epistemology.
   When we speak of fashions in thought, we are treating
philosophy lightly. There is disparagement in the phrases,
"a fashionable problem," "a fashionable term." Yet it is the
most natural and appropriate thing in the world for a new
problem or a new terminology to have a vogue that crowds
out everything else for a little while.A    word that everyone
snaps up, or a question that has everybody excited, probably
carries a generative idea—  the germ of a complete reorienta-
tion in metaphysics, or at least the "Open Sesame" of some
new positive science. The sudden vogue of such a key-idea
is due to the fact that all sensitive and active minds turn at
once to exploiting it; we try it in every connection, for every
purpose, experiment with possible stretches of its strict mean-
ing, with generalizations and derivatives. When we become
familiar with the new idea our expectations do not outrun
its actual uses quite so far, and then its unbalanced popu-
larity is over. We settle down to the problems that it has
really generated, and these become the characteristic issues
of our time.                                               'm
   The rise of technology^ is the best possible proof that the
basic concepts of physical science, which have ruled our
thinking for nearly two centuries, are essentially sound. They
have begotten knowledge, practice, and systematic under-
standing; no wonder they have .given us a very confident
and definite Weltanschauung. They have delivered all physi-
cal nature into our hands. But strangely enough, the so-
called "mental sciences" have gained very little from the
great adventure. One attempt after another has failed to
apply the concept of causality to logic and aesthetics, or even
sociology and psychology. Causes and effects could be found,
of course, and could be correlated, tabulated, and studied;
but even in psychology, where the study of stimulus and re-
action has been carried to elaborate lengths, no true science
has resulted. No prospects of really great achievement have
 opened before us in the laboratory. If we follow the meth-
 ods of natural science our psychology tends to run into
32                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
physiology, histology, and genetics; we move further and fur-
ther away from those problems which we ought to be ap-
proaching. That signifies that the generative idea which gave
rise to physics and chemistry and all their progeny       —
                                                         tech-
nology, medicine, biology   — does not contain any vivifying
concept for the humanistic sciences. The physicist's scheme,
so faithfully emulated by generations of psychologists, epis-
temologists, and aestheticians, is probably blocking their
progress, defeating possible insights by its prejudicial force.
The scheme is not         —
                       false it is perfectly reasonable —   but it
is bootless for the study of mental phenomena. It does not

engender leading questions and excite a constructive imagina-
tion, as it does in physical researches. Instead of a method,
it inspires a militant methodology.

   Now, in those very regions of human interest where the
age of empiricism has caused no revolution, the preoccupa-
tion with symbols has come into fashion. It has not sprung
directly from any canon of science. It runs at least two dis-
tinct and apparently incompatible courses. Yet each course
is a river of life in its own field, each fructifies its own har-

vest; and instead of finding mere contradiction in the wide
difference of forms and uses to which this new generative
idea is put, I see in it a promise of power and versatility,
and a commanding philosophical problem. One conception
of symbolism leads to logic, and meets the new problems in
theory of knowledge; and so it inspires an evaluation of
science and a quest for certainty. The other takes us in the
opposite direction —   to psychiatry, the study of emotions,
religion, fantasy, and everything but knowledge. Yet in both
we have a central theme: the human response, as a construc-
tive, not a passive thing. Epistemologists and psychologists
agree that symbolization is the key to that constructive pro-
cess, though they may be ready to kill each other over the
issue of what a symbol is and how it functions. One studies
the structure of science, the other of dreams; each has his
                  —                      —
own assumptions that is all they are regarding the nature
of symbolism itself. Assumptions, generative ideas, are what
we fight for. Our conclusions we are usually content to
demonstrate by peaceable means. Yet the assumptions are
philosophically our most interesting stock-in-trade.
   In the fundamental notion of symbolization         —  mystical,
practical, or mathematical, it makes no difference    —   we have
the keynote of all humanistic problems. In it lies a new con-
ception of "mentality," that may illumine questions of life
and consciousness, instead of obscuring them as traditional
"scientific methods" have done. If it is indeed a generative
idea, it will beget tangible methods of its own, to free the
                      SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                    33
deadlocked paradoxes of mind and body, reason and impulse,
autonomy and law, and will overcome the checkmated argu-
ments of an earlier age by discarding their very idiom and
shaping their equivalents in more significant phrase. The
philosophical study of symbols is not a technique borrowed
from other disciplines, not even from mathematics; it has
arisen in the fields that the great advance of learning has
left fallow. Perhaps it holds the seed of a new intellectual
harvest, to be reaped in the next season of the human under-
standing.
