2.     Symbolic Transformation


        The vitality and energies of the imagination do not
        operate at will; they are fountains, not machinery.
                          D. G. James, Skepticism and Poetry.

A changed approach to the theory of knowledge naturally
has   its   effect    upon psychology,   too.   As long as sense was
supposed to be the chief factor in knowledge, psychologists
took a prime interest in the organs that were the windows of
the mind, and in the details of their functioning; other
things were accorded a sketchier and sometimes vaguer
treatment. If scientists demanded, and philosophers dutifully
admitted, that all true belief must be based on sense-evi-
dence, then the activity of the mind had to be conceived
purely as a matter of recording and combining; then jm\elli-,
gence had to«be a product of impression, memory, and as-
sociation. But now, an -epistemological insight has uncovered
a more potent, howbeit more difficult, factor in scientific
             —
procedure the use of symbols to attain, as well as to or-
ganize, belief. Of course, this alters our conception of in-
telligence at a stroke. Not higher sensitivity, not longer
memory or even quicker association sets man so far above
other animals that he can regard them as denizens of a
                                                         —
lower world: no, it is the power of using symbols the power
of speech    —
             that makes him lord of the earth. So our inter-
est in the mind has shifted more and more from the acquisi-
tion of experience, the domain of sense, to the uses of
sense-data, the realm of conception and expression.
   The importance of symbol-using, once admitted, soon be-
comes paramount in the study of intelligence. It has lent a
new orientation especially to genetic psychology, which
traces the growth of the mind; for this growth is paralleled,
34                        PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
in large measure, by the observable uses of language, from
the first words in infancy to the complete self-expression of
maturity, and perhaps the relapse into meaningless verbiage
that accompanies senile decline. Such researches have even
been extended from the development of individuals to the
evolution of mental traits in nations and races. There is an
increasing rapprochement between philology and psychology
—  between the science of language and the science of what
we do with language. The recent literature of psychogenetics
bears ample witness to the central position which symbol-
using, or language in its most general sense, holds in
our conception of human mentality. Frank Lorimer's The
Growth of Reason bears the sub-title: "A Study of the Role
of Verbal Activity in the Growth and Structure of the Hu-
man Mind." Grace De Laguna's Speech: Its Function and
Development treats the acquisition of language as not only
indicative of the growth of concepts, but as the principal
agent in this evolution. Much the same view is held by Pro-
fessor A. D. Ritchie, who remarks, in The Natural History
of the Mind: "As far as thought is concerned, and at all
levels of thought, it [mental life] is a symbolic process. It is
mental not because the symbols are immaterial, for they are
often material, perhaps always material, but because they
are symbols.     .  The essential act of thought is symboliza-
                      .     .



tion." x There is, I think, more depth in this statement than
its author realized; had he been aware of it, the proposition
would have occurred earlier in the book, and given the whole
work a somewhat novel turn. As it is, he goes on to an ex-
cellent account of sign-using and sign-making, which stand
forth clearly as the essential means of intellection.
   Quotations could be multiplied almost indefinitely, from
an imposing          list           —
                            of sources from John Dewey and Ber-
trand   Russell,          from Brunschwicg and Piaget and Head,
Kohler and Koffka, Carnap, Delacroix, Ribot, Cassirer,
             —
Whitehead from philosophers, psychologists, neurologists,
                                —
and anthropologists to substantiate the claim that symbol-
ism is the recognized key to that mental life which is char-
acteristically human and above the level of sheer animality.
Symbol and meaning make man's world, far more than sen-
sation; Miss Helen Keller, bereft of sight and hearing, or
even a person like the late Laura Bridgman, with the single
sense of touch, is capable of living in a wider and richer
world than a dog or an ape with all his senses alert.
   Genetic psychology grew out of the study of animals, chil-
dren, and savages, both from a physiological and from a

 i Pages   278-279.
                    SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                     35
behavioristic angle. Its fundamental standpoint is that the
responses of an organism to the environment are adaptive,
and are dictated by that organism's needs. Such needs may
be variously conceived; one school reduces them all to one
basic requirement, such as keeping the metabolic balance,
                                    2
persisting in an ideal status;         others distinguish as ele-
                                    —
mentary more specific aims e.g., nutrition, parturition, de-
fense—   or even such differentiated cravings as physical comfort,
companionship, self-assertion, security, play. 3 The tenor of
these primary concepts is suggested largely by the inves-
tigator's starting point.       A
                               biologist tends to postulate only
the obvious    needs   of  a  clam    or even an infusorian; an
animal-psychologist generalizes somewhat less, for he makes
distinctions that are relevant, say, to a white rat, but hardly
to a clam. An observer of childhood conceives the cardinal
interests on a still higher level. But through the whole hier-
archy of genetic studies there runs a feeling of continuity,
a tendency to identify the "real" or "ultimate" motive con-
ditions of human action with the needs of primitive life, to
trace all wants and aims of mankind to some initial proto-
plasmic response. This dominant principle is the most im-
portant thing that the evolutionist school has bestowed upon
             —
psychology the assumption, sometimes avowed, more often
tacit, that "Nihil est in homine quod non prius in amoeba
erat."
   When students of mental evolution discovered how great
a role in science is played by symbols, they were not slow
to exploit that valuable insight. The acquisition of so de-
cisive a tool must certainly be regarded as one of the great
landmarks in human progress, probably the starting point of
all genuinely intellectual growth. Since symbol-using appears
at a late stage, it is presumably a highly integrated form of
simpler animal activities. It must spring from biological
needs, and justify itself as a practical asset. Man's conquest
of the world undoubtedly rests «on the supreme development
of his brain, which allows him to synthesize, delay, and
modify his reactions by the interpolation of symbols in the
gaps and confusions of direct experience, and by means of
"verbal signs" to add the experiences of other people to his
own.
   There is a profound difference between using symbols and
merely using signs. The use of signs is the very first mani-
festation of mind. It arises as early in biological history as


  2Cf. Eugenio Rignano, The Psychology of Reasoning (1927).
  3 Cf William James, The Principles of Psychology (1899; first pub-
         .


lished in 1890),   II,   348.
36                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
 the famous "conditioned reflex," by which a concomitant
 of a stimulus takes over the stimulus-function. The concom-
 itant becomes a sign of the condition to which the reaction
 is really appropriate. This is the real beginning of mentality,
 for here is the birthplace of error, and therewith of truth.
 If truth and error are to be attributed only to belief, then
 we must recognize in the earliest misuse of signs, in the in-
 appropriate conditioned reflex, not error, but some proto-
 type of error. We might call it mistake. Every piano player,
 every typist, knows that the hand can make mistakes where
 consciousness entertains no error. However, whether we
 speak of truth and error, or of their respective prototypes,
 whether we regard the creature liable to them as conscious
 or preconscious, or dispense with such terms altogether, the
 use of signs is certainly a mental function. It is the beginning
of intelligence. As soon as sensations function as signs of
 conditions in the surrounding world, the animal receiving
them is moved to exploit or avoid those conditions. The
 sound of a gong or a whistle, itself entirely unrelated to the
process of eating, causes a dog to expect food, if in past
experience this sound has always preceded dinner; it is a
 sign, not a part, of his food. Or, the smell of a cigarette, in
itself not necessarily displeasing, tells a wild animal that
there is danger, and drives it into hiding. The growth of
this sign-language runs parallel with the physical develop-
ment of sense organs and synaptic nerve-structure. It con-
sists in the transmission of sense messages to muscles and
glands—   to the organs of eating, mating, flight and defense
and obviously functions in the interest of the elementary
biological requirements: self-preservation, growth, procrea-
tion, the preservation of the species.
    Even animal mentality, therefore, is built up on a primi-
tive semantic; it is the power of learning, by trial and error,
that certain phenomena in the world are signs of certain
others, existing or about to exist; adaptation to an environ-
ment is its purpose, and hence the measure of its success.
The environment may be very narrow, as it is for the mole,
whose world is a back yard, or it may be as wide as an
eagle's range and as complicated as a monkey's jungle pre-
serve. That depends on the variety of signals a creature can
receive, the variety of combinations of them to which he can
react, and the fixity or adjustability of his responses. Ob-
viously, if he has very fixed reactions, he cannot adapt him-
self to a varied or transient environment; if he cannot easily
combine and integrate several activities, then the occur-
rence of more than one stimulus at a time will throw him
into confusion; if he be poor in sensory organs      —   deaf, or
                SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                       37
blind, hard-shelled, or otherwise limited   —he cannot   receive
many signals to begin with.
   Man's superiority    in the race for self-preservation was
first ascribed to his wider range of signals, his greater power
of integrating reflexes, his quicker learning by trial and error;
but a little reflection brought a much more fundamental
trait to light, namely his peculiar use of "signs." Man, un-
like all other animals, uses "signs" not only to indicate
things, but also to represent them. To a clever dog, the name
of a person is a signal that the person is present; you say
the name, he pricks up his ears and looks for its object. If
you say "dinner," he becomes restive, expecting food. You
cannot make any communication to him that is not taken as
a signal of something immediately forthcoming. His mind
is a simple and direct transmitter of messages from the world

to his motor centers. With man it is different.          We   use
certain "signs" among ourselves that do not point to anything
in our actual surroundings. Most of our words are not signs
in the sense of signals. They are used to talk about things,
not to direct our eyes and ears and noses toward them. In-
stead of announcers of things, they are reminders. They have
been called "substitute signs," for in our present experience
they take the place of things that we have perceived in the
past, or even things that we can merely imagine by combin-
ing memories, things that might be in past or future experi-
ence. Of course such "signs" do not usually serve as
vicarious stimuli to actions that would be appropriate to their
meanings; where the objects are quite normally not present,
that would result in a complete chaos of behavior. They
serve, rather, to let us develop a characteristic attitude* to-
ward objects   m   absentia, which is called "thinking of" or
"referring to" what is not here. "Signs" used in this capacity
are not symptoms of things, but symbols.
   The development of language is the history of the gradual
accumulation and elaboration of verbal symbols. By means
of this phenomenon, man's whole behavior-pattern has un-
dergone an immense change from the simple biological
scheme, and his mentality has expanded to such a degree
that it is no longer comparable to the minds of animals. In-
stead of a direct transmitter of coded signals, we have a
system that has sometimes been likened to a telephone-
exchange, 4 wherein messages may be relayed, stored up if
a line is busy, answered by proxy, perhaps sent over a line
that did not exist when they were first given, noted down

  * The simile of the telephone-exchange has been used by Leonard
Troland in The Mystery of Mind (1926), p. 100 ff.
38                                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
and kept if the desired number gives no answer. Words are
the plugs                in    this         super-switchboard;     they    connect impres-
sions and     them function together; sometimes they cause
                         let
lines to become crossed in funny or disastrous ways.
   This view of mentality, of its growth through trial and
error,    apparently complicated but essentially simple aims
               its

—  namely, to advance the persistence, growth, and procre-
ation of the organism, and to produce, and provide for, its
                   —
progeny brings the troublesome concept of Mind into
line with other basic ideas of biology. Man is doing in his
elaborate way just what the mouse in his simplicity is do-
ing, and what the unconscious or semiconscious jellyfish is
performing after its own chemical fashion. The ideal of
"Nihil est in homine       ." is supported by living example.
                                                 .   .



The speech line between man and beast is minimized by the
recognition that speech is primarily an instrument of social
control, just like the cries of animals, but has acquired a
representative function, allowing a much greater degree of
cooperation among individuals, and the focussing of per-
sonal attention on absent objects. The passage from the sign-
function of a word to its symbolic function is gradual, a
result of social organization, an instrument that proves in-
dispensable once it is discovered, and develops through suc-
cessful use.
   If the theoretic position here attributed to students of
genetic psychology requires any affidavit, we can find it in
the words of a psychologist, in Frank Lorimer's The Growth
of      Reason:
   "The apes described by Kohler," he says, "certainly have
quite elaborate 'ape-ways' into which a newcomer is gradu-
ally acculturated, including among other patterns ways of
using          available            instruments          for reaching and climbing, a
sort of rhythmic play or dance,                            and types of murmurs, wails
and rejoicings.                 .   .   .



     "It  not surprising that still more intelligent animals
               is
should have developed much more definite and elaborate
'animal ways,' including techniques of tool-uses and specific
mechanisms of vocal social control, which gradually de-
veloped into the 'folk-ways' of the modern anthropolo-
gist.      .   .     .



   "Vocal acts are originally involved in the intellectual cor-
relation of behaviour just as other physiological processes
are. During the whole course of meaningless vocal chatter,
vocal processes gradually accumulate intensity and domi-
nance in behaviour.        Specific vocables become dominant
                                             .   .   .



foci of fixed reactions to various situations and the instru-
ments of specific social adjustments.       The gradual differ-.   .   .
                   SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                          39
entiation   and expansion of the     social functions of vocal
activity, among a race of    animals   characterized by increas-
ingly complex   nervous  systems, is  the fundamental principle
of the historic trend of vocal activity to verbal activity, and
the emergence of language." 5
   An interpretation of observed facts that adjusts them to
a general scientific outlook, a theory that bridges what used
to appear as a saltus naturae, a logical explanation displacing
a shamefaced resort to miracle, has so much to recommend it
that one hates to challenge it on any count. But the best
ideas are also the ones most worth reflecting on. At first
glance it seems as though the genetic conception of language,
which regards the power of symbol-using as the latest and
highest device of practical intelligence, an added instrument
for gaining animal ends, must be the key to all essential
features of human mentality. It makes rationality plausible,
and shows at once the relationship of man and brute, and
the gulf between them as a fairly simple phenomenon.
   The difficulty of the theory arises when we consider how
people with synaptic switchboards between their sense organs
and their muscles should use their verbal symbols to make
the telephone-exchange work most efficiently. Obviously the
only proper use of the words which "plug in" the many
complicated wires is the denotation of facts. Such facts
may be concrete and personal, or they may be highly general
and universal; but they should be chosen for the sake of
orientation in the world for better living, for more advan-
tageous practice. It is easy to see how errors might arise,
just as they occur in overt action; the white rat in a maze
makes mistakes, and so does the trout who bites at a feajt&er-
and-silk fly. In^so complicated an organ as the human cor-
tex, a confusion of messages or of responses would be even
more likely than in the reflex arcs of rodents or fish. But
of course the mistakes should be subject to quick correction
by the world's punishments; behavior should, on the whole,
be rational and realistic. Any other response must be chalked
up as failure, as a miscarriage of biological purposes.
  There     are,   indeed,   philosophical   and   scientific   thinkers
who have accepted the biogenetic     theory of mind on its
great merits, and drawn just the conclusions indicated above.
They have looked at the way men really use their power of
symbolic thinking, the responses they actually make, and
have been forced to admit that the cortical telephone-ex-
change does business in most extraordinary ways. The results
of their candid observations are such books as W. B. Pit-

  6 Pages 76-77.
40                        PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
kin's Short Introduction to the History of Human Stupidity,
Charles Richet's L'homme Stupide (which deals not with
men generally regarded as stupid, but with the impractical
customs and beliefs of aliens, and the folly of religious con-
victions), and Stuart Chase's The Tyranny of Words. To
contemplate the unbelievable folly of which symbol-using
animals are capable is very disgusting or very amusing, ac-
cording to our mood; but philosophically it is, above all,
confounding. How can an instrument develop in the inter-
ests of better practice, and survive, if it harbors so many
dangers for the creature possessed of it? How can language
increase a man's efficiency if it puts him at a biological
disadvantage beside his cat?
   Mr. Chase, watching his cat Hobie Baker, reflects:
   "Hobie can never learn to talk. He can learn to respond
to my talk, as he responds to other signs. ... He can utter
cries indicating pain, pleasure, excitement. He can announce
that he wants to go out of doors.        .But he cannot master
                                             .   .


words and language. This in some respects is fortunate for
Hobie, for he will not suffer from hallucinations provoked
by bad language. He will remain a realist all his life.    .   .   .


He is certainly able to think after a fashion, interpreting
signs in the light of past experience, deliberately deciding his
course of action, the survival value of which is high.
   "Instead of words, Hobie sometimes uses a crude gesture
language. We know that he has a nervous system corres-
ponding to that of man, with messages coming into the re-
ceptors in skin, ear and eye and going over the wires to the
cortex, where memories are duly filed for reference. There
are fewer switchboards in his cortex than in mine, which
may be one of the reasons why he cannot learn to talk.         .
                                                               .   .


   "Meaning comes to Hobie as it comes to me, through past
experience.       ...
   "Generally speaking, animals tend to learn cumulatively
through experience. The old elephant is the wisest of the
herd. This selective process does not always operate in the
case of human beings. The old are sometimes wise, but more
often they are stuffed above the average with superstitions,
misconceptions, and irrational dogmas. One may hazard the
guess that erroneous identifications in human beings are
pickled and preserved in words, and so not subject to the
constant check of the environment, as in the case of cats and
elephants.    .   .   .


   "I find Hobie a useful exhibit along this difficult trail of
semantics. What 'meaning' connotes to him is often so clear
and simple that I have no trouble in following it. I come
from a like evolutionary matrix. 'Meaning' to me has like
                       SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                            41
roots, and a like mechanism of apprehension. I have a six-
cylinder brain and he has a one-lunger, but they operate
on like principles.
   ".    Most children do not long maintain Hobie Baker's
         .   .


realistic appraisal       of the environment. Verbal identifications
and confused abstractions begin at a tender age.          Lan-.   .   .


guage is no more than crudely acquired before children be-
gin to suffer from it, and to misinterpret the world by reason
of    it." 6
     A
     cat with a "stalking-instinct," or other special equip-
ment, who could never learn to use that asset properly, but
was forever stalking chairs or elephants, would scarcely rise
in animal estate by virtue of his talent. Men who can use
symbols to facilitate their practical responses, but use them
constantly to confuse and inhibit, warp and misadapt their
actions, and gain no other end by their symbolic devices,
have no prospect of inheriting the earth. Such an "instinct"
would have no chance to develop by any process of success-
ful exercise.        The error-quotient is too great. The commonly
recognized biological needs         —food and     shelter, security, sex-
ual satisfaction, and the safety of young ones             —
                                                      are prob-
ably better assuaged by the realistic activities, the meows
and gestures, of Hobie Baker than by the verbal imagination
and reflection of his master. The cat's world is not falsified by
the beliefs and poetic figments that language creates, nor his
behavior unbalanced by the bootless rites and sacrifices that
characterize religion, art, and other vagaries of a word-
mongering mind. In fact, his vital purposes are so well served
without the intervention of these vast mental constructions,
these flourishes and embellishments of the cerebral switch-
board, that it ^s hard to see why such an overcomplication
of the central exchange "was ever permitted, in man's "higher
centers," to block the routes from sensory to motor organs
and garble all the messages.
   The dilemma for philosophy js bad enough to make one
reconsider the genetic hypothesis that underlies it. If our
basic needs were really just those of lower creatures much
refined, we should have evolved a more realistic language
than in fact we have. If the mind were essentially a recorder
and transmitter, typified by the simile of the telephone-ex-
change, we should act very differently from the way we
actually do. Certainly no "learning-process" has caused man
to believe in magic; yet "word-magic" is a common practice
among primitive peoples, and so is vicarious treatment
burning in effigy, etc.        —
                           where the proxy is plainly a mere

     e Stuart    Chase, The Tyranny of Words (1938), pp. 46-56.
42                       PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
symbol of the desired victim. Another strange, universal
phenomenon is ritual. It is obviously symbolic, except where
it   is   aimed at concrete results, and then it may be regarded
as a communal form of magic. Now, all magical and ritual
practices are hopelessly inappropriate to the preservation
and increase of life.        My
                        cat would turn up his nose and his
tail      at   them.   To regard them as mistaken attempts to con-
trol nature, as a result of wrong synapses, or     "crossed wires,"
in the brain,  seems to me to leave the most rational of ani-
mals too deep in the slough of error. If a savage in his ig-
norance of physics tries to make a mountain open its caverns
by dancing round it, we must admit with shame that no rat
in a psychologist's maze would try such patently ineffectual
methods of opening a door. Nor should such experiments
be carried on, in the face of failure, for thousands of years;
even morons should learn more quickly than that.
   Another item in human behavior is our serious attitude
toward art. Genetic psychology usually regards art as a form
of play, a luxury product of the mind. This is not only a
scientific theory, it is a common-sense view; we play an in-
strument, we act a play. Yet like many common-sense doc-
trines, it is probably false. Great artists are rarely recruited
from the leisure class, and it is only in careless speech that
we denote music or tragedy as our "hobby"; we do not
really class them with tennis or bridge. We condemn as bar-
barous people who destroy works of art, even under the stress
of war         —
          blame them for ruining the Parthenon, when only a
recent, sentimental generation has learned to blame them
for ruining the homes that surrounded the sanctuary of
Beauty! Why should the world wail over the loss of a play
product, and look with its old callousness on the destruction
of so much that dire labor has produced? It seems a poor
economy of nature that men will suffer and starve for the
sake of play, when play is supposed to be the abundance of
their strength after their needs are satisfied. Yet artists as a
class are so ready to sacrifice wealth and comfort and even
health to their trade, that a lean and hollow look has become
an indispensable feature in the popular conception of genius.
   There is a third factor in human life that challenges the
utilitarian doctrine of symbolism. That is the constant, in-
effectual process of dreaming during sleep. The activity of
the mind seems to go on all the time, like that of the heart
and lungs and viscera; but during sleep it serves no practical
purpose. That dream-material is symbolic is a fairly estab-
lished fact. And symbols are supposed to have evolved from
the advantageous use of signs. They are representative signs,
that help to retain things for later reference, for comparing,
               SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                      43
planning, and generally for purposive thinking. Yet the sym-
bolism of dreams performs no such acquired function. At
best it presents us with the things we do not want to think
about, the things which stand in the way of practical living.
Why should the mind produce symbols that do not direct
the dreamer's activities, that only mix up the present with
unsuitable past experiences?
   There are several theories of dream, notably, of course,
the Freudian interpretation. But those which   —   like Freud's
—  regard it as more than excess mental energy or visceral
disturbance do not fit the scientific picture of the mind's
growth and function at all.  A      mind whose semantic powers
are evolved from the functioning of the motor arc should
only think; any vagaries of association are "mistakes." If
our viscera made as many mistakes in sleep as the brain, we
should all die of indigestion after our first nursing. It may
be replied that the mistakes of dream are harmless, since
they have no motor terminals, though they enter into waking
life as memories, and we have to learn to discount them. But
why does the central switchboard not rest when there is
no need of making connections? Why should the plugs be
popped in and out, and set the whole system wildly ringing,
only to end with a universal "Excuse it, please"?
   The love of magic, the high development of ritual, the
seriousness of art, and the characteristic activity of dreams,
are rather large factors to leave out of account in construct-
ing a theory of mind. Obviously the mind is doing some-
thing else, or at least something more, than just connecting
experiential items. It is not functioning simply in the inter-
est of those biological needs which genetic psychology recog-
nizes. Yet it is a natural ^org an, and presumably does nothing
that is not relevant to the total behavior, the response to
nature that constitutes human life. The moral of this long
critique is, therefore, to reconsider the inventory of human
needs, which scientists have established on a basis of ani-
mal psychology, and somewhat hastily set up as the measure
of a man. An unrecorded motive might well account for
many an unexplained action. I propose, therefore, to try
a new general principle: to conceive the mind, still as an
organ in the service of primary needs, but of characteristi-
cally human needs; instead of assuming that the human mind
tries to do the same things as a cat's mind, but by the use of
a special talent which miscarries four times out of five, I
shall assume that the human mind is trying to do something
else; and that the cat does not act humanly because he does
not need to. This difference in fundamental needs, I believe,
determines the difference of function which sets man so far
44               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
apart from all his zoological brethren; and the recognition
of it is the key to those paradoxes in the philosophy of mind
which our too consistently zoological model of human in-
telligence has engendered.
   It is generally conceded that men have certain "higher"
aims and desires than animals; but what these are, and in
what sense they are "higher," may still be mooted without
any universal agreement. There are essentially two schools
of opinion: one which considers man the highest animal,
and his supreme desires as products of his supreme mind;
and another which regards him as the lowest spirit, and his
unique longings as a manifestation of his otherworldly ad-
mixture. To the naturalists, the difference between physical
and mental interests, between organismic will and moral
will, between hungry meows and harvest prayers, or between
faith in the mother cat and faith in a heavenly father, is a
difference of complexity, abstractness, articulateness, in short:
a difference of degree. To the religious interpreters it seems
a radical distinction, a difference, in each case, of kind and
cause. The moral sentiments especially are deemed a sign
of the ultimate godhead in man; likewise the power of prayer,
which is regarded as a gift, not a native and natural power
like laughter, tears, language, and song. The Ancient Mar-
iner, when suddenly he could pray, had not merely found
his speech; he had received grace, he was given back the di-
vine status from which he had fallen. According to the re-
ligious conception, man is at most half-brother to the beast.
No matter how many of his traits may be identified as simian
features, there is that in him yet which springs from a different
source and is forever unzoological. This view is the antithesis
of the naturalistic; it breaks the structure of genetic psychol-
ogy in principle. For, the study of psychogenesis has grown
                                 —
up on exactly the opposite creed that man is a true-blooded,
full-franchised denizen of the animal kingdom, without any
alien ancestors, and therefore has no features or functions
which animals do not share in some degree.
   That man is an animal I certainly believe; and also, that he
has no supernatural essence, "soul" or "entelechy" or "mind-
stuff," enclosed in his skin. He is an organism, his substance
is chemical, and what he does, suffers, or knows, is just what

this sort of chemical structure may do, suffer, or know. When
the structure goes to pieces, it never does, suffers, or knows
anything again. If we ask how physical objects, chemically
analyzable, can be conscious, how ideas can occur to them,
we are talking ambiguously; for the conception of "physical
object" is a conception of chemical substance not biologically
organized. What causes this tremendous organization of sub-
                 SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                         45
stances, is one of the things the tremendous organisms do not
know; but with their organization, suffering and impulse and
awareness arise. It is really no harder to imagine that a
chemically active body wills, knows, thinks, and feels, than
that an invisible, intangible something does so, "animates"
the body without physical agency, and "inhabits" it without
being in any place.
   Now this is a mere declaration of faith, preliminary to a
confession of heresy. The heresy is this: that I believe there
is a primary need in man, which other creatures probably do
not have, and which actuates all his apparently unzoological
aims, his wistful fancies, his consciousness of value, his ut-
terly impractical enthusiasms, and his awareness of a "Be-
yond" filled with holiness. Despite the fact that this need
gives rise to almost everything that we commonly assign to
the "higher" life, it is not itself a "higher" form of some
"lower" need; it is quite essential, imperious, and general,
and may be called "high" only in the sense that it belongs
exclusively (I think) to a very complex and perhaps recent
genus. It may be satisfied in crude, primitive ways or in con-
scious and refined ways, so it has its own hierarchy of
"higher" and "lower," elementary and derivative forms.
   This basic need, which certainly is obvious only in man,
is the need of symbolization. The symbol-making function is
one of man's primary activities, like eating, looking, or mov-
ing about. It is the fundamental process of his mind, and
goes on all the time. Sometimes we are aware of it, some-
times we merely find its results, and realize that certain ex-
periences have passed through our brains and have been
digested there w
                                                            ym
                                                             '




   Hark back, now, to a. passage already quoted above, from
Ritchie's The Natural History of the Mind: "As far as
thought is concerned, and at all levels of thought, it is a
symbolic process.   .   . The essential act of thought is sym-
                            .


bolization." 7 The significance of this statement strikes us
more forcibly now. For if the material of thought is sym-
bolism, then the thinking organism must be forever furnish-
ing symbolic versions of its experiences, in order to let
thinking proceed. As a matter of fact, it is not the essential act
of thought that is symbolization, but an act essential to thought,
and prior to it. Symbolization is the essential act of mind;
and mind takes in more than what is commonly called
thought. Only certain products of the symbol-making brain
can be used according to the canons of discursive reasoning.
In every mind there is an enormous store of other symbolic

  i See p. 34.
46                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
material,which is put to different uses or perhaps even to
                —
no use at all a mere result of spontaneous brain activity, a
reserve fund of conceptions, a surplus of mental wealth.
   The brain works as naturally as the kidneys and the
blood vessels. It is not dormant just because there is no
conscious purpose to be served at the moment. If it were,
indeed, a vast and intricate telephone-exchange, then it
should be quiescent when the rest of the organism sleeps, or
at most transmit experiences of digestion, of wanted oxygen
or itching toes, of after-images on the retina or little throb-
bings in pressed arteries. Instead of that, it goes right on
                       —
manufacturing ideas-; streams and deluges of ideas, that the
sleeper is not using to think with about anything. But the
brain is following its own law; it is actively translating ex-
periences into symbols, in fulfilment of a basic need to do so.
It carries on a constant process of ideation.
   Ideas are undoubtedly made out of impressions        —out of
sense messages from the special organs of perception, and
vague visceral reports of feeling. The law by which they are
made, however, is not a law of direct combination. Any at-
tempt to use such principles as association by contiguity or
similarity soon runs into sheer unintelligible complication
and artifice. Ideation proceeds by a more potent principle,
which seems to be best described as a principle of symboliza-
tion. The material furnished by the senses is constantly
wrought into symbols, which are our elementary ideas. Some
of these ideas can be combined and manipulated in the
manner we call "reasoning." Others do not lend themselves
to this use, but are naturally telescoped into dreams, or vapor
off in conscious fantasy; and a vast number of them build
the most typical and fundamental edifice of the human mind
—   religion.
  Symbolization    is pre-rationative, but not pre-rational. It is
the starting point of all intellection in the human sense, and
is more general than thinking, fancying, or taking action.

For the brain is not merely a great transmitter, a super-switch-
board; it is better likened to a great transformer. The current
of experience that passes through it undergoes a change of
character, not through the agency of the sense by which the
perception entered, but by virtue of a primary use which is
made of it immediately: it is sucked into the stream of sym-
bols which constitutes a human mind.
   Our overt acts are governed by representations whose
counterparts can nowhere be pointed out, whose objects are
"percepts" only in a Pickwickian sense. The representations
on which we act are symbols of various kinds. This fact is
recognized in a vague and general way by most epistemolo-
                    SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                          47
gists;but what has not received their due recognition is the
enormous importance of the kinds. So long as we regard
sensations as signs of the things which are supposed to give
rise to them, and perhaps endow such signs with further
reference to past sensations that were similar signs, we have
not even       scratched   the   surface   of   the   symbol-mongering
human mind. It is only when we penetrate into the varieties
of symbolific activity     —
                         as Cassirer, for instance, has done
that we begin to see why human beings do not act as super-
intelligent cats, dogs, or apes would act. Because our brain
is only a fairly good transmitter, but a tremendously power-
ful transformer, we do things that Mr. Chase's cat would
reject as too impractical, if he were able to conceive them.
So they would be, for him; so are they for the psychologist
who deems himself a cat of the nth degree.
   The fact that the human brain is constantly carrying on
a process of symbolic transformation of the experiential data
that come to it causes it to be a veritable fountain of more
or less spontaneous ideas. As all registered experience tends
to terminate in action, it is only natural that a typically
human function should require a typically human form of
overt activity; and that is just what we find in the sheer ex-
pression of ideas. This is the activity of which beasts appear
to have no need. And it accounts for just those traits in man
which he does not hold in common with the other animals
—  ritual, art, laughter, weeping, speech, superstition, and
scientific genius.
    Only a part    —howbeit a very important          part   —of our be-
havior   is         Only some of our expressions are signs,
              practical.
indicative or mnemonic, and belong to the heightened animal
wisdom called common >ense; and only a small and relatively
unimportant part are immediate signs of feeling. The remain-
der serve simply to express ideas that the organism yearns
to express, i.e. to act upon, without practical purpose, with-
out any view to satisfying other needs than the need of
completing in overt action the brain's symbolic process.
  How    else shall we account for man's love of talk? From
the first dawning recognition that words can express some-
thing, talk is a dominant interest, an irresistible desire. As
soon as this avenue of action opens, a whole stream of sym-
bolic process is set free in the jumbled outpouring of words
—  often repeated, disconnected, random words            —
                                                   that we ob-
serve in the "chattering" stage of early childhood. Psychol-
ogists generally, and perhaps correctly, regard such babble
as verbal play, and explain it through its obvious utilitarian
function of developing the lines of communication that will
be needed later in life. But an explanation by final causes
48                             PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
does not really account for the occurrence of an act. What
gives a child the present stimulus to talk? Surely not the
prospect of acquiring a useful tool toward his future social
relations! The impulse must be motivated by a present need,
not a prospective one. Mr. Chase, who sees no use in words
except their practical effect on other people, admits the puz-
zling fact that "children practice them with as much gusto
as Hobie stalks a mouse." 8 But we can hardly believe that
they do so for the sake of practice. There must be immediate
satisfaction in this strange exercise, as there is in running
and kicking. The effect of words on other people is only a
secondary consideration. Mrs. De Laguna has pointed this
out in her book on the general nature of speech: "The little
child," she says there, "spends many hours and much energy
in vocal play. It is far more agreeable to carry on this play
with others        but the little child indulges in language-play
                   .   .   .



even when he is alone.           Internal speech, fragmentary or
                                     .   .   .



continuous, becomes the habitual accompaniment of his ac-
tive behaviour and the occupation of his idle hours." 9 Speech
is, in fact, the readiest active termination of that basic pro-

cess in the human brain which may be called symbolic trans-
formation of experiences. The fact that it makes elaborate
communication with others possible becomes important at a
somewhat later stage. Piaget has observed that children of
kindergarten age pay little attention to the response of others;
they talk just as blithely to a companion who does not un-
derstand them as to one who gives correct answers. 10 Of
course they have long learned to use language practically;
but the typically infantile, or "egocentric," function persists
side by side with the progressively social development of
communication. The sheer symbolific use of sounds is the
more primitive, the easier use, which can be made before
conventional forms are really mastered, just as soon as any
meaning-experience has occurred to the vociferous little hu-
man animal. The practical use, though early, is more dif-
ficult, for it is not the direct fulfilment of a craving; it is
an adaptation of language for the satisfaction of other needs.
   Words are certainly our most important instruments of
expression, our most characteristic, universal, and enviable
tools in the conduct of life. Speech is the mark of humanity.
It is the normal terminus of thought.                  We
                                             are apt to be so
impressed with its symbolistic mission that we regard it as

   8 Op. cit., p.      54.
   *>   Grace De Laguna, Speech: Its Function and Development (1927),
p. 307.
  10 Jean Piaget,          Le langage et la pensee chez Venfant (1923). See esp.
chaps, i and ii.
                SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                        49
the only important expressive act, and assume that all other
activity must be practical in an animalian way, or else irra-
     —
tional    playful, or atavistic (residual) past recognition, or
mistaken, i.e., unsuccessful. But in fact, speech is the natural
outcome of only one kind of symbolic process. There are
transformations of experience in the human mind that have
quite different overt endings. They end in acts that are neither
practical nor communicative, though they may be both ef-
fective and communal; I mean the actions we call ritual.
   Human life is shot through and through with ritual, as it
is also with animalian practices. It is an intricate fabric of
reason and rite, of knowledge and religion, prose and poetry,
fact and dream. Just as the results of that primitive process
of mental digestion, verbal symbolism, may be used for the
satisfaction of other needs than symbolization, so all other
instinctive acts may serve the expressive function. Eating,
traveling, asking or answering questions, construction, de-
struction, prostitution—    any or all such activities may enter
into rites; yet rites in themselves are not practical, but ex-
pressive. Ritual, like art, is essentially the active termination
of a symbolic transformation of experience. It is born in the
cortex, not in the "old brain"; but it is born of an elementary
need of that organ, once the organ has grown to human estate.
   If the "impractical" use of language has mystified philoso-
phers and psychologists who measured it by standards it is
not really designed to meet, the apparent perversity of ritual
from the same point of view has simply overcome them. They
have had to invent excuses for its existence, to save the
psychogenetic theory of mind. They have sought its explana-
tion in social purposes, in ulterior motivations of the^most
unlikely sort, m    "mistakes" of sense and reason that verge
on complete imbecility; "they have wondered at the incor-
rigibility of religious follies, at the docility of the poor dupes
who let themselves be misled, and at the disproportionate
cost of the supposed social advantages; but they have not
been led to the assumption of a peculiarly human need which
is fed, as every need must be, at the expense of other interests.
   The ethnologists who were the first white men to interest
themselves in the ritual of primitive races for any other
purpose than to suppress or correct it were mystified by the
high seriousness of actions that looked purely clownish and
farcical to the European beholder; just as the Christian mis-
sionaries had long reported the difficulty of making the gos-
pels plausible to men who were able to believe stories far more
mysterious and fantastic in their own idiom. Andrew Lang,
for instance, discussing the belief in magic, makes the follow-
ing observation:
50                   PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
     "The theory requires for its existence an almost boundless
credulity. This credulity appears to    Europeans to prevail in
full force among savages.        .   But it is a curious fact that
                                     .   .



while savages are, as a rule, so credulous, they often 'laugh
consumedly' at the religious doctrines taught them by mis-
sionaries. Savages and civilized men have different standards
of credulity. Dr. Moffat remarks, 'To speak of the Creation,
the Fall, and the Resurrection, seemed more fabulous, ex-
travagant, and ludicrous to them than their own vain stories
of lions and hyaenas.' ... It is, apparently, in regard to
imported and novel opinions about religion and science alone
that savages imitate the conduct of the adder which, accord-
ing to St. Augustine, is voluntarily deaf.       ." lx
                                                   .   .



   Frobenius, also a pioneer in the study of primitive society,
describes an initiation ceremony in New South Wales, in the
course of which the older men performed a dog-dance, on all
fours, for the benefit of the young acolytes who watched
these rites, preliminary to the painful honor of having a tooth
knocked out. Frobenius refers to the ritual as a "comedy,"
a "farce," and is amazed at the solemnity with which the
boys sat through the "ridiculous canine display." "They acted
as if they never caught sight of the comical procession of
men." 12         A
              little later he describes a funeral among the Bou-
gala, in theSouthern Congo; again, each step in the per-
formance seems to him a circus act, until at last "there now
followed, if possible, a still more clownish farce. The de-
ceased had now himself to declare what was the cause of his
death." 13 The professor is at a loss to understand how even
the least intelligent of men can reach such depths of folly.
Perhaps the savages who "laughed consumedly" at a tonsured
father's sacraments with Holy Water, his God-eating and his
scriptural explanations, were having a similar difficulty!
   Later scholars gradually realized that the irrationality of
customs and rites was so great that they could not possibly
be "mistakes" of practice, or rest on "erroneous" theories of
nature. Obviously they serve some natural purpose to which
their practical justification or lack of justification is entirely
irrelevant. Mrs. De Laguna seeks this purpose in the social
solidarity which a prescribed ritual imparts: "Those elaborate
and monstrous systems of belief," she says, "cannot possibly
be accounted for by any simple theory that beliefs are deter-
mined by their successful 'working' in practice.   The truth
                                                           .   .   .



is   .that some more or less organized system of beliefs and
         .   .




  11 Myth, Ritual, and Religion, 2 vols. (1887), I, 91.
  12 Leo Frobenius, The Childhood of         Man(1909; first published in
1901 under the title, Aus den Flegeljahren der Menschheit) , p. 41 ff.
  13 Ibid., p. 148.
                      SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                           51
sentiments      an absolute necessity for the carrying on of
                 is
social       So long as group solidarity is secured by some
         life.
such system, the particular beliefs which enter into it may
to an indefinite degree lead to behaviour ill-adapted to the
objective order of nature." 14 But why should this social
purpose not be served by a sensible dogma which the mem-
bers of the society could reasonably be called on to believe,
instead of "elaborate and monstrous" creeds issuing in all
sorts of cruel rites, mutilations, and even human sacrifices,
such as Baal or the Aztec gods demanded? Why did the Cults
of Reason set up in post-Revolutionary France and in early
Soviet Russia not serve the purpose of social solidarity every
bit as well as the "Christian hocus-pocus" they displaced, and
much better than the dog-dances and interrogation of the
dead that disturbed Frobenius by their incredibility? Why
should a priesthood primarily interested in accomplishing a
social  end demand that its laity should believe in immoral
and unreasonable gods? Plato, who treated religion in just
this sociological spirit, found himself confronted with this
question. The established religion of Greece was not only
irrational, but the social unity that might be achieved by
participating in one form of worship and following one divine
example was off-set by the fact that this worship was often
degrading and the example bad. How could any wise ruler
or rulers prescribe such ritual, or indorse such a mythology?
   The answer is, of course, that ritual is not prescribed for
a practical purpose, not even that of social solidarity. Such
solidarity may be one of its effects, and sophisticated war-
lords may realize this fact and capitalize on it by emphasizing
national religion or holding compulsory prayers before^Jpat-
tle; but neitha* myth nor ritual arose originally for this
purpose. Even the pioneers in anthropology, to whom the
practices of savage society must have been more surprising
than to us who are initiated through their reports, realized
that the "farces" and "antics" of primitive men were pro-
foundly serious, and that their wizards could not be accused
of bad faith. "Magic has not its origin in fraud, and seems
seldom practiced as an utter imposture," observed Tylor,
seventy years ago. "It is, in fact, a sincere but fallacious sys-
tem of philosophy, evolved by the human intellect by pro-
cesses still in great measure intelligible to our minds, and it
had thus an original standing-ground in the world." 15 Its
roots lie much deeper than any conscious purpose, any trick-
ery, policy, or practical design; they lie in that substratum

  14 Speech, pp. 345-346.
  is E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture, 2 vols. (6th ed., 1920; first published
in 1871), I, 134.
52                         PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
of the mind, the realm of fundamental ideas, and bear their
strange if not poisonous fruits, by virtue of the human need
for expressing such ideas. Whatever purpose magical practice
may serve, its direct motivation is the desire to symbolize
great conceptions. It is the overt action in which a rich and
savage imagination automatically ends. Its origin is probably
not practical at all, but ritualistic; its central aim is to sym-
bolize a Presence, to aid in the formulation of a religious
universe. "Show us a miracle, that we may believe thou art
God." Magic is never employed in a commonplace mood,
like ordinary causal agency; this fact belies the widely ac-
cepted belief that the "method of magic" rests on a mistaken
view of causality. After all, a savage who beats a tom-tom
to drive off his brother's malaria would never make such a
practical mistake as to shoot his arrow blunt end forward or
bait his fishline with flowers. It is not ignorance of causal
relations, but the supervention of an interest stronger than
his practical interest, that holds him to magical rites. This
stronger interest concerns the expressive value of such mystic
acts.
   Magic, then, is not a method, but a language; it is part and
parcel of that greater phenomenon, ritual, which is the lan-
guage of religion. Ritual is a symbolic transformation of
experiences that no other medium can adequately express.
Because it springs from a primary human need, it is a spon-
                          —
taneous activity that is to say, it arises without intention,
without adaptation to a conscious purpose; its growth is un-
designed, its pattern purely natural, however intricate it may
be. It was never "imposed" on people; they acted thus quite
of themselves, exactly as bees swarmed and birds built nests,
squirrels           hoarded food, and cats washed their faces.   No one
made up ritual, any more than anyone made up Hebrew or
Sanskrit or Latin. The forms of expressive acts          —
                                                speech and
gesture, song and sacrifice           —
                                are the symbolic transforma-
tions which minds of certain species, at certain stages of their
development and communion, naturally produce.
   Franz Boas remarked, even in one of his early works, that
ritual resembled language in the unconscious development of
its forms; and furthermore he saw, though less clearly, that
it had certain symbolistic functions. After a discussion of the

role played by language in the actual division and arrange-
ment of sense experience, he says: "The behavior of primitive
man makes it perfectly clear that all these linguistic classes
have never risen to consciousness, and that consequently
their origin must be sought, not in rational, but in entirely
unconscious, processes of the mind. ... It seems very plaus-
ible    .  that the fundamental religious notions ... are in
            .   .
                   SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                       53
their origin just as little conscious as the       fundamental ideas
of language." 16   And a few pages later he touches, howbeit
only tentatively and vaguely, upon the expressive nature of
those practices which seem "impractical" to us:
   "Primitive man views each action not only as adapted to
its main object, each thought related to its main end, as we
should perceive them, but ... he associates them with other
ideas, often of a religious or at least a symbolic nature. Thus
he gives them a higher significance than they seem to us to
deserve. Every taboo is an example of such associations of
apparently trifling actions with ideas that are so sacred that
a deviation from the customary mode of performance creates
the strongest emotions of abhorrence. The interpretation of
ornaments as charms, the symbolism of decorative art, are
other examples of association of ideas that, on the whole, are
foreign to our mode of thought." 17
  A   year after Boas' book, there appeared the articles by
Sigmund Freud which are now collected under the title of
Totem and Taboo.™ It was Freud who recognized that ritual
acts are not genuine instrumental acts, but are motivated
primarily a tergo, and carry with them, consequently, a feel-
ing not of purpose, but of compulsion. They must be per-
formed, not to any visible end, but from a sheer inward need;
and he is familiar enough with such compulsive acts in other
settings to suspect at once that in the religious sphere, too,
they are best interpreted as expressive behavior. Empirically
senseless, they are none the less important and justified when
we regard them as symbolic presentations rather than prac-
tical measures. They are spontaneous transformations of ex-
perience, and J^he form they take is normal for the primitive*
mind. In civilized society, the same phenomena are apt to be
pathological; there is a good reason for this, but that must be
postponed to a later chapter.
   The great contribution of Freud to the philosophy of mind
has been the realization that human behavior is not only a
food-getting strategy, but is also a language; that every move
is at the same time a gesture. Symbolization is both an end

and an instrument. So far, epistemology has treated it only
in the latter capacity; and philosophers have ample reason
to wonder why this purely utilitarian trait of man's mind so
frequently plays him false, why nature permitted it to grow
beyond the limits of usefulness, to assume a tyrant role and
lure him into patently impractical ventures. The fact is, I
believe, that it did not originate purely in the service of other
activities. It is a primary interest, and may require a sacrifice
  i6 77ie Mind of Primitive   Man (1911), pp. 198-199.
  17 Ibid., p. 209.                is Published in 1918.
54                        PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
of other ends, just as the imperative demand for food or sex-
life may necessitate sacrifices under difficult conditions. This
                      —                      —
fundamentally not adventitiously symbolific function of
the mind was suggested to Freud by his psychiatric studies,
but in later works he has given it a very general development,
notably in the book already cited, Totem and Taboo. 19 Cer-
tainly he has carried his theories far enough to make a phil-
osophical study of "impractical" actions            —
                                               rites, formalities,
dramatizations, and above all, the unapplied arts         relevant —
and promising in the light of them. Yet few epistemologists
have seriously taken advantage of the new ideas that fairly
cry to be explored.
   The reason is, probably, that traditional theory of mind is
                    —
epistemology theory of knowledge; and Freud's psychology
is not directly applicable to the problems which compose this

field.    Symbolism, as it enters into the structure of knowledge,
is   better typified by mathematical "expressions" than by swas-
tikas or genuflexions.         Language, not ritual,    is   its   main rep-
resentative.
   In order to relate these two distinct conceptions of sym-
bolism, and exhibit the respective parts they play in that gen-
eral human response we call a life, it is necessary to examine
more accurately that which makes symbols out of anything
out of marks on paper, the little squeaks and grunts we inter-
pret as "words," or bended knees             —
                                       the quality of meaning,
in its several aspects and forms. Meaning rests upon a condi-
tion which is, in the last analysis, logical; therefore the next
chapter will have to concern itself mainly with logical struc-
ture, and cannot help being somewhat technical. But without
such a grounding the whole argument would remain intan-
gible,unfounded, and would probably appear more fantastic
than cogent; so a short account of what constitutes meaning,
what characterizes symbols, and also the different kinds of
symbolism and their logical distinctions, will have to precede
any further elaborations of the ideas so far suggested.
