5.       The Logic of Signs and Symbols

So much work has already been done on the logic of mean-
ing that it is not necessary to present long arguments in sup-
port of the theory here employed; let it suffice to outline the
facts, or if you will, the assumptions, on which my further
considerations are to rest.
     ie See also,   Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (1922).
            THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                     55
   Meaning has both a logical and a psychological aspect.
Psychologically, any item that is to have meaning must be
employed as a sign or a symbol; that is to say, it must be a
sign or a symbol to someone. Logically, it must be capable of
conveying a meaning, it must be the sort of item that can be
thus employed. In some meaning-relations this logical re-
quirement is trivial, and tacitly accepted; in others it is of
the utmost importance, and may even lead us a merry chase
through the labyrinths of nonsense. These two aspects, the
logical and the psychological, are thoroughly confounded by
the ambiguous verb "to mean"; for sometimes it is proper to
     u
say i$ means," and sometimes "/ mean." Obviously, a word
—  say, "London"  —   does not "mean" a city in just the same
sense that a person employing the word "means" the place.
   Both aspects, the logical and the psychological, are always
present, and their interplay produces the great variety of
meaning-relations over which philosophers have puzzled and
fought for the last fifty years. The analysis of "meaning" has
had a peculiarly difficult history; the word is used in many
different ways, and a good deal of controversy has been
wasted on the subject of the correct way, the meaning of
"meaning." Whenever people find several species of a genus,
they look for the prime form, the archetype that is supposed
to be differently disguised in each special case; so, for a long
time, philosophers hoped to find the true quality of meaning
by collecting all its various manifestations and looking for a
common ingredient. They talked more and more generally
about "symbol-situations," believing that by generalization
they might attain to the essential quality which all such situa-
tions had in common. But generalizing from vague and mud-
dled special theories can never give us a clear general theory.
The sort of generalization that merely substitutes "symbol-
situation" for "denotation-or-connotation-or-signification-or-
association-etc." is scientifically useless; for the whole purpose
of general concepts is to make the distinctions between
special classes clear, to relate all subspecies to each other in
definite ways; but if such general concepts are simply com-
posite photographs of all known types of meaning, they can
only blur, not clarify, the relations that obtain among special-
ized senses of the word.
   Charles Peirce, who was probably the first person to con-
cern himself seriously with semantics, began by making an
inventory of all "symbol-situations," in the hope that when
all possible meanings of "meaning" were herded together,
they would show empirical differentia whereby one could
divide the sheep from the goats. But the obstreperous flock,
instead of falling neatly into a few classes, each according to
56                   PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
 its kind, divided and subdivided into the most terrifying order
 of icons, qualisigns, legisigns, semes, phemes, and delomes,
 and there is but cold comfort in his assurance that his original
 59,049 types can really be boiled down to a mere sixty-six. 1
      Afew further attempts were made to grasp the essential
quality of meaning by empirical methods, but the more vari-
eties could be found, the less did they promise to reveal a
common essence. Husserl, distinguishing each type of mean-
ing as a special notion, ended with as many theories as there
are "meanings." 2 But we have still the sheep and the goats
and all their several relatives, and are still left wondering
why one family name, Meaning, should apply where no
family likeness can be detected.
    There is in fact no quality of meaning; its essence lies in
the realm of logic, where one does not deal with qualities,
but only with relations. It is not fair to say: "Meaning is a
relation," for that suggests too simple a business. Most people
think of a relation as a two-termed affair      —
                                                "A-in-relation-to-
B"; but meaning involves several terms, and different types
of meaning consist of different types and degrees of relation-
ship. It is better, perhaps, to say: "Meaning is not a quality,
but a function of a term."         A
                                   function is a pattern viewed
with reference to one special term round which it centers;
this pattern emerges when we look at the given term in its
total relation to the other terms about it. The total may be
quite complicated. For instance, a musical chord may be
treated as a function of one note, known as the "written
bass," by writing this one note and indicating its relation to
all the other notes that are to go above it. In old organ music,



the chord      91$= jbz would be written: ^^             J       ,   which
                      '                                  6
                                                         4
                                                         3
means: "The A-chord with the sixth, the fourth and the third
notes above A." The chord is treated as a pattern surround-
ing and including A. It is expressed as a function of A.
  The meaning of a term is, likewise, a function; it rests on
a pattern, in which the term itself holds the key-position.
Even in the simplest kinds of meaning there must be at least
two other things related to the term that "means" an object  —
  i   From two letters to Lady Welby, 1904 and 1908 respectively, first
citedby Ogden and Richards in The Meaning of Meaning (App. D, pp.
435-444), and now published in The Collected Papers of Charles S.
Peirce (1932), II, 330.
   2 Edmund Husserl, Logische Untersuchungen, 2 vols. (1913 and 1921),
vol. II, part I, passim.
             THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                              57
that is "meant," and a subject who uses the term; just as in
a chord there must be at least two notes besides the "written
bass" to determine what the chord is (one of these may be
merely "understood" by musicians, but without it the com-
bination would not be a determinate chord). The same may
be said for a term with a meaning; the existence of a subject
is often tacitly accepted, but if there is not at least one thing
meant and one mind for which it is meant, then there is not
a complete meaning      —only a partial pattern which might be
completed in different ways.
  Any term in a pattern may be taken as a key-term to which

the others are related.      For   instance, the chord


may be regarded as a function of its lowest note, and ex-

pressed by the description rS " —±z           ;   or   it   may be treated


with reference to the note on which it is built harmonically,
which happens to be D. A musician analyzing the harmony
would call this chord "the second inversion of the seventh-
chord on the dominant, in the key of G." The "dominant"
of that key is D, not A. He would treat the whole pattern as
a function of D; that sounds more complicated than the other
treatment, which fixed the notes from the              A
                                              upward, but of
course it is not really so, because it comes to just the same
pattern.                                                            ,*
  Similarly,   we may view a meaning-pattern from the point
of view of any term in "it, and our descriptions of the same
pattern will differ accordingly.       We
                                        may say that a certain
symbol "means" an object to a person, or that the person
"means" the object by the symbol. The first description treats
meaning in the logical sense, the second in the psychological
sense. The former takes the symbol as the key, and the latter
the subject. 3 So, the two most controversial kinds of meaning
—  the logical and the psychological      —
                                        are distinguished and at
the same time related to each other, by the general principle
of viewing meaning as a function, not a property, of terms.
   In the further analyses that follow, "meaning" will be taken
in the objective sense, unless some other is specified; that is
to say, I shall speak of terms (such as words) as "meaning"

  3 Where the object is taken as the key, the resulting description begins
with the "knowledge-content" postulated in some epistemologies.
58                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
something, not of people as "meaning" this or that. Later we
shall  have to distinguish various subjective functions; but at
present let us consider the relations of terms to their objects.
What relates the terms to their objects is, of course, a subject;
that is always to be understood.
   There are, first of all, two distinct functions of terms,
which have both a perfectly good right to the name "mean-
ing": for a significant sound, gesture, thing, event (e.g. a
flash, an image), may be either a sign or a symbol.
    A sign indicates the existence      —
                                     past, present, or future
of a thing, event, or condition. Wet streets are a sign that it
has rained.   A  patter on the roof is a sign that it is raining.
A  fall of the barometer or a ring round the moon is a sign
that it is going to rain. In an unirrigated place, abundant
verdure is a sign that it often rains there.       A
                                                 smell of smoke
signifies the presence of fire.     A
                                   scar  is a sign of a past ac-
cident. Dawn is a herald of sunrise. Sleekness is a sign of
frequent and plentiful food.
   All the examples here adduced are natural signs.           A
                                                          natural
sign is a part of a greater event, or of a complex condition,
and to an experienced observer it signifies the rest of that
situation of which it is a notable feature. It is a symptom of
a state of affairs. 4
   The logical relation between a sign and its object is a very
simple one: they are" associated, somehow, to form a pair;
that is to say, they stand in a one-to-one correlation. To each
sign there corresponds one definite item which is its object,
the thing (or event, or condition) signified. All the rest of
that important function, signification, involves the third term,
the subject, which uses the pair of items; and the relation
of the subject to the other two terms is much more interest-
ing than their own bare logical coupling. The subject is re-
lated, essentially, to the other two terms as a pair. What
characterizes them is the fact that they are paired. Thus, a
white bump on a person's arm, as a mere sense-datum, would
probably not be interesting enough even to have a name, but
such a datum in its relation to the past is noted and called a
"scar." Note, however, that although the subject's relation is
to the pair of other terms, he has also a relation to each one
of them individually, which makes one of them the sign and

   * There is a fine distinction between sign and symptom, in that the
object signified by a symptom is the entire condition of which the symp-
tom is a proper part; e.g., red spots are a symptom of measles, and
                                                                       A
"measles" is the entire condition begetting and including the red spots.
sign, on the other hand, may be one part of a total condition, which we
associate with another separate part. Thus a ring round the moon is part
                                                  —
of a weather condition, but what it signifies is rain another proper part
—  and not the entire state of "low-pressure" weather.
              THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                    59
the other the object. What is the difference between a sign
and its object, by virtue of which they are not interchange-
able? Two terms merely associated as a pair, like two socks,
two balances of a scale, two ends of a stick, etc., could be
interchanged without any harm.
   The difference is, that the subject for which they constitute
a pair must find one more interesting than the other, and the
latter more easily available than the former. If we are in-
terested in tomorrow's weather, the events now present, if
coupled with tomorrow's weather-phenomena, are signs for
us.   Aring round the moon, or "mares' tails" in the sky, are
not important in themselves; but as visible, present items
coupled with something important but not yet present, they
have "meaning." If it were not for the subject, or interpretant,
sign and object would be interchangeable. Thunder may just
as well be a sign that there has been lightning, as lightning
may signify that there will be thunder. In themselves they are
merely correlated. It is only where one is perceptible and the
other (harder or impossible to perceive) is interesting, that
we actually have a case of signification belonging to a term. 5
   Now, just as in nature certain events are correlated, so that
the less important may be taken as signs of the more impor-
tant, so we may also produce arbitrary events purposely cor-
related with important ones that are to be their meanings.
A  whistle means that the train is about to start.      A    gunshot
means that the sun is   just setting.   Acrepe   on the  door means
someone has   just died.  These   are artificial signs, for they are
not part of a condition of which they naturally signify the
remainder or something in the remainder. Their logical rela-
tion to their objects, however, is the same as that of natural
signs  —a one-to-one correspondence of sign and object, by
virtue of which the interpretant, who is interested in the lat-
ter and perceives the former, may apprehend the existence of
the term that interests him.
   The interpretation of signs is the basis of animal intel-
ligence. Animals presumably do not distinguish between natu-
ral signs and artificial or fortuitous signs; but they use both
kinds to guide their practical activities.  We    do the same thing
all   day long. We answer bells, watch the clock, obey warning
signals, follow arrows, take off the kettle when it whistles,
come at   the baby's cry, close the windows when we hear
thunder. The logical basis of all these interpretations, the
mere correlation of trivial events with important ones, is
really very simple and common; so much so that there is no
limit to what a sign may mean. This is even more obviously

    e Cf. Whitehead, Symbolism, pp. 9-13.
60                      PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
true of artificial signs than of natural ones.            A
                                               shot may mean
the beginning of a race, the rise of the sun, the sighting of
danger, the commencement of a parade. As for bells, the
world   is mad with their messages. Somebody at the front
door, the back door, the side door, the telephone    toast is     —
         —                                 —
ready typewriter line is ended school begins, work begins,
                                            —
church begins, church is over street car starts cashbox           —
registers    —
           knife grinder passes            —
                                time for dinner, time to get
up   —        town!
         fire in
     Because a sign may mean so many things, we are very apt
to misinterpret        it,   especially   when it is artificial. Bell signals,
of course, may be either wrongly associated with their objects,
or the sound of one bell may actually be confused with that
of another. But natural signs, too, may be misunderstood.
Wet streets are not a reliable sign of recent rain if the sprin-
kler wagon has passed by. The misinterpretation of signs is
the simplest form of mistake. It is the most important form,
for purposes of practical life, and the easiest to detect; for its
normal manifestation is the experience called disappointment.
   Where we find the simplest form of error, we may expect
to find also, as its correlate, the simplest form of knowledge.
This is, indeed, the interpretation of signs. It is the most el-
ementary and most tangible sort of intellection; the kind of
knowledge that we share with animals, that we acquire en-
tirely by experience, that has obvious biological uses, and
equally obvious criteria of truth and falsehood. Its mechanism
may be conceived as an elaboration of the conditioned-reflex
arc, with the brain doing switchboard duty, and getting the
right or the wrong number for the sense organ that called
up the musculature and expects an answer in terms of altered
sensations. It has all those virtues of simplicity, componability,
and intelligibility that recommend a concept for scientific pur-
poses. So it is not surprising that students of genetic psychol-
ogy have seized upon sign interpretation as the archetype of
all knowledge, that they regard signs as the original bearers


                   —
of meaning, and treat all other terms with semantic properties
as subspecies    "substitute signs," which act as proxy for their
objects and evoke conduct appropriate to the latter instead
of to themselves.
   But "substitute signs," though they may be classed with
symbols, are of a very specialized sort, and play only a mea-
gre and restricted part in the whole process of mental life,
I shall return to them later, in discussing the relationship be-

tween symbols and signs, for they do stand with a foot in
either domain. First, however, the characteristics of symbols
in general, and their essential difference from signs, must go
on record.
             THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                            61
  A   term which is used symbolically and not signally does
not evoke action appropriate to the presence of its object. If
I say: "Napoleon," you do not bow to the conqueror of
Europe as though I had introduced him, but merely think of
him. If I mention a Mr. Smith of our common acquaintance,
you may be led to tell me something about him "behind his
back," which is just what you would not do in his presence.
                                       —
Thus the symbol for Mr. Smith his name may very well —
initiate an act appropriate peculiarly to his absence. Raised
eyebrows and a look at the door, interpreted as a sign that he
is coming, would stop you in the midst of your narrative;
that action would be directed toward Mr. Smith in person.
   Symbols are not proxy for their objects, but are vehicles
for the conception of objects. To conceive a thing or a situa-
tion is not the same thing as to "react toward it" overtly, or
to be aware of its presence. In talking about things we have
conceptions of them, not the things themselves; and it is the
conceptions, not the things, that symbols directly "mean."
Behavior toward conceptions is what words normally evoke;
this is the typical process of thinking.
   Of course a word may be used as a sign, but that is not its
primary role. Its signific character has to be indicated by
                                —
some special modification by a tone of voice, a gesture
(such as pointing or staring), or the location of a placard
bearing the word. In itself it is a symbol, associated with a
conception, 6 not directly with a public object or event. The
fundamental difference between signs and symbols is this dif-
ference of association, and consequently of their use by the
third party to the meaning function, the subject; signs an-
nounce their objects to him, whereas symbols lead him* to
conceive their objects. The fact that the same item say, the —
little mouthy noise we call a "word"          —
                                          may serve in either
capacity, does not obliterate the cardinal distinction between
the two functions it may assume.
   The simplest kind of symbolistic meaning is probably that
which belongs to proper names.           A
                                      personal name evokes a
conception of something given as a unit in the subject's ex-
perience, something concrete and therefore easy to recall in
imagination. Because the name belongs to a notion so ob-
viously and unequivocally derived from an individual object,

  6 Note that I have called the terms of our thinking conceptions, not
concepts. Concepts are abstract forms embodied in conceptions; their
bare presentation may be approximated by so-called "abstract thought,"
but in ordinary mental life they no more figure as naked factors than
skeletons are seen walking the street. Concepts, like decent living skele-
tons, are always embodied  — sometimes rather too much. I shall return
to the topic of pure concepts later on, in discussing communication.
62               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
itis often supposed to "mean" that object as a sign would

"mean" it. This belief is reinforced by the fact that a name
borne by a living person always is at once a symbol by which
we think of the person, and a call-name by which we signal
him. Through a confusion of these two functions, the proper
name is often deemed the bridge from animal semantic, or
sign-using, to human language, which is symbol-using. Dogs,
                                —
we are told, understand names not only their own, but their
masters'. So they do, indeed; but they understand them only
in the capacity of call-names. If you say "James" to a dog
whose master bears that name, the dog will interpret the
sound as a sign, and look for James. Say it to a person who
knows someone called thus, and he will ask: "What about
James?" That simple question is forever beyond the dog; sig-
nification is the only meaning a name can have for him         —
meaning which the master's name shares with the master's
smell, with his footfall, and his characteristic ring of the door-
bell. In a human being, however, the name evokes the con-
ception of a certain man so called, and prepares the mind
for further conceptions in which the notion of that man
figures; therefore the human being naturally asks: "What
about James?"
   There is a famous passage in the autobiography of Helen
Keller, in which this remarkable woman describes the dawn
of Language upon her mind. Of course she had used signs
before, formed associations, learned to expect things and
identify people or places; but there was a great day when
all sign-meaning was eclipsed and dwarfed by the discovery
that a certain datum in her limited sense-world had a denota-
tion, that a particular act of her fingers constituted a word.
This event had required a long preparation; the child had
learned many finger acts, but they were as yet a meaningless
play. Then, one day, her teacher took her out to walk      —
                                                           and
there the great advent of Language occurred.
   "She brought me my hat," the memoir reads, "and I knew
I was going out into the warm sunshine. This thought, if a
wordless sensation may be called a thought, made me hop
and skip with pleasure.
   "We walked down the path to the well-house, attracted by
the fragrance of the honeysuckle with which it was covered.
Some one was drawing water and my teacher placed my hand
under the spout. As the cool stream gushed over my hand
she spelled into the other the word water, first slowly, then
rapidly. I stood still, my whole attention fixed upon the mo-
tion of her fingers. Suddenly I felt a misty consciousness as
of something forgotten   — a thrill of returning thought; and
somehow the mystery of language was revealed to me. I knew
            THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                            63
then that w-a-t-e-r meant the wonderful cool something that
was flowing over my hand. That living word awakened my
soul, gave it light, hope, joy, set it free! There were barriers
still, it is true, but barriers that in time could be swept away.

    "I left the well-house eager to learn. Everything had a
name, and each name gave birth to a new thought. As we
returned to the house every object which I touched seemed
to quiver with life. That was because I saw everything with
the strange, new sight that had come to me." 7
   This passage is the best affidavit we could hope to find for
the genuine difference between sign and symbol. The sign is
something to act upon, or a means to command action; the
symbol is an instrument of thought. Note how Miss Keller
      —
qualifies the mental process just preceding her discovery of
words "This thought, // a wordless sensation may be called
a thought.'" Real thinking is possible only in the fight of genu-
ine language, no matter how limited, how primitive; in her
case, it became possible with the discovery that "w-a-t-e-r"
was not necessarily a sign that water was wanted or expected,
but was the name of this substance, by which it could be
mentioned, conceived, remembered.
   Since a name, the simplest type of symbol, is directly asso-
ciated with a conception, and is employed by a subject to
realize the conception, one is easily led to treat a name as a
"conceptual sign," an artificial sign which announces the pres-
ence of a certain idea. In a sense this is quite justified; yet it
strikes a strained and unnatural note, which is usually a fair
warning that the attempted interpretation misses the most im-
portant feature in its material. In the present case, it misses
the relation of conceptions to the concrete world, which -iy so
close and so important that it enters into the very structure of
"names."   A name, above all, denotes something. "James"
may represent a conception, but it names a certain person. In
the case of proper nouns this relation of the symbol to what
it denotes is so striking that denotation has been confused

with the direct relation of sign and object, signification. As
a matter of fact, "James" does not, without further ado, sig-
nify a person; it denotes him      —
                                 it is associated with a concep-

tion which "fits" the actual person. The relation between a
symbol and an object, usually expressed by "S denotes O,"
is not a simple two-termed relation which S has to O; it is a
complex affair: S is coupled, for a certain subject, with a con-
ception that fits O, i.e. with a notion which         O
                                                   satisfies.
   In an ordinary sign-function, there are three essential terms:
subject, sign, and object. In denotation, which is the com-

  i Helen Keller,   The Story of My Life (1936; 1st ed. 1902), pp. 23-24.
64                   PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
monest kind of symbol-function, there have to be four: sub-
ject, symbol, conception, and object. The radical difference
between sign-meaning and symbol-meaning can therefore be
logically exhibited, for it rests on a difference of pattern, it is
strictly a different function. 8
     Denotation is, then, the complex relationship which a name
has to an object which bears it; but what shall the more direct
relation of the name, or symbol, to its associated concept
be called? It shall be called by its traditional name, connota-
tion. The connotation of a word is the conception it conveys.
Because the connotation remains with the symbol when the
object of its denotation is neither present nor looked for, we
are able to think about the object without reacting to it overtly
at   all.

   Here, then, are the three most familiar meanings of the one
word, "meaning": signification, denotation, and connotation.
All three are equally and perfectly legitimate, but in no pos-
sible way interchangeable.
   In every analysis of sign-using or symbol-using, we must
be able to account not only for the genesis of knowledge, but
also of that most human characteristic, error. How sign-
interpretation can miscarry, has already been shown; but
failures of denotation, or confusions of connotation, are un-
fortunately just as common, and have a claim to our attention,
too.
     There is a psychological act involved in every case of deno-
tation,  which might be called the application of a term to an
object. The word "water," for instance, denotes a certain
substance because people conventionally apply it to that sub-
stance. Such application has fixed its connotation. We may
ask, quite reasonably, whether a certain colorless liquid is or
is not water, but hardly whether water "really" means that

substance which is found in ponds, falls from the clouds, has
the chemical constitution        H
                               2 0, etc. The connotation of the
word, though derived from an age-long application, is more
definite now than some cases of the word's applicability.
When we have misapplied a term, i.e. applied it to an object
that does not satisfy its connotation, we do not say that the
term "denoted" that object; one feature in the tetradic mean-
ing-relation is missing, so there is no real denotation  only a  —
psychological act of application, and that was a mistake. The
word "water" was never guilty of denoting the drink that
   8 If a symbol could be said normally to "signify" anything, its object
would be the occurrence of an act of conception. But such a function of
a symbol is casual, and crosses with its use as a symbol. In the latter
function it is not the act of conception, but what is conceived, that enters
into the meaning-pattern. We shall avoid much confusion and quibbling
by recognizing that signification does not figure in symbolization at all.
              THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                     65
undid   little   Willy,   in   the   pathetic   laboratory   rhyme:

                   We had a little Willy,
                   Now Willy is no more,
                  For what he thought was        H   2
                  Was H 2 S0 4

Willy had mistaken one object for another; he misapplied a
term of which he knew the connotation well enough. But
since connotations are normally fixed upon a word, originally,
by its application to certain things, whose properties are but
vaguely known, we may also be mistaken about the connota-
tion, when we use the term as a vehicle of thought. We may
know that the symbol "James" applies to our next-door neigh-
bor, and quite mistakenly suppose it connotes a man with all
sorts of virtues or frailties. This time we are not mistaking
James for someone else, but we are mistaken about James.
    It is a peculiarity of proper names that they have a different
connotation for every denotation. Because their connotation
 is not fixed, they can be arbitrarily applied. In itself, a proper
name has no connotation at all; sometimes it acquires a very
 general sort of conceptual meaning     —it connotes a gender, or

 race, or confession (e.g. "Christian," "Wesley," "Israel")
 but there is no actual mistake involved in calling a boy
 "Marion," a girl "Frank," a German "Pierre," or a Jew "Lu-
 ther." In civilized society the connotation of a proper name is
 not regarded as a meaning applying to the bearer of the name;
 when the name is used to denote a certain person it takes on
 the connotation required by that function. In primitive soci-
 eties this is less apt to be the case; names are often changed^
 because their^ccepted connotations do not fit the beareT. The*
 same man may in turn be named "Lightfoot," "Hawkeye,"
 "Whizzing Death," etc. In an Indian society, the class of men
 named "Hawkeye" would very probably be a subclass of the
 class "sharp-eyed men." But in our own communities ladies
 named "Blanche" do not have to be albinos or even platinum
 blondes. A    word that functions as a proper noun is excused
 from the usual rules of application.
    So much, then, for the venerable "logic of terms." It ap-
 pears a little more complicated than in the medieval books,
 since we must add to the long-recognized functions, connota-
 tion and denotation, a third one, signification, which is fun-
 damentally different from the other two; and since, moreover,
 in discussing the semantic functions of terms we have made
 the rare discovery that they really are functions, not powers
 or mysterious properties or what-not, and have treated them
 accordingly. The traditional "logic of terms" is really a meta-
66               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
physic of meaning; the new philosophy of meaning is first
of all a logic of terms—  of signs and symbols —   an analysis of
the relational patterns in which "meaning'* .nay be sought.
   But a semantic of separate symbols is only a rudimentary
foundation for a more interesting aspect of meaning. Every-
thing is mere propaedeutic until we come to discourse. It is
in discursive thinking that truth and falsehood are born. Be-
fore terms are built into propositions, they assert nothing,
preclude nothing; in fact, although they may name things,
and convey ideas of such things, they say nothing. I have dis-
cussed them at such great length simply because most logicians
have given them such cavalier treatment that even so obvious
a distinction as that between sign-functions and symbol-func-
tions passed unnoticed; so that careless philosophers have been
guilty of letting ambitious genetic psychologists argue them
from the conditioned reflex to the wisdom of G. Bernard
Shaw, all in one skyrocketing generalization.
   The logic of discourse has been much more adequately
        —
handled so well, in fact, that practically nothing I have to
say about it is new; yet it must at least be brought to mind
here, because an understanding of discursive symbolism, the
vehicle of propositional thinking, is essential to any theory of
human mentality; for without it there could be no literal
meaning, and therefore no scientific knowledge.
   Anyone who has ever learned a foreign language knows that
the study of its vocabulary alone will not make him master
of the new tongue. Even if he were to memorize a whole
dictionary, he would not be able to make the simplest state-
ment correctly; for he could not form a sentence without
 certain principles of grammar. He must know that some
words are nouns and some are verbs; he must recognize some
 as active or passive forms of verbs, and know the person and
number they express; he must know where the verb stands
 in the sentence in order to make the sense he has in mind.
 Mere separate names of things (even of actions, which are
"named" by infinitives) do not constitute a sentence.          A
string of words which we might derive by running our eye
                                                —
down the left-hand column in the dictionary for instance,
 "especially espouse espringal espry esquire"   —   does not say
anything. Each word has meaning, yet the series of words
has none.
   Grammatical structure, then, is a further source of sig-
nificance. We cannot call it a symbol, since it is not even
a term; but it has a symbolific mission. It ties together several
symbols, each with at least a fragmentary connotation of its
own, to make one complex term, whose meaning is a special
constellation of all the connotations involved. What the
               THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                          67
special constellation is, depends on the syntactical relations
within the complex symbol, or proposition.
   Propositional structure has commanded more interest among
logicians of the present generation than any other aspect of
symbolism. Ever since Bertrand Russell 9 pointed out that the
Aristotelian metaphysic of substance and attribute is a counter-
part of the Aristotelian logic of subject and predicate        that—
the common-sense view of things and properties, agent and
patient, object and action, etc., is a faithful counterpart of
that common-sense logic embodied in our parts of speech                —
the ties between expressibility and conceivability, forms of
language and forms of experience, propositions and facts,
have been drawn closer and closer. It has become apparent
that a proposition fits a fact not only because it contains
names for the things and actions involved in the fact, but also
because it combines them in a pattern analogous, somehow, to
the pattern in which the named objects are "in fact" com-
bined. A proposition is a picture of a structure         —
                                                     the structure
of a state of affairs. The unity of a proposition is the same
sort of unity that belongs to a picture, which presents one
scene, no matter how many items may be distinguishable
within it.
   What property must a picture have in order to represent
its object? Must it really share the visual appearance of the
object? Certainly not to any high degree. It may, for instance,
be black on white, or red on grey, or any color on any other
color; it may be shiny whereas the object is dull; it may be
much larger or much smaller than the object; it is certainly
flat, and although the tricks of perspective sometimes give a
perfect illusion of three-dimensionality, a picture without"
perspective   —e!g. an architect's "elevation drawing"          —
                                                            is still
unmistakably a picture, "representing an object.
    The reason for this latitude is that the picture is essentially
a symbol, not a duplicate, of what it represents. It has certain
salient features by virtue of which it can function as a symbol
for its object. For instance, the childish outline drawing
(fig. 1 ) on page 68 is immediately recognized as a rabbit,
yet it really looks so unlike one that even a person nearly
blind could not for a moment be made to think that he saw
a rabbit sitting on the open page of his book. All it shares
with the "reality" is a certain proportion of parts the posi-—
tion and relative length of "ears," the dot where an "eye"
belongs, the "head" and "body" in relation to each other,
etc. Beside it is exactly the same figure with different ears and
tail (fig. 2); any child will accept it as a cat. Yet cats don't


  »   A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz (1900). See p. 12.
68                   PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY




                 Fie.   1                         Fig. 2

look like long-tailed, short-eared rabbits, in reality. Neither
are they flat and white, with a papery texture and a black
outline running round them. But all these traits of the pic-
tured cat are irrelevant, because it is merely a symbol, not a
pseudo-cat. 10
   Of course, themore detail is depicted by the image, the
more unequivocal becomes the reference to a particular ob-
ject. A good portrait is "true" to only one person. Yet even
good portraits are not duplications. There are styles in por-
traiture as there are in any other art. We may paint in
heightened, warm, melting colors, or in cool pastels; we may
range from the clean line drawings of Holbein to the shim-
mering hues of French impressionism; and all the time the
object need not change. Our presentation of it is the vari-
able factor.
   The picture is a symbol, and the so-called "medium" is a
type of symbolism. Yet there is something, of course, that
relates the picture to its original, and makes it represent, say,
a Dutch interior and not the crucifixion. What it may repre-
sent is dictated purely by its logic        —
                                         by the arrangement of
its elements.  The disposition of pale and dark, dull and
bright paints, or thin and thick lines and variously shaped
white spaces, yields the determination of those forms that
mean certain objects. They can mean all those and only those
objects in which we recognize similar forms. All other aspects
of the picture  —for instance, what artists call the "distribution
of values," the "technique," and the "tone" of the whole work
—  serve other ends than mere representation. The only charac-
   10 Tolstoi relates a little incident of his childhood which hinges on the
sudden ingression of irrelevant factors into consciousness, to the detri-
ment of artistic appreciation; I quote it here because it is quite the most
charming record I have found of a semantic muddle:
   "We settled ourselves about the round table at our drawing. I had only
blue paint; nevertheless, I undertook to depict the hunt. After represent-
ing, in very lively style, a blue boy mounted on a blue horse, and some
blue dogs, I was not quite sure whether I could paint a blue hare, and
ran to Papa in his study to take advice on the matter. Papa was reading;
and in answer to my question, 'Are there any blue hares?' he said, with-
out raising his head, 'Yes, my dear, there are.' I went back to the round
table and painted a blue hare.  .    .
                                       .'*
                                           L. N. Tolstoi, Childhood, Boyhood
and Youth.
             THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                 69
teristic that a picture must have in order to be a picture of a
certain thing is an arrangement of elements analogous to the
arrangement of salient visual elements in the object. A  repre-
sentation of a rabbit must have long ears; a man must feature
arms and legs.
   In the case of a so-called "realistic" picture, the analogy
goes into great detail, so great that many people believe a
statue or a painting to be a copy of its object. But consider
how we meet such vagaries of style as modern commercial
art produces: ladies with bright green faces and aluminum
hair, men whose heads are perfect circles, horses constructed
entirely of cylinders. We still recognize the objects they de-
pict, as long as we find an element to stand for the head and
one for the eye in the head, a white mark to connote a starched
bosom, a line placed where it may represent an arm. With
amazing rapidity our vision picks up these features and lets
the whole fantasy convey a human form.
   One step removed from the "styled" picture is the diagram.
Here any attempt at imitating the parts of an object has been
given up. The parts are merely indicated by conventional
symbols, such as dots, circles, crosses, or what-not. The only
thing that is "pictured" is the relation of the parts to each
other. A diagram is a "picture" only of a form.
   Consider a photograph, a painting, a pencil sketch, an
architect's elevation drawing, and a builder's diagram, all
showing the front view of one and the same house. With a
little attention, you will recognize the house in each repre-
sentation.   Why?
   Because each one of the very different images expresses
the same relation of parts, which you have fasteneoV^n icr
formulating your conception of the house. Some versions
show more such relations than others; they are more detailed.
But those which do not show certain details at least show
no others in place of these, and so it may be understood that
the details are there left out. The things shown in the sim-
plest picture, the diagram, are all contained in the more
elaborate renderings. Moreover, they are contained in your
conception of the house; so the pictures all answer, in their
several ways, to your conception, although the latter may
contain further items that are not pictured at all. Likewise,
another person's conception of that same house will agree
in its essential pattern with the pictures and with your con-
ception, however many private aspects it may have.
   It is by virtue of such a fundamental pattern, which all
correct conceptions of the house have in common, that we
can talk together about the "same" house despite our private
differences of sense-experience, feeling, and purely personal
 70                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
associations. That which all adequate conceptions of an object
must have in common, is the concept of the object. The same
concept is embodied in a multitude of conceptions. It is a
form that appears in all versions of thought or imagery that
can connote the object in question, a form clothed in different
 integuments of sensation for every different mind. Probably
 no two people see anything just alike. Their sense organs
 differ, their attention and imagery and feelings differ so that
 they cannot be supposed to have identical impressions. But
 if their respective conceptions of a thing (or event, or person,
etc.) embody the same concept, they will understand each other.
   A   concept is all that a symbol really conveys. But just as
 quickly as the concept is symbolized to us, our own imagina-
tion dresses it up in a private, personal conception, which we
can distinguish from the communicable public concept only
by a process of abstraction. Whenever we deal with a concept
we must have some particular presentation of it, through
which we grasp it. What we actually have "in mind" is always
 universalium in re. When we express this universalium we
use another symbol to exhibit it, and still another res will
embody it for the mind that sees through our symbol and
apprehends the concept in its own way.
    The power of understanding symbols, i.e. of regarding
everything about a sense-datum as irrelevant except a certain
form that it embodies, is the most characteristic mental trait
of mankind. It issues in an unconscious, spontaneous process
of abstraction, which goes on all the time in the human mind:
a process of recognizing the concept in any configuration
given to experience, and forming a conception accordingly.
That is the real sense of Aristotle's definition of man as "the
rational animal." Abstractive seeing is the foundation of our
rationality, and is its definite guarantee long before the dawn
of any conscious generalization or syllogism. 11 It is the func-
tion which no other animal shares. Beasts do not read sym-
bols; that is why they do not see pictures. We are sometimes
told that dogs do not react even to the best portraits because
they live more by smell than by sight; but the behavior of
a dog who spies a motionless real cat through the window
glass belies this explanation. Dogs scorn our paintings be-
cause they see colored canvases, not pictures. A representa-
tion of a cat does not make them conceive one.
    Since any single sense-datum can, logically, be a symbol
for any single item, any arbitrary mark or counter may con-
note the conception, or, publicly speaking, the concept, of
any single thing, and thus denote the thing itself. A motion
  11 Cf. Th. Ribot, Essai sur I 'imagination criatrice (1921; 1st ed. 1900),
p. 14.
             THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                      71
of fingers, apprehended as one unit performance, became the
name of a substance to little deaf-and-blind Helen Keller.       A
word, likewise taken as a sound-unit, becomes a symbol to
us, for some item in the world. And now the power of seeing
configurations as symbols comes into play: we make patterns
of denotative symbols, and they promptly symbolize the very
different, but analogous, configurations of denoted things.
A  temporal order of words stands for a relational order of
things.   When pure word-order becomes insufficient, word-
endings and prefixes    "mean"    relationships;   from these are
born prepositions and other purely relational symbols. 12 Just
as mnemonic dots and crosses, as soon as they denote objects,
can also enter into diagrams or simple pictures, so do sounds,
as soon as they are words, enter into word-pictures, or sen-
tences. A sentence is a symbol for a state of affairs, and pic-
tures its character.
   Now, in an ordinary picture, the terms of the represented
complex are symbolized by so many visual items, i.e. areas
of color, and their relations are indicated by relations of these
items. So painting, being static, can present only a momen-
tary state; it may suggest, but can never actually report, a
history. We may produce a series of pictures, but nothing
in the pictures can actually guarantee the conjunction of
their several scenes in one serial order of events. Five baby-
pictures of the little Dionne sisters in various acts may be
taken either as a series representing successive acts of one
child, or as separate views of five little girls in characteristic
activities. There is no sure way of choosing between these
two interpretations without captions or other indications.
   But most of our interests center upon events, rather* thaDT
upon things Ih static spatial relations. Causal connections,
activities, time, and change are what we want most of all to
conceive and communicate. And to this end pictures are
poorly suited. We resort, therefore, to the more powerful,
supple, and adaptable symbolism of language.
   How are relations expressed in language? For the most
part, they are not symbolized by other relations, as in pic-
tures, but are named, just like substantives. We name two
items, and place the name of a relation between; this means ,
that the relation holds the two items together. "Brutus
killed Caesar" indicates that "killing" holds between Brutus
and Caesar. Where the relation is not symmetrical, the word-
order and the grammatical forms (case, mood, tense, etc.)
of the words symbolize its direction. "Brutus killed Caesar"
  12 See Philip Wegener, Untersuchungen iiber die Grundfragen des
Sprachlebens (1885), esp. pp. 88-89; also Karl Buhler, Sprachtheorie
(1934), chs. iii and iv.
72                   PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
means something different from "Caesar killed Brutus," and
"Killed Caesar Brutus" is not a sentence at all. The word-
order partly determines the sense of the structure.
   The trick of naming relations instead of illustrating them
gives language a tremendous scope; one word can thus take
care of a situation that would require a whole sheet of draw-
ings to depict it. Consider the sentence, "Your chance of
winning is one among a thousand of losing." Imagine a pic-
torial expression of this comparatively simple proposition!
First, a symbol for "you, winning"; another for "you, losing,"
pictured a thousand times! Of course a thousand anythings
would be far beyond clear apprehension on a basis of mere
visual Gestalt. We can distinguish three, four, five, and perhaps
somewhat higher numbers as visible patterns, for instance:



But  a thousand becomes merely "a great number." Its exact
fixation requires an order of concepts in which it holds a
definite place, as    each number concept does   in   our number
system. But to denote such a host of concepts and keep their
relations to each other straight, we need a symbolism that can
express both terms and relationships more economically than
pictures, gestures, or mnesic signs.
   It was remarked before that symbol and object, having a
common logical form, would be interchangeable save for
some psychological factors, namely: that the object is inter-
esting, but hard to fixate, whereas the symbol is easy of ap-
prehension though in itself perhaps quite unimportant. Now
the little vocal noises out of which we make our words are
extremely easy to produce in all sorts of subtle variations,
and easy to perceive and distinguish. As Bertrand Russell
has put it, "It is of course largely a matter of convenience that
we do not use words of other kinds (than vocal). There is the
deaf-and-dumb language; a Frenchman's shrug of the shoul-
ders is a word; in fact, any kind of externally perceptible
bodily movement may become a word, if social usage so
ordains. But the convention which has given the supremacy
to speaking is one which has a good ground, since there is
no other way of producing a number of perceptively different
bodily movements so quickly or with so little muscular effort.
Public speaking would be very tedious if statesmen had to
use the deaf-and-dumb language, and very exhausting if all
words involved as much muscular effort as a shrug of the
shoulders." 13 Not only does speech cost little effort, but
above all it requires no instrument save the vocal apparatus
and the auditory organs which, normally, we all carry about
  13 Philosophy   (1927), p. 44.
             THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                          73
as part of our very selves; so words are naturally available
symbols, as well as very economical ones.
   Another recommendation for words is that they have no
value except as symbols (or signs); in themselves they are
completely trivial. This is a greater advantage than philos-
ophers of language generally realize.       A     symbol which inter-
ests us also as an object is distracting. It does not convey its
meaning without obstruction. For instance, if the word
"plenty" were replaced by a succulent, ripe, real peach, few
people could attend entirely to the mere concept of quite
enough when confronted with such a symbol. The more
barren and indifferent the symbol, the greater is its semantic
power. Peaches are too good to act as words; we are too
much interested in peaches themselves. But little noises are
ideal conveyors of concepts, for they give us nothing but their
meaning. That is the source of the "transparency" of lan-
guage, on which several scholars have remarked. Vocables
in themselves are so worthless that we cease to be aware of
their physical presence at all, and become conscious only of
their connotations, denotations, or other meanings. Our con-
ceptual activity seems to flow through them, rather than
merely to accompany them, as it accompanies other experi-
ences that we endow with significance. They fail to impress
us as "experiences" in their own right, unless we have diffi-
culty in using them as words, as we do with a foreign lan-
guage or a technical jargon until we have mastered it.
   But the greatest virtue of verbal symbols is, probably, their
tremendous readiness to enter into combinations. There is
practically no limit to the selections and arrangements we can
make of them. This is largely due to the economy Lord
Russell remarked, the speed with which each word is "pro-
duced and presented and- finished, making way for another
word. This makes it possible for us to grasp whole groups of
meanings at a time, and make a new, total, complex concept
out of the separate connotations of rapidly passing words.
    Herein lies the power of language to embody concepts
not only of things, but of things in combination, or situations.
A    combination of words connoting a situation-concept is a
descriptive phrase; if the relation-word in such a phrase is
given the grammatical form called a "verb," the phrase
becomes a sentence. Verbs are symbols with a double func-
tion; they express a relation, and also assert that the relation
holds, i.e. that the symbol has a denotation. 14 Logically they
combine the meaning of a function, 0, and an assertion-sign;
a verb has the force of "assert 0( )."
   14 A more detailed discussion of this double function may be found in
my article, "A Logical Study of Verbs," The Journal of Philosophy,
XXIV (1927), 5: 120-129.
74               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
   When a word is given an arbitrary denotation (which may
be a simple thing, or a complex affair), it is simply a name;
for instance, in a language of my invention "Moof" might
mean a cat, a state of mind, or the government of a country.
I may give that name to anything I like. A name may be
awkward or convenient, ugly or pretty, but in itself it is
never true or false. But if it already has a connotation, then
it cannot be given an arbitrary denotation, nor vice versa.

I cannot use the word "kitten" with its accepted connotation
to denote an elephant. The application of a word with its
connotation is the equivalent of a statement: "This is a
such-and-such." To call an elephant "kitten," not as a proper
name but as a common noun, is a mistake, because he does
not exemplify the connoted concept. Similarly a word with
a fixed denotation cannot be given an arbitrary connotation,
for once the word is a name (common or proper), to give it
a certain connotation is to predicate the connoted concept of
whatever bears the name. If "Jumbo" denotes an elephant,
it cannot be given the connotation "something furry," be-

cause Jumbo is presumably not furry.
   The relation between connotation and denotation is, there-
fore, the most obvious seat of truth and falsity. Its conven-
tional expressions are sentences asserting that something is a
such-and-such, or that something has such-and-such a prop-
erty; in technical language,       propositions of the forms
"x e y(4>y)," and "<$>x." The distinction between these two
forms lies simply in which aspect of the name we have first
determined, its connotation or its denotation; truth and falsity
have the same basis for both kinds of proposition.
   In a complex symbolic structure, such as a sentence con-
necting several elements with each other by a verb that ex-
presses an elaborate pattern of relations, we have a "logical
picture" whose applicability depends on the denotations of
many words and the connotations of many relation-symbols
(word-order, particles, cases, etc.). If the names have denota-
tions, the sentence is about something; then its truth or
falsity depends on whether any relations actually holding
among the denoted things exemplify the relational concepts
expressed by the sentence, i.e. whether the pattern of things
(or properties, events, etc.) denoted is analogous to the"
syntactical pattern of the complex symbol.
   There are many refinements of logic that give rise to spe-
cial symbol-situations, to ambiguities and odd mathematical
devices, and to the legion of distinctions which Charles
Peirce was able to make. But the main fines of logical struc-
ture in all meaning-relations are those I have just discussed;
the correlation of signs with their meanings by a selective
           DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                75
mental process; the correlation of symbols with concepts and
concepts with things, which gives rise to a "short-cut" rela-
tion between names and things, known as denotation; and
the assignment of elaborately patterned symbols to certain
analogues in experience, the basis of all interpretation and
thought. These are, essentially, the relationships we use in
weaving the intricate web of meaning which is the real fabric
of human life.
