4.      Discursive and Presentational Forms


The logical theory on which this whole study of symbols
is based is essentially that which was set forth by Wittgenstein,
some twenty years ago, in his Tractatus Logic o-Philosophicus:
   "One name stands for one thing, and another for another
thing,    and they are connected together.   And so the whole,
like a living picture, presents the   atomic fact. (4.0311)
                                             —
   "At the first glance the proposition say as it stands
printed on paper    —does not seem to be a picture of the
reality of which it treats. But neither does the musical score
appear at first sight to be a picture of a musical piece; nor
does our phonetic spelling (letters) seem to be a picture of
our spoken language.    .   .(4.015)
                                .



   "In the fact that there is a general rule by which the
musician is able to read the symphony out of the score, and
that there is ap rule by which one could reconstruct Ihe
symphony from the line^on a phonograph record and from
this again  —                            —
              by means of the first rule construct the score,
herein lies the internal similarity between the things which
at first sight seem to be entirely different. And the rule is
the law of projection which projects the symphony into the
language of the musical score. It is the rule of translation of
this language into the language of the gramophone record."
(4.0141)
   "Projection" is a good word, albeit a figurative one, for
the process by which we draw purely logical analogies. Geo-
metric projection is the best instance of a perfectly faithful
representation which, without knowledge of some logical
rule, appears to be a misrepresentation.     A
                                           child looking at a
map of the world in Mercator projection cannot help be-
lieving that Greenland is larger than Australia; he simply
finds it larger. The projection employed is not the usual
76               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
principle of copying which we use in all visual comparisons
or translations, and his training in the usual rule makes him
unable to "see" by the new one. It takes sophistication to
"see" the relative sizes of Greenland and Australia on a
Mercator map. Yet a mind educated to appreciate the pro-
jected image brings the eye's habit with it. After a while, we
genuinely "see" the thing as we apprehend it.
   Language, our most faithful and indispensable picture of
human experience, of the world and its events, of thought
and life and all the march of time, contains a law of projec-
tion of which philosophers are sometimes unaware, so that
their reading of the presented "facts" is obvious and yet
wrong, as a child's visual experience is obvious yet deceptive
when his judgment is ensnared by the trick of the flattened
map. The transformation which facts undergo when they
are rendered as propositions is that the relations in them are
turned into something like objects. Thus, "A killed B" tells
of a way in which   A   and B were unfortunately combined;
but our only means of expressing this way is to name it, and
      —
presto!  a new entity, "killing," seems to have added itself
to the complex of   A and B. The event which is "pictured"
in the proposition undoubtedly involved a succession of acts
by A and B, but not the succession which the proposition
                —
seems to exhibit first A, then "killing," then B. Surely A
and B were simultaneous with each other and with the killing.
But words have a linear, discrete, successive order; they are
strung one after another like beads on a rosary; beyond the
very limited meanings of inflections, which can indeed be in-
corporated in the words themselves, we cannot talk in simul-
taneous bunches of names. We must name one thing and then
another, and symbols that are not names must be stuck be-
tween or before or after, by convention. But these symbols,
holding proud places in the chain of names, are apt to be        I




mistaken for names, to the detriment of many a metaphysical
theory. Lord Russell regrets that we cannot construct a lan-
guage which would express all relations by analogous rela-
tions; then we would not be tempted to misconstrue language,
as a person who knows the meaning of the Mercator map, but
has not used one freely enough to "see" in its terms, mis-
construes the relative sizes of its areas.
   "Take, say, that lightning precedes thunder," he says. "To
express this by a language closely reproducing the structure
of the fact, we should have to say simply: 'lightning, thun-
der,' where the fact that the first word precedes the second
means that what the first word means precedes what the
second word means. But even if we adopted this method for
temporal order, we should still need words for all other rela-
         DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                           77
tions, because we could not without intolerable ambiguity
symbolize them by the order of our words." 1
   It is a mistake, I think, to symbolize things by entities too
much like themselves; to let words in temporal order repre-
sent things in temporal order. If relations such as temporal
order are symbolized at all, let the symbols not be those same
relations themselves. A structure cannot include as part of a
symbol something that should properly be part of the meaning.
But it is unfortunate that names and syntactical indicators
look so much alike in language; that we cannot represent
objects by words, and relations by pitch, loudness, or other
characteristics of speech. 2
   As it is, however, all language has a form which requires
us to string out our ideas even though their objects rest one
within the other; as pieces of clothing that are actually worn
one over the other have to be strung side by side on the
clothesline. This property of verbal symbolism is known as
discursiveness; by reason of it, only thoughts which can be
arranged in this peculiar order can be spoken at all; any idea
which does not lend itself to this "projection" is ineffable,
incommunicable by means of words. That is why the laws of
reasoning, our clearest formulation of exact expression, are
sometimes known as the "laws of discursive thought."
   There is no need of going further into the details of verbal
symbolism and its poorer substitutes, hieroglyphs, the deaf-
and-dumb language, Morse Code, or the highly developed
drum-telegraphy of certain jungle tribes. The subject has been
exhaustively treated by several able men, as the many quota-
tions in this chapter indicate; I can only assent to their find-
ings. The relation between word-structures and their meanings
is, I believe, one*of logical analogy, whereby, in Wittgenstein's

phrase, "we make ourselves pictures of facts." This philosophy
of language lends itself, indeed, to great technical develop-
ment, such as Wittgenstein envisaged:
    "In the language of everyday life it very often happens that
the same word signifies in different ways         —
                                               and therefore be-
longs to two different symbols        —
                                      or that two words, which
signify in different ways, are apparently applied in the same
way in the proposition. (3.323)
  i Philosophy,   p. 264.
  2 In  the same chapter from which I have just quoted, Lord Russell
attributes the power of language to represent events to the fact that, like
events, it is a temporal series. I cannot agree with him in this matter. It
is by virtue of names for relations that we can depict dynamic relations.
We   do not mention past events earlier in a sentence than present ones,
but subject temporal order to the same "projection" as, for instance,
attribution or classification; temporal order is usually rendered by the
syntactical (non-temporal) device of tense.
78               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
    "In order to avoid these errors, we must employ a symbol-
ism which excludes them, by not applying the same sign in
different symbols and by not applying signs in the same way
which signify in different ways. A symbolism, that is to say,
                                            —
which obeys the rules of logical grammar of logical syntax,
    "(The logical symbolism of Frege and Russell is such a lan-
guage, which, however, does still not exclude all errors.)"
(3.325) 3
    Carnap's admirable book, The Logical Syntax of Language,
carries out the philosophical program suggested by Wittgen-
stein. Here an actual, detailed technique is developed for
determining the capacity for expression of any given linguistic
system, a technique which predicts the limit of all combina-
tions to be made in that system, shows the equivalence of
certain forms and the differences among others which might
be mistaken for equivalents, and exhibits the conventions to
which any thought or experience must submit in order to be-
come conveyable by the symbolism in question. The distinc-
tions between scientific language and everyday speech, which
most of us can feel rather than define, are clearly illumined
by Carnap's analysis; and it is surprising to find how little of
our ordinary communication measures up to the standard of
"meaning" which a serious philosophy of language, and hence
a logic of discursive thought, sets before us.
    In this truly remarkable work the somewhat diffuse appre-
hension of our intellectual age, that symbolism is the key to
 epistemology and "natural knowledge," finds precise and prac-
 tical corroboration. The Kantian challenge:      "What can I
 know?" is shown to be dependent on the prior question:
 "What can I ask?" And the answer, in Professor Carnap's
 formulation, is clear and direct. I can ask whatever language
 will express; I can know whatever experiment will answer.      A
 proposition which could not, under any (perhaps ideal, im-
 practicable) conditions, be verified or refuted, is a pseudo-
 proposition, it has no literal meaning. It does not belong to
the framework of knowledge that we call logical conception;
it is not true or false, but unthinkable, for it falls outside the

order of symbolism.
   Since an inordinate amount of our talk, and therefore (we
hope) of our cerebration too, defies the canons of literal
                                            —
meaning, our philosophers of language Russell, Wittgen-
stein, Carnap, and others of similar persuasions     —  are faced
with the new question: What is the true function of those ver-
bal combinations and other pseudo-symbolic structures that
have no real significance, but are freely used as though they
meant something?

  3 Tractatus.
                DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                79
   According to our logicians, those structures are to be treated
as "expressions" in a different sense, namely as "expressions"
of emotions, feelings, desires. They are not symbols for
thought, but symptoms of the inner life, like tears and
laughter, crooning, or profanity.
   "Many linguistic utterances," says Carnap, "are analogous
to laughing in that they have only an expressive function, no
representative function. Examples of this are cries like 'Oh,
Oh,' or, on a higher level, lyrical verses. The aim of a lyrical
poem in which occur the words 'sunshine' and 'clouds,' is not
to inform us of certain meteorological facts, but to express
certain feelings of the poet and to excite similar feelings in
us. .   .                              —
         Metaphysical propositions like lyrical verses have
            .                                                 —
only an expressive function, but no representative function.
Metaphysical propositions are neither true nor false, because
they assert nothing.      . But they are, like laughing, lyrics
                              .   .



and music, expressive. They express not so much temporary
feelings as permanent emotional and volitional dispositions." 4
    Lord Russell holds a very similar view of other people's
metaphysics:
    "I do not deny," he says, "the importance or value, within
its own sphere, of the kind of philosophy which is inspired

by ethical notions. The ethical work of Spinoza, for instance,
appears to me of the very highest significance, but what is
valuable in such a work is not any metaphysical theory as to
the nature of the world to which it may give rise, nor indeed
anything that can be proved or disproved by argument. What
is valuable is the indication of some new way of feeling toward
life and the world, some way of feeling by which our own
existence can acquire more of the characteristics whicfe*we
must deeply deTire." 5
    And Wittgenstein:
    "Most propositions and questions, that have been written
about philosophical matters, are not false, but senseless. We
cannot, therefore, answer questions of this kind at all, but
only state their senselessness. Most questions and propositions
of the philosophers result from the fact that we do not under-
stand the logic of our language. (4.003)
    "A proposition presents the existence and non-existence
of atomic facts. (4.1)
    "The totality of true propositions is the total of natural
science (or the totality of the natural sciences). (4.11)
    "Everything that can be thought at all can be thought
clearly. Everything that can be said can be said clearly."
(4.116) 6
   4 Philosophy and Logical Syntax, p. 28.
   s "Scientific Method in Philosophy," in Mysticism and
                                                         Logic (1918).
P. 109.                               6 Op. cit.
80                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
   In their criticism of metaphysical propositions, namely that
such propositions are usually pseudo-answers to pseudo-ques-
tions, these logicians have my full assent; problems of "First
Cause" and "Unity" and "Substance," and all the other time-
honored topics, are insoluble, because they arise from the fact
that we attribute to the world what really belongs to the
"logical projection" in which we conceive it, and by mis-
placing our questions we jeopardize our answers. This source
of bafflement has been uncovered by the philosophers of our
day, through their interest in the functions and nature of
symbolism. The discovery marks a great intellectual advance.
But it does not condemn philosophical inquiry as such; it
merely requires every philosophical problem to be recast, to be
conceived in a different form. Many issues that seemed to
concern the sources of knowledge, for instance, now appear
to turn partly or wholly on the forms of knowledge, or even
the forms of expression, of symbolism. The center of philo-
sophical interest has shifted once more, as it has shifted several
times in the past. That does not mean, however, that rational
people should now renounce metaphysics. The recognition of
the intimate relation between symbolism and experience, on
which our whole criticism of traditional problems is based, is
itself a metaphysical insight. For metaphysics is, like every
philosophical pursuit, a study of meanings. From it spring the
special sciences, which can develop their techniques and verify
their propositions one by one, as soon as their initial concepts
are clear enough to allow systematic handling, i.e. as soon as
the philosophical work behind them is at least tentatively ac-
complished. 7 Metaphysics is not itself a science with fixed pre-
suppositions, but progresses from problem to problem rather
than from premise to consequence. To suppose that we have
outgrown it is to suppose that all "the sciences" are finally
established, that human language is complete, or at least
soon to be completed, and additional facts are all we lack
of the greatest knowledge ever possible to man; and though
this knowledge may be small, it is all that we shall ever have.
   This is, essentially, the attitude of those logicians who have
investigated the limits of language. Nothing that is not "lan-
guage"  in the sense of their technical definition can possess
the character of symbolic expressiveness (though it may be
"expressive" in the symptomatic way). Consequently nothing
that cannot be "projected" in discursive form is accessible to
the human mind at all, and any attempt to understand any-
thing but demonstrable fact is bootless ambition. The know-
able is a clearly defined field, governed by the requirements

  7 I have presented a fuller discussion of philosophy as the "mother of

sciences" in The Practice of Philosophy (1930), ch. ii.
            DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                          81
of   discursive projectability. Outside this domain is the
inexpressible realm of feeling, of formless desires and satisfac-
tions, immediate experience, forever incognito and incommuni-
cando.    A philosopher who looks in that direction is, or should
be, a mystic; from the ineffable sphere nothing but nonsense
can be conveyed, since language, our only possible semantic,
will not clothe experiences that elude the discursive form.
   But intelligence is a slippery customer; if one door is closed
to it, it finds, or even breaks, another entrance to the world.
If one symbolism is inadequate, it seizes another; there is no
eternal decree over its means and methods. So I will go with
the logisticians and linguists as far as they like, but do not
promise to go no further. For there is an unexplored possibil-
ity of genuine semantic beyond the limits of discursive
language.
   This logical "beyond," which Wittgenstein calls the "un-
speakable," both Russell and Carnap regard as the sphere of
subjective experience, emotion, feeling, and wish, from which
only symptoms come to us in the form of metaphysical and
artistic fancies. The study of such products they relegate to
psychology, not semantics. And here is the point of my radical
divergence from them. Where Carnap speaks of "cries like
'Oh, Oh,' or, on a higher level, lyrical verses," I can see only
a complete failure to apprehend a fundamental distinction.
Why should we cry our feelings at such high levels that any-
one would think we were talking? 8 Clearly, poetry means
more than a cry; it has reason for being articulate; and meta-
physics is more than the croon with which we might cuddle
up to the world in a comfortable attitude. We are dealing
with symbolisms here, and what they express is often ^ftjghly-
intellectual. Oftly, the form and function of such symbolisms
are not those investigated by logicians, under the heading of
"language." The field of semantics is wider than that of lan-
guage, as certain philosophers      —
                                  Schopenhauer, Cassirer, Dela-
croix, Dewey, Whitehead, and some others            —
                                                have discovered;
but it is blocked for us by the two fundamental tenets of
current epistemology, which we have just discussed.
   These two basic assumptions go hand in hand: (1) That
language 9 is the only means of articulating thought, and (2)
That everything which is not speakable thought, is feeling.
They are linked together because all genuine thinking is
symbolic, and the limits of the expressive medium are, there-
fore, really the limits of our conceptual powers. Beyond these
we can have only blind feeling, which records nothing and
conveys nothing, but has to be discharged in action or self-
     8 Cf. Urban, Language and Reality, p. 164.
     s Including, of course, its refinements in mathematical   and scientific
symbolisms, and its approximations by gesture, hieroglyphics, or graphs.
82                              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
expression, in deeds or cries or other impulsive demonstrations.
   But if we consider how difficult it is to construct a meaning-
ful language that shall meet neo-positivistic standards, it is
quite incredible that people should ever say anything at all,
or understand each other's propositions. At best, human
thought is but a tiny, grammar-bound island, in the midst of
a sea of feeling expressed by "Oh-oh" and sheer babble. The
island has a periphery, perhaps, of mud             —
                                                factual and hypo-
thetical concepts broken down by the emotional tides into
the "material mode," a mixture of meaning and nonsense.
Most of us live the better part of our lives on this mud-
flat; but in artistic moods we take to the deep, where we
flounder about with symptomatic cries that sound like propo-
sitions about life and death, good and evil, substance, beauty,
and other non-existent topics.
   So long as we regard only scientific and "material" (semi-
scientific) thought as really cognitive of the world, this pecul-
iar picture of mental life must stand. And so long as we
admit only discursive symbolism as a bearer of ideas, "thought"
in this restricted sense must be regarded as our only intellec-
tual activity. It begins and ends with language; without the
elements, at least, of scientific grammar, conception must be
impossible.
        A
      theory which implies such peculiar consequences is itself
a suspicious character. But the error which it harbors is not
in its reasoning. It is in the very premise from which the
doctrine proceeds, namely that all articulate symbolism is dis-
cursive. As Lord Russell, with his usual precision and direct-
ness, has stated the case, "it is clear that anything that can be
said in an inflected language can be said in an uninfected
language; therefore, anything that can be said in language can
be said by means of a temporal series of uninfected words.
This places a limitation upon what can be expressed in words.
It may well be that there are facts which do not lend them-
selves to this very simple schema; if so, they cannot be ex-
pressed in language. Our confidence in language is due to the
fact that it       shares the structure of the physical world,
                    .   .   .



and therefore can express that structure. But if there be a
world which is not physical, or not in space-time, it may have
a structure which we can never hope to express or to know.
.   .Perhaps that is why we know so much physics and so little
         .



of anything else." 10
   Now, I do not believe that "there is a world which is not
physical, or not in space-time," but I do believe that in this
physical, space-time world of our experience there are things

        10 Philosophy, p. 265.
          DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                     83
which do not fit the grammatical scheme of expression. But
they are not necessarily blind, inconceivable, mystical affairs;
they are simply matters which require to be conceived through
some symbolistic schema other than discursive language. And
to demonstrate the possibility of such a non-discursive pattern
one needs only to review the logical requirements for any
symbolic structure whatever. Language is by no means our
only articulate product.
    Our merest sense-experience is a process of formulation.
The world that actually meets our senses is not a world of
"things," about which we are invited to discover facts as
soon as we have codified the necessary logical language to
do so; the world of pure sensation is so complex, so fluid and
full, that sheer sensitivity to stimuli would only encounter
what William James has called (in characteristic phrase) "a
blooming, buzzing confusion." Out of this bedlam our sense-
organs must select certain predominant forms, if they are to
make report of things and not of mere dissolving sensa.
                                                —
The eye and the ear must have their logic their "categories
of understanding," if you like the Kantian idiom, or their
"primary imagination," in Coleridge's version of the same
concept. 11 An object is not a datum, but a form construed by
the sensitive and intelligent organ, a form which is at once
an experienced individual thing and a symbol for the con-
cept of it, for this sort of thing.
  A    tendency to organize the sensory field into groups and
patterns of sense-data, to perceive forms rather than a flux of
light-impressions, seems to be inherent in our receptor appa-
ratus just as much as in the higher nervous centers with
which we do arithmetic and logic. But this unconscious >appre-~
ciation of forms is the primitive root of all abstraction, which
in turn is the keynote of rationality; so it appears that the
conditions for rationality lie deep in our pure animal experi-
      —
 ence in our power of perceiving, in the elementary functions
of our eyes and ears and fingers. Mental life begins with our
 mere physiological constitution.    Alittle reflection shows us
 that, since no experience occurs more than once, so-called
"repeated" experiences are really analogous occurrences, all
 fitting a form that was abstracted on the first occasion.
 Familiarity is nothing but the quality of fitting very neatly
 into the form of a previous experience. I believe our ingrained
 habit of hypostatizing impressions, of seeing things and not
 sense-data, rests on the fact that we promptly and uncon-
 sciously abstract a form from each sensory experience, and

  11 An excellent discussion of Coleridge's philosophy may be found in
D. G. James, Skepticism and Poetry (1937), a book well worth reading
in connection with this chapter.
84                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
use this form to conceive the experience as a whole, as a
"thing."
  No matter what heights the human mind may attain, it can
work only with the organs it has and the functions peculiar
to them. Eyes that did not see forms could never furnish it
with images; ears that did not hear articulated sounds could
never open it to words. Sense-data, in brief, would be useless
to a mind whose activity is "through and through a symbolic
process," were they not par excellence receptacles of meaning.
But meaning, as previous considerations have shown, accrues
essentially to forms. Unless the G^ra//-psychologists are right
in their belief that Gestaltung is of the very nature of percep-
tion, I do not know how the hiatus between perception and
conception, sense-organ and mind-organ, chaotic stimulus and
logical response, is ever to be closed and welded. A mind that
works primarily with meanings must have organs that supply
it primarily with forms.

   The nervous system is the organ of the mind; its center is
the brain, its extremities the sense-organs; and any charac-
teristic function it may possess must govern the work of all
its parts. In other words, the activity of our senses is "mental"

not only when it reaches the brain, but in its very inception,
whenever the alien world outside impinges on the furthest
and smallest receptor. All sensitivity bears the stamp of men-
tality. "Seeing," for instance, is not a passive process, by
which meaningless impressions are stored up for the use of
an organizing mind, which construes forms out of these
amorphous data to suit its own purposes. "Seeing" is itself a
process of formulation; our understanding of the visible world
begins in the eye. 12
   This psychological insight, which we owe to the school of
Wertheimer, Kohler, and Koffka, has far-reaching philosophi-
cal consequences, if we take it seriously; for it carries ration-
ality into processes that are usually deemed pre-rational, and
points to the existence of forms, i.e. of possible symbolic ma-

    !2 For a general account of the Gestalt-theory, see Wolfgang Kohler,
Gestalt Psychology (1929), from which the following relevant passage
is taken:
    "It is precisely the original organization and segregation of circum-
scribed wholes which make it possible for the sensory world to appear so
utterly imbued with meaning to the adult because, in its gradual entry
into the sensory field, meaning follows the lines drawn by natural organi-
zation. It usually enters into segregated wholes. .   .   .



    "Where 'form' exists originally, it acquires a meaning very easily. But
here a whole with its form is given first and then a meaning 'creeps into
it.' That meaning automatically produces a form where beforehand there
is none, has not been shown experimentally in a single case, as far as I
know" (p. 208).
    See also Max Wertheimer, Drei Abhandlungen zur Gestalttheorie
(1925), and Kurt Koffka. Principles of Gestalt Psychology (1935).
          DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                85
terial,at a level where symbolic activity has certainly never
been looked for by any epistemologist. The eye and the ear
make their own abstractions, and consequently dictate their
own peculiar forms of conception. But these forms are de-
rived from exactly the same world that furnished the totally
different forms known to physics. There is, in fact, no such
thing as the form of the "real" world; physics is one pattern
which may be found in it, and "appearance," or the pattern
of things with their qualities and characters, is another. One
construction may indeed preclude the other; but to maintain
that the consistency and universality of the one brands the
other as false is a mistake. The fact that physical analysis
does not rest in a final establishment of irreducible "qualities"
does not refute the belief that there are red, blue, and green
things, wet or oily or dry substances, fragrant flowers, and
shiny surfaces in the real world. These concepts of the
"material mode" are not approximations to "physical" notions
at all. Physical concepts owe their origin and development to
the application of mathematics to the world of "things," and
                   —                        —
mathematics never even in the beginning dealt with quali-
ties of objects. It measured their proportions, but never treated
its concepts —                               —
                 triangularity, circularity, etc. as qualities of
which so-and-so much could become an ingredient of certain
objects. Even though an elliptical race-track may approximate
a circle, it is not to be improved by the addition of more
circularity. On the other hand, wine which is not sweet
enough requires more sweetening, paint which is not bright
enough is given an ingredient of more white or more color.
The world of physics is essentially the real world construed by
mathematical abstractions, and the world of sense is t]?£ real-*
world constrtlfcd by the abstractions which the sense-organs
immediately furnish. To suppose that the "material mode" is
a primitive and groping attempt at physical conception is a
fatal error in epistemology, because it cuts off all interest in
the developments of which sensuous conception is capable,
and the intellectual uses to which it might be put.
   These intellectual uses lie in a field which usually harbors
a  slough  of despond for the philosopher, who ventures into
it because he is too honest to ignore it, though really he knows

no path around its pitfalls. It is the field of "intuition,"
"deeper meaning," "artistic truth," "insight," and so forth.
A   dangerous-looking sector, indeed, for the advance of a
rational spirit! To date, I think, every serious epistemology
that has regarded mental life as greater than discursive reason,
and has made concessions to "insight" or "intuition," has
just so far capitulated to unreason, to mysticism and irra-
tionalism. Every excursion beyond propositional thought has
86               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
dispensed with thought altogether, and postulated some in-
most soul of pure feeling in direct contact with a Reality
unsymbolized, unfocussed, and incommunicable (with the
notable exception of the theory set forth by L. A. Reid in
the last chapter of his Knowledge and Truth, which admits the
facts of non-propositional conception in a way that invites
rather than precludes logical analysis).
                                                    —
   The abstractions made by the ear and the eye the forms
of direct perception —   are our most primitive instruments of
intelligence. They are genuine symbolic materials, media
of understanding, by whose office we apprehend a world of
things, and of events that are the histories of things. To
furnish such conceptions is their prime mission. Our sense-
organs make their habitual, unconscious abstractions, in the
interest of this "reifying" function that underlies ordinary
recognition of objects, knowledge of signals, words, tunes,
places, and the possibility of classifying such things in the
outer world according to their kind. We recognize the ele-
ments of this sensuous analysis in all sorts of combination;
we can use them imaginatively, to conceive prospective
changes in familiar scenes.
   Visual forms —                                 —
                   lines, colors, proportions, etc.   are just as
capable of articulation, i.e. of complex combination, as words.
But the laws that govern this sort of articulation are altogether
different from the laws of syntax that govern language. The
most radical difference is that visual forms are not discursive.
They do not present their constituents successively, but simul-
taneously, so the relations determining a visual structure are
grasped in one act of vision. Their complexity, consequently,
is not limited, as the complexity of discourse is limited, by
what the mind can retain from the beginning of an apper-
ceptive act to the end of it. Of course such a restriction on
discourse sets bounds to the complexity of speakable ideas.
An idea that contains too many minute yet closely related
parts, too many relations within relations, cannot be "pro-
jected" into discursive form; it is too subtle for speech.     A
language-bound theory of mind, therefore, rules it out of the
domain of understanding and the sphere of knowledge.
   But the symbolism furnished by our purely sensory appre-
ciation of forms is a non-discursive symbolism, peculiarly well
suited to the expression of ideas that defy linguistic "projec-
tion." Its primary function, that of conceptualizing the flux
of sensations, and giving us concrete things in place of kalei-
doscopic colors or noises, is itself an office that no language-
born thought can replace. The understanding of space which
we owe to sight and touch could never be developed, in all its
detail and definiteness, by a discursive knowledge of geom-
         DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                87
etry.  Nature speaks to us, first of all, through our senses;
the forms and qualities we distinguish, remember, imagine,
or recognize are symbols of entities which exceed and outlive
our momentary experience. Moreover, the same symbols
                        —
qualities, lines, rhythms    may occur in innumerable presen-
tations; they are abstractable and combinatory. It is quite
natural, therefore, that philosophers who have recognized the
symbolical character of so-called "sense-data," especially in
their highly developed uses, in science and art, often speak of
a "language" of the senses, a "language" of musical tones, of
colors, and so forth.
   Yet this manner of speaking is very deceptive. Language
is a special mode of expression, and not every sort of seman-
tic can be brought under this rubric; by generalizing from
linguistic symbolism to symbolism as such, we are easily led
to misconceive all other types, and overlook their most in-
teresting features. Perhaps it were well to consider, here, the
salient characteristics of true language, or discourse.
    In the first place, every language has a vocabulary and a
syntax. Its elements are words with fixed meanings. Out of
of these one can construct, according to the rules of the syn-
tax, composite symbols with resultant new meanings.
    Secondly, in a language, some words are equivalent to
whole combinations of other words, so that most meanings
can be expressed in several different ways. This makes it
possible to define the meanings of the ultimate single words,
i.e., to construct a dictionary.

    Thirdly, there may be alternative words for the same mean-
ing. When two people systematically use different words for
almost everything, they are said to speak different langi*agesr    >




But the two languages are roughly equivalent; with a little
artifice, an occasional "substitution of a phrase for a single
word, etc., the propositions enunciated by one person, in his
system, may be translated into the conventional system of the
other.
   Now    consider the most familiar sort of non-discursive sym-
bol, a picture. Like language, it is composed of elements that
represent various respective constituents in the object; but
these elements are not units with independent meanings. The
areas of fight and shade that constitute a portrait, a photo-
graph for instance, have no significance by themselves. In
isolation we would consider them simply blotches. Yet they
are faithful representatives of visual elements composing the
visual object. However, they do not represent, item for item,
those elements which have names; there is not one blotch for
the nose, one for the mouth, etc.; their shapes, in quite in-
describable combinations, convey a total picture in which
88               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
nameable features may be pointed out. The gradations of light
and shade cannot be enumerated. They cannot be correlated,
one by one, with parts or characteristics by means of which we
might describe the person who posed for the portrait. The
"elements" that the camera represents are not the "elements"
that language represents. They are a thousand times more
numerous. For this reason the correspondence between a word-
picture and a visible object can never be as close as that be-
tween the object and its photograph. Given all at once to the
intelligent eye, an incredible wealth and detail of information
is conveyed by the portrait, where we do not have to stop to
construe verbal meanings. That is why we use a photograph
rather than a description on a passport or in the Rogues'
Gallery.
   Clearly, a symbolism with so many elements, such myriad
relationships, cannot be broken up into basic units. It is im-
possible to find the smallest independent symbol, and recog-
nize its identity when the same unit is met in other contexts.
Photography, therefore, has no vocabulary. The same is ob-
viously true of painting, drawing, etc. There is, of course,
a technique of picturing objects, but the law governing this
technique cannot properly be called a "syntax," since there
are no items that might be called, metaphorically, the "words"
of portraiture.
   Since we have no words, there can be no dictionary of
meanings for lines, shadings, or other elements of pictorial
technique. We may well pick out some line, say a certain
curve, in a picture, which serves to represent one nameable
item; but in another place the same curve would have an
entirely different meaning. It has no fixed meaning apart
from its context. Also, there is no complex of other elements
that is equivalent to it at all times, as "2+2" is equivalent to
"4." Non-discursive symbols cannot be defined in terms of
others, as discursive symbols can.
   If there can be no defining dictionary, of course we have
no translating dictionary, either. There are different media of
graphic representation, but their respective elements cannot
be brought into one-to-one correlation with each other, as in
languages: "chien" = "dog," "moi" = "me," etc. There is no
standard key for translating sculpture into painting, or draw-
ing into ink-wash, because their equivalence rests on their
common total reference, not on bit-for-bit equivalences of
parts such as underlie a literal translation.
   Furthermore, verbal symbolism, unlike the non-discursive
kinds, has primarily a general reference. Only convention can
assign a proper name  —  and then there is no way of prevent-
ing some other convention from assigning the same proper
           DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                       89
name to a different individual. We may name a child as oddly
as we will, yet we cannot guarantee that no one else will ever
bear that designation. A description may fit a scene ever so
closely, but it takes some known proper name to refer it
without possible doubt to one and only one place. Where the
names of persons and places are withheld, we can never
prove that a discourse refers     —
                                 not merely applies        —
                                                     to a cer-
tain historic occasion. In the non-discursive mode that speaks
directly      to sense, however, there is no intrinsic generality.
It is first    and foremost a direct presentation of an individual
object.    Apicture has to be schematized if it is to be capable
of various meanings. In itself it represents just one object
real or imaginary, but still a unique object. The definition of
a triangle fits triangles in general, but a drawing always pre-
sents a triangle of some specific kind and size.          We
                                                          have to
abstract from the conveyed meaning in order to conceive tri-
angularity in general. Without the help of words this gen-
eralization, if possible at all, is certainly incommunicable.
   It appears, then, that although the different media of non-
verbal representation are often referred to as distinct "lan-
guages," this is really a loose terminology. Language in the
strict sense is essentially discursive; it has permanent units of
meaning which are combinable into larger units; it has fixed
equivalences that make definition and translation possible;
its connotations are general, so that it requires non-verbal acts,
like pointing, looking, or emphatic voice-inflections, to assign
specific denotations to its terms. In all these salient charac-
ters it differs from wordless symbolism, which is non-discur-
sive and untranslatable, does not allow of definitions within
its own system, and cannot directly convey generalities^The

meanings given»through language are successively understood,
and gathered into a whole by the process called discourse;
the meanings of all other symbolic elements that compose a
larger, articulate symbol are understood only through the
meaning of the whole, through their relations within the total
structure. Their very functioning as symbols depends on the
fact that they are involved in a simultaneous, integral pre-
sentation. This kind of semantic may be called "presentational
symbolism," to characterize its essential distinction from
discursive symbolism, or "language" proper. 13
    The recognition of presentational symbolism as a normal
and prevalent vehicle of meaning widens our conception of

   is It is relevant here to note that "picture language," which uses
separate pictures in place of words, is a discursive symbolism, though
each "word" is a presentational symbol; and that all codes, e.g. the con-
ventional gestures of deaf-mutes or the drum communications of African
tribes, are discursive systems.
90                     PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
rationality far beyond the traditional boundaries, yet never
breaks faith with logic in the strictest sense. Wherever a
symbol operates, there is a meaning; and conversely, differ-
ent classes of experience       —
                             say, reason, intuition, appreciation
—  correspond to different types of symbolic mediation. No
symbol is exempt from the office of logical formulation, of
conceptualizing what it conveys; however simple its import,
or however great, this import is a meaning, and therefore
an element for understanding. Such reflection invites one
to tackle anew, and with entirely different expectations, the
whole problem of the limits of reason, the much-disputed life
of feeling, and the great controversial topics of fact and
truth, knowledge and wisdom, science and art. It brings within
the compass of reason much that has been traditionally rele-
gated to "emotion," or to that crepuscular depth of the mind
where "intuitions" are supposed to be born, without any mid-
wifery of symbols, without due process of thought, to fill the
gaps in the edifice of discursive, or "rational," judgment.
   The symbolic materials given to our senses, the Gestalten
or fundamental perceptual forms which invite us to construe
the pandemonium of sheer impression into a world of things
and occasions, belong to the "presentational" order. They
furnish the elementary abstractions in terms of which ordinary
sense-experience is understood. 14 This kind of understanding
is directly reflected in the pattern of physical reaction, im-

pulse and instinct. May not the order of perceptual forms,
then, be a possible principle for symbolization, and hence the
conception, expression, and apprehension, of impulsive, in-
stinctive, and sentient life? May not a non-discursive sym-
bolism of light and color, or of tone, be formulative of that
life? And is it not possible that the sort of "intuitive" knowl-
edge which Bergson extols above all rational knowledge be-
cause it is supposedly not mediated by any formulating (and
hence deforming) symbol 15 is itself perfectly rational, but
   14 Kant thought that the principles of such formulation were supplied
by a faculty of the mind, which he called Verstand; but his somewhat
dogmatic delimitation of the field of knowledge open to Verstand, and
the fact that he regarded the mind-engendered forms as constitutive of
experience rather than interpretative (as principles must be), prevented
logicians from taking serious note of such forms as possible machinery
of reason. They abode by the forms of Vernunft, which are, roughly
speaking, the forms of discourse. Kant himself exalted Vernunft as the
special gift and glory of man. When an epistemology of medium and
meaning began to crowd out the older epistemology of percept and con-
cept,   his   V erstandesformen, in their role of conceptual ingredients of
phenomena, were lumped with his metaphysical doctrines, and eclipsed
by "metalogical" interests.
   15 See Henri Bergson, La pensee et le mouvement (1934), esp. essays ii
("De la position des problemes") and iv ("L'intuition philosophique");
also his Essai sur les donnees immediates de la conscience (1889), and
Introduction to Metaphysics (1912).
         DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                                     91
                                                —
not to be conceived through language a product of that
presentational symbolism which the mind reads in a flash, and
preserves in a disposition or an attitude?
   This hypothesis, though unfamiliar and therefore somewhat
difficult, seems to me well worth exploring. For, quite apart
from all questions of the authenticity of intuitive, inherited, or
inspired knowledge, about which I do not wish to cavil, the
very idea of a non-rational source of any knowledge vitiates
the concept of mind as an organ of understanding. "The power
of reason is simply the power of the whole mind at its fullest
stretch and compass," said Professor Creighton, in an essay
that sought to stem the great wave of irrationalism and emo-
tionalism following the World War. 16 This assumption appears
to me to be a basic one in any study of mentality. Rationality
is the essence of mind, and symbolic transformation its ele-
mentary process. It is a fundamental error, therefore, to
recognize it only in the phenomenon of systematic, explicit
reasoning. That is a mature and precarious product.
   Rationality, however, is embodied in every mental act, not
only when the mind is "at its fullest stretch and compass." It
permeates the peripheral activities of the human nervous sys-
tem, just as truly as the cortical functions.
  "The facts of perception and memory maintain themselves
only in so far as they are mediated, and thus given significance
beyond their mere isolated existence.     What falls in any
                                            .   .   .



way within experience partakes of the rational form of the
mind. As mental content, any part of experience is something
more than a particular impression having only the attributes
of existence. As already baptized into the life of the mind,
it partakes of its logical nature and moves on the planewof

universality. ..T
  "No matter how strorfgly the unity and integrity of the
mind is asserted, this unity is nothing more than verbal if the
mind is not in principle the expression of reason. For it can
be shown that all attempts to render comprehensible the unity
of the mental life in terms of        an alogical principle               fail   to
attain their goal." 17
  The title of Professor Creighton's trenchant little article is
"Reason and Feeling."       Its   central thesis        is   that   if   there   is
something in our mental life besides "reason," by which he
means, of course, discursive thinking, then it cannot be an
alogical factor, but must be in essence cognitive, too; and
since the only alternative to this reason is feeling (the author
does not question that axiom of epistemology), feeling itself
  is J. E. Creighton, "Reason and Feeling," Philosophical Review,           XXX
(1921), 5: 465-481. See p. 469.
  17 Ibid., pp. 470-472.
92                    PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
must somehow participate      in   knowledge and understanding.
   All this may be granted. The position is well taken. But
the most crucial problem is barely broached: this problem is
epitomized in the word "somehow." Just how can feelings be
conceived as possible ingredients of rationality?            We
                                                       are not
told, but we are given a generous hint, which in the light of a
broader theory of symbolism points to explanation.
   "In the development of mind," he says, "feeling does not
remain a static element, constant in form and content at all
levels, but ... is transformed and disciplined through its
interplay with other aspects of experience.      .   . Indeed, the
                                                         .




character of the feeling in any experience may be taken as
an index of the mind's grasp of its object; at the lower levels
of experience, where the mind is only partially or superficially
involved, feeling appears as something isolated and opaque,
as the passive accompaniment of mere bodily sensations.           .
                                                                  .   .



In the higher experiences, the feelings assume an entirely
different character, just as do the sensations and the other
contents of mind." 18
   The significant observation voiced in this passage is that
feelings have definite forms, which become progressively artic-
ulated. Their development is effected through their "interplay
with the other aspects of experience"; but the nature of that
interplay is not specified. Yet it is here, I think, that cogency
for the whole thesis must be sought. What character of feeling
is "an index of the mind's grasp of its object," and by what
tokens is it so? If feeling has articulate forms, what are they
like? For what these are like determines by what symbolism
we might understand them. Everybody knows that language
is a very poor medium for expressing our emotional nature.

It merely names certain vaguely and crudely conceived states,
but fails miserably in any attempt to convey the ever-moving
patterns, the ambivalences and intricacies of inner experience,
the interplay of feelings with thoughts and impressions, mem-
ories and echoes of memories, transient fantasy, or its mere
runic traces, all turned into nameless, emotional stuff. If we
say that we understand someone else's feeling in a certain
matter, we mean that we understand why he should be sad or
happy, excited or indifferent, in a general way; that we can
see due cause for his attitude.    We do not mean that we have
insight into the actual flow and balance of his feelings, into
that "character" which "may be taken as an index of the mind's
grasp of its object." Language is quite inadequate to articulate
such a conception. Probably we would not impart our actual,
inmost feelings even if they could be spoken.        We
                                                      rarely speak
in detail of entirely personal things.
  is Ibid., pp.   478-479.
        DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                   93
  There is, however, a kind of symbolism peculiarly adapted
to the explication of "unspeakable" things, though it lacks
the cardinal virtue of language, which is denotation. The most
highly developed type of such purely connotational semantic
is music. We are not talking nonsense when we say that a
certain musical progression is significant, or that a given
phrase lacks meaning, or a player's rendering fails to convey
the import of a passage. Yet such statements make sense only
to people with a natural understanding of the medium, whom
we describe, therefore, as "musical." Musicality is often re-
garded as an essentially unintellectual, even a biologically
sportive trait. Perhaps that is why musicians, who know that it
is the prime source of their mental life and the medium of
their clearest insight into humanity, so often feel called upon
to despise the more obvious forms of understanding, that claim
practical virtues under the names of reason, logic, etc. But in
fact, musical understanding is not hampered by the possession
of an active intellect, nor even by that love of pure reason
which is known as rationalism or intellectualism; and vice
versa, common-sense and scientific acumen need not defend
themselves against any "emotionalism" that is supposed to be
inherent in a respect for music. Speech and music have essen-
tially different functions, despite their oft-remarked union in
song. Their original relationship lies much deeper than any
such union (of which more will be said in a subsequent chap-
ter), and can be seen only when their respective natures are
understood.
   The problem of meaning deepens at every turn. The longer
we delve into its difficulties, the more complex it appears. But
in a central philosophical concept, this is a sign of health.
Each question answered leads to another which previously
could not be even entertained: the logic of symbolism, the
possible types of representation, the fields proper to them, the
actual functions of symbols according to their nature, their
relationships to each other, and finally our main theme, their
integration in human mentality. '
   Of course it is not possible to study every known phenome-
non in the realm of symbolism. But neither is this necessary
even in an intimate study. The logical structures underlying
all semantic functions, which I have discussed in this chapter,
suggest a general principle of division. Signs are logically dis-
tinct from symbols; discursive and presentational patterns show
a formal difference. There are further natural divisions due to
various ways of using symbols, no less important than the
logical distinctions. Altogether, we may group meaning-situa-
tions around certain outstanding types, and make these several
types the subjects of individual studies. Language, ritual, myth,
94                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
and music, representing four respective modes, may serve as
central topics for the study of actual symbolisms; and I trust
that further problems of significance in art, in science or
mathematics, in behavior or in fantasy and dream, may re-
ceive some light by analogy, and by that most powerful
human gift, the adaptation of ideas.




                          /      Language


Language is, without a doubt, the most momentous and at
the same time the most mysterious product of the human
mind. Between the clearest animal call of love or warning or
anger, and a man's least, trivial word, there lies a whole day
of Creation   —or in modern phrase, a whole chapter of evolu-
tion. In language we have the free, accomplished use of
symbolism, the record of articulate conceptual thinking; with-
out language there seems to be nothing like explicit thought
whatever. All races of men         —
                                 even the scattered, primitive
denizens of the deep jungle, and brutish cannibals who have
lived for centuries on world-removed islands         —
                                               have their com-
plete and articulate language. There seem to be no simple,
amorphous, or imperfect languages, such as one would nat-
urally expect to find in conjunction with the lowest cultures.
People who have not invented textiles, who live under roofs
of pleated branches, need no privacy and mind no filth and
roast their enemies for dinner, will yet converse over their
bestial feasts in a tongue as grammatical as Greek, and as
fluent as French! *

   i There are several statements in philological and psychological litera-
ture to the effect that certain primitive races have but a rudimentary
language, and depend on gesture to supplement their speech. All such
statements that I have found, however, can be traced back to one com-
mon source, namely Mary H. Kingsley's Travels in West Africa (1897).
This writer enjoyed so high a reputation in other fields than philology
that her casual and apparently erroneous observations of native lan-
guages have been accepted rather uncritically by men as learned as
Sir Richard Paget, Professor G. F. Stout, and Dr. Israel Latif. Yet Miss
Kingsley's testimony is very shaky. She tells us (p. 504) that "the in-
habitants of Fernando Po, the Bubis, are quite unable to converse
with each other unless they have sufficient light to see the accompanying
gestures of the conversation." But in an earlier part of the book she
writes, "I know nothing of it [the Bubi language] myself save that it
is harsh in sound," and refers the reader to the work of Dr. Baumann
for information about its words and structure; Baumann gives a vocabu-
lary and grammar that would certainly suffice a European to carry on any
ordinary conversation in the dark. (See O. Baumann, "Beitrage zur
Kentniss der Bubesprache auf Fernando Poo," Zeitschrift fur afrikanische
                                LANGUAGE                                  95
   Animals, on the other hand, are one and all without speech.
They communicate, of course; but not by any method that
can be likened to speaking. They express their emotions and
indicate their wishes and control one another's behavior by
suggestion. One ape will take another by the hand and drag
him into a game or to his bed; he will hold out his hand to
beg for food, and will sometimes receive it. But even the
highest apes give no indication of speech. Careful studies
have been made of the sounds they emit, but all systematic
observers agree that none of these are denotative, i.e. none
of them are rudimentary words. 2 Furness, for instance, says:
"If these animals have a language it is restricted to a very
few sounds of a general emotional signification. Articulate
speech they have none and communication with one another
is accomplished by vocal sounds to no greater extent than
                                                   3
it is by dogs, with a growl, a whine, or a bark."    Mr. and
Mrs. Yerkes, who are very reluctant to abandon the search
for pre-human speech-functions in simians, come to the con-
clusion that "although evidence of use of the voice and of
definite word-like sounds to symbolize feelings, and possibly
also ideas, becomes increasingly abundant from lemur to ape,
no one of the infra-human primates exhibits a systematization
of vocal symbols which may approximately be described as
speech." 4
  If the apes really used "definite word-like sounds to sym-

Sprachen, I, 1888, 138-155.) It seems plausible, therefore, that the Bubis
find such conversation personally or socially "impossible" for some other
reason. Her other example is no surer. "When I was with the Fans they
frequently said, 'We will go to the fire so we can see what they say,' when
any question had to be decided after dark   .
                                               ." (p. 504). It is strange that
                                                .

a language in which one can make, in the dark, so complex a statement
as: "We will go to«the fire so we can see what they say," should require
gesture to complete other propositions; moreover, where there is a ques-
tion to decide, it might be awkward for the most civilized congress to
take a majority vote without switching on the lights.
   1 am inclined, therefore, to credit the statement of Edward Sapir, that
"the gift of speech and a well-ordered language are characteristic of
every known group of human beings. No tribe has ever been found which
is without language and all statements to the contrary may be dismissed
as mere folklore." After repudiating specifically the stories just related,
he concludes: "The truth of the matter is that language is an essentially
perfect means of expression and communication among every known
people." (From article "Language," in Encyclopedia of the Social
Sciences, by permission of The Macmillan Company, publishers. Cf. Otto
Jespersen, Language: Its Nature, Development and Origin, 1922, p. 413.)
   2 In 1892 R. L. Garner published a book, The Speech of Monkeys,
which aroused considerable interest, for he claimed to have learned a
monkey vocabulary of about forty words. The book, however, is so
fanciful and unscientific, and its interpretations so extravagant, that I
think it must be discounted in toto, especially as more careful observa-
tions of later scientists belie its findings.
   3 W. H. Furness, "Observations on the Mentality of Chimpanzees and
Orang-Utans," Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, LV
(1916), 281-290.
   *R. M. Yerkes and A. W. Yerkes, The Great Apes (1929), p. 569.
94                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
and music, representing four respective modes, may serve as
central topics for the study of actual symbolisms; and I trust
that further problems of significance in art, in science or
mathematics, in behavior or in fantasy and dream, may re-
ceive some light by analogy, and by that most powerful
human gift, the adaptation of ideas.
