Language


Language is, without a doubt, the most momentous and at
the same time the most mysterious product of the human
mind. Between the clearest animal call of love or warning or
anger, and a man's least, trivial word, there lies a whole day
of Creation  — or in modern phrase, a whole chapter of evolu-
tion. In language we have the free, accomplished use of
symbolism, the record of articulate conceptual thinking; with-
out language there seems to be nothing like explicit thought
whatever. All races of men         —
                                 even the scattered, primitive
denizens of the deep jungle, and brutish cannibals who have
lived for centuries on world-removed islands         —
                                               have their com-
plete and articulate language. There seem to be no simple,
amorphous, or imperfect languages, such as one would nat-
urally expect to find in conjunction with the lowest cultures.
People who have not invented textiles, who live under roofs
of pleated branches, need no privacy and mind no filth and
roast their enemies for dinner, will yet converse over their
bestial feasts in a tongue as grammatical as Greek, and as
fluent as French! x

   i There are several statements in philological and psychological litera-

ture to the effect that certain primitive races have but a rudimentary
language, and depend on gesture to supplement their speech. All such
statements that I have found, however, can be traced back to one com-
mon source, namely Mary H. Kingsley's Travels in West Africa (1897).
This writer enjoyed so high a reputation in other fields than philology
that her casual and apparently erroneous observations of native lan-
guages have been accepted rather uncritically by men as learned as
Sir Richard Paget, Professor G. F. Stout, and Dr. Israel Latif. Yet Miss
Kingsley's testimony is very shaky. She tells us (p. 504) that "the in-
habitants of Fernando Po, the Bubis, are quite unable to converse
with each other unless they have sufficient light to see the accompanying
gestures of the conversation." But in an earlier part of the book she
writes, "I know nothing of it [the Bubi language] myself save that it
is harsh in sound," and refers the reader to the work of Dr. Baumann
for information about its words and structure; Baumann gives a vocabu-
lary and grammar that would certainly suffice a European to carry on any
ordinary conversation in the dark. (See O. Baumann, "Beitrage zur
Kentniss der Bubesprache auf Fernando Poo," Zeitschrift fiir afrikanische
                                LANGUAGE                                   95
   Animals, on the other hand, are one and all without speech.
They communicate, of course; but not by any method that
can be likened to speaking. They express their emotions and
indicate their wishes and control one another's behavior by
suggestion. One ape will take another by the hand and drag
him into a game or to his bed; he will hold out his hand to
beg for food, and will sometimes receive it. But even the
highest apes give no indication of speech. Careful studies
have been made of the sounds they emit, but all systematic
observers agree that none of these are denotative, i.e. none
of them are rudimentary words. 2 Furness, for instance, says:
"If these animals have a language it is restricted to a very
few sounds of a general emotional signification. Articulate
speech they have none and communication with one another
is accomplished by vocal sounds to no greater extent than
it is by dogs, with a growl, a whine, or a bark." 3 Mr. and

Mrs. Yerkes, who are very reluctant to abandon the search
for pre-human speech-functions in simians, come to the con-
clusion that "although evidence of use of the voice and of
definite word-like sounds to symbolize feelings, and possibly
also ideas, becomes increasingly abundant from lemur to ape,
no one of the infra-human primates exhibits a systematization
of vocal symbols which may approximately be described as
speech." 4
  If the apes really used "definite word-like sounds to sym-

Sprachen, I, 1888, 138-155.) It seems plausible, therefore, that the Bubis
find such conversation personally or socially "impossible" for some other
reason. Her other example is no surer. "When I was with the Fans they
frequently said, 'We will go to the fire so we can see what they say,' when
any question had to be decided after dark    .
                                               ." (p. 504). It is strange that
                                                 .


a language in which one can make, in the dark, so complex a statement
as: "We will go toathe fire so we can see what they say," should require
gesture to complete other propositions; moreover, where there is a ques-
tion to decide, it might be awkward for the most civilized congress to
take a majority vote without switching on the lights.
   1 am inclined, therefore, to credit the statement of Edward Sapir, that
"the gift of speech and a well-ordered language are characteristic of
every known group of human beings. No tribe has ever been found which
is without language and all statements to the contrary may be dismissed
as mere folklore." After repudiating specifically the stories just related,
he concludes: "The truth of the matter is that language is an essentially
perfect means of expression and communication among every known
people." (From article "Language," in Encyclopedia of the Social
Sciences, by permission of The Macmillan Company, publishers. Cf. Otto
Jespersen, Language: Its Nature, Development and Origin, 1922, p. 413.)
   2 In 1 892 R. L. Garner published a book, The Speech of Monkeys,
which aroused considerable interest, for he claimed to have learned a
monkey vocabulary of about forty words. The book, however, is so
fanciful and unscientific, and its interpretations so extravagant, that I
think it must be discounted in toto, especially as more careful observa-
tions of later scientists belie its findings.
   3 W. H. Furness, "Observations on the Mentality of Chimpanzees and
Orang-Utans," Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, LV
(1916), 281-290.
   4R. M. Yerkes and A. W. Yerkes, The Great Apes (1929), p. 569.
98                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
or the motherly care of some large animal. In regions where
it was  (or is) customary to expose undesired infants, babes
in the wood are not a nine days' wonder. Of course they
usually die of neglect very soon, or are devoured; but on a
few known occasions the maternal instinct of a bear or a wolf
has held the foundling more sacred than did man's moral law,
and a child has grown up, at least to pre-adolescence, without
human influence.
     The only well-attested cases are Peter the Wild Boy, found
in the fields  near Hanover in 1723; 9 Victor, known as "the
Savage of Aveyron," captured in that district of Southern
France in 1799; 10 and two little girls, Amala and Kamala,
taken in the vicinity of Midnapur, India, in 1920. 11 Several
other "wild children" have been reported, but all accounts
of them require considerable sifting, and some             —
                                                    like Lukas
the Baboon Boy      —
                    prove to be spurious. Even of the ones
here mentioned, only Victor has been scientifically studied
and described. One thing, however, we know definitely about
all of them  none of these children could speak in any tongue,
             :



remembered or invented. A child without human companions
would, of course, find no response to his chattering; but if
speech were a genuine instinct, this should make little differ-
ence. Civilized children talk to the cat without knowing that
they are soliloquizing, and a dog that answers with a bark
is a good audience; moreover, Amala and Kamala had each

other. Yet they did not talk. Where, then, is "the language-
making instinct of very young children"?
   It probably does not exist at all. Language, though nor-
mally learned in infancy without any compulsion or formal
training, is none the less a product of sheer learning, an art
handed down from generation to generation, and where there
is no teacher there is no accomplishment. Despite the caprices
of the children cited by Professor Hale, it is fairly certain
that these little inventors would not have talked at all if they
had not heard their elders speaking. Whatever talent it is that
helps a baby to learn a language with three or four times (or
any number of times!) the ease of an adult, this talent is
apparently not a "speech instinct." We have no birthright to
vocabularies and syntaxes.
   This throws us back upon an old and mystifying problem.
If we find no prototype of speech in the highest animals, and


    9 See Henry Wilson, Wonderful Characters, 2 vols. (1821), vol. II; also
J. Burnett, Lord Monboddo, Of the Origin and Progress of Language, 6
vols. (1773), vol. I.
   io See E. M. Itard, The Savage of Aveyron (English translation 1802).
     nSee Arnold Gesell, "The Biography of a Wolf-Child," Harper's
Magazine, January 1941.
                                      LANGUAGE                                99
man will not say even the first word by instinct, then how
did all his tribes acquire their various languages? Who began
the art which now we all have to learn? And why is it not
restricted to the cultured races, but possessed by every primi-
tive family, from darkest Africa to the loneliness of the polar
ice? Even the simplest of practical arts, such as clothing,
cooking, or pottery, is found wanting in one human group or
another, or at least found to be very rudimentary. Language
is neither absent nor archaic in any of them.
   The problem is so baffling that it is no longer considered
respectable. There is a paragraph of Sapir's in the Encyclo-
pedia of Social Sciences, repudiating it on excellent grounds.
But in the very passage that warrants the despair of the philol-
ogists, he justifies the present philosophical study in its hope-
fulness, so I quote his words for their peculiar relevance:
    "Many attempts have been made to unravel the origin of
language but most of these are hardly more than exercises of
 the speculative imagination. Linguists as a whole have lost
 interest in the problem and this for two reasons. In the first
 place, it has come to be realized that there exist no truly
 primitive languages in a psychological sense. ... In the sec-
 ond place, our knowledge of psychology, particularly of the
 symbolic process in general, is not felt to be sound enough
 to help materially with the problem of the emergence of
 speech. It is probable that the origin of language is not a
 problem that can be solved out of the resources of linguistics
 alone but that it is essentially a particular case of a much
 wider problem of the genesis of symbolic behavior and of
 the specialization of such behavior in the laryngeal region
 which may be presumed to have had only an expressive func-
 tion to begin with.      .   .   .


    "The primary function of language is generally said to be
 communication.   .   .   The autistic speech of children seems
                              .



 to show that the purely communicative aspect of language has
 been exaggerated. It is best to admit that language is pri-
 marily a vocal actualization of the tendency to see reality
 symbolically, that it is precisely this quality which renders it
 a fit instrument for communication and that it is in the actual
 give and take of social intercourse that it has been compli-
 cated and refined into the form in which it is known today." 12
    If it is true that "the tendency to see reality symbolically"
 is the real keynote of language, then most researches into the

 roots of the speech-function have been misdirected. Com-
 munication by sound is what we have looked for among the

  12 From Sapir, article "Language,"         p.   159.   By   permission of   The
Macmillan Company, publishers.
100              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
apes; a pragmatic use of vocables is the only sign of word-
conception that we have interpreted to their credit, the only
thing we have tried to inspire in them, and in the "wild
 children," to pave their way toward language. What we should
look for is the first indication of symbolic behavior, which is
not likely to be anything as specialized, conscious, or rational
 as the use of semantic. Language is a very high form of sym-
bolism; presentational forms are much lower than discursive,
and the appreciation of meaning probably earlier than its ex-
pression. The earliest manifestation of any symbol-making
tendency, therefore, is likely to be a mere sense of significance
attached to certain objects, certain forms or sounds, a vague
emotional arrest of the mind by something that is neither
dangerous nor useful in reality. The beginnings of symbolic
transformation in the cortex must be elusive and disturbing
experiences, perhaps thrilling, but very useless, and hard on
the whole nervous system. It is absurd to suppose that the
earliest symbols could be invented; they are merely Gestalten
furnished to the senses of a creature ready to give them some
diffuse meaning. But even in such rudimentary new behavior
lies the first break with the world of pure signs. Aesthetic
attraction, mysterious fear, are probably the first manifesta-
tions of that mental function which in man becomes a pe-
culiar "tendency to see reality symbolically," and which issues
in the power of conception, and the life-long habit of speech.
   Something very much like an aesthetic sense of import is
occasionally displayed by the anthropoid apes. It is like a
                     —
dawn of superstition a forerunner of fetishes and demons,
perhaps. Especially in chimpanzees has this unrealistic atti-
tude been observed by the most careful investigators, such as
Yerkes, Kellogg, and Kohler. Gua, the little chimpanzee who
was given the benefits of a human nursery, showed some very
remarkable reactions to objects that certainly had no direct
associations with her past experiences. For instance, the ex-
perimenters report that she stood in mortal fear of toad-
stools. She would run from them, screaming, or if cornered,
hide her face as though to escape the sight of them. This be-
havior proved to be elicited by all kinds of toadstools, and to
be based on no warning smell that might betray their poi-
sonous properties (if, indeed, they are poisonous to apes.
Some animals, e.g. squirrels, seem to eat all kinds with im-
punity). Once the experimenters wrapped some toadstools
lightly in paper and handed her the package which, of course,
smelled of the fungi, and watched her reception of it.
   "She accepts it without the slightest show of diffidence, and
even starts to chew some of the paper. But when the package
is unwrapped before her, she backs away apprehensively and
                          LANGUAGE                            101
will thereafter have none of the paper or its contents. Ap-
parently she is stimulated only visually by toadstools." 13
    By way of comparison, toadstools were then offered to the
thirteen apes at the experimental station near by. Only four
of the subjects showed a similar fear, which they did not show
toward pinecones, sticks, etc. These four were two adult
females and two "children" three years old. Since the reaction
was not universal the observers concluded that it was merely
due to the chimpanzee's natural fear of the unknown. But
surely pinecones are just as strange as toadstools to a caged
chimpanzee. Moreover, they say (in the very same paragraph)
that "Gua herself avoids both plucked and growing toadstools
                                     —
2 l/i months after her original fright or as long as any speci-
mens can be found in the woods. It is quite likely that her
reactions would have remained essentially the same through-
out the entire period of the research." 14 Certainly the plants
cannot have frightened her by their novelty all summer long!
    The reaction on the part of the apes, limited as it was to
about one subject in every three or four, has just that charac-
ter of being common, yet individual, that belongs to aesthetic
experiences. Some are sensitive to the sight, and the rest are
not; to some of them it seems to convey something    —  to others
it is just a thing, a toadstool or what you will.

    Gua had other objects of unreasonable fear: a pair of
blue trousers, of which she was afraid the first time she saw
them and ever after; a pair of leather gloves; a flat and rusty
tin can which she herself had found during her play out-
doors. "It is difficult," say her observers, "to reconcile be-
havior of this sort with the ape's obvious preference for new
toys." 15                                                ••
   Yerkes and^Learned have recorded similar oddities of
simian behavior.
   "The causes of fear or apprehension in the chimpanzees
were various," they report, "and sometimes difficult to under-
stand. Thus Panzee stood in dread of a large burlap bag
filled with hay, which she was obliged to pass frequently.
She would meet the situation bravely, however, holding her
head high, stamping her feet, and raising her fur, as she
passed with an air of injured dignity." 16
   Remembering some of the strange inanimate objects in the
world of early childhood, one may wonder what sort of ex-
pression the burlap bag was showing to Panzee.
   The best account of what may be termed "aesthetic frights"
  is Kellogg, The Ape and the Child, p. 177.
  14 Ibid., p. 178.                  is Ibid., p. 179.
  16 R. M. Yerkes and B. Learned, Chimpanzee Intelligence   and   its
Vocal Expression (1925), p. 143.
102                       PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
is given by Wolfgang Kohler, who tells, in The Mentality of
Apes, how he showed his chimpanzees "some primitive stuffed
toys, on wooden frames, fastened to a stand, and padded
with straw sewn inside cloth covers, with black buttons for
eyes. They were about thirty-five centimeters in height, and
could in extremity be taken for oxen and asses, though most
drolly unnatural. It was totally impossible to get Sultan, who
at that time could be led by the hand outside, near these
small objects, which had so little real resemblance to any
kind of creature.        One day I entered their room with
                            .   .   .



one of these toys under my arm. Their reaction-times may
be very short; for in a moment a blacker cluster, consisting
of the whole group of chimpanzees, hung suspended to the
farthest corner of the wire roofing; each individual tried to
thrust the others aside and bury his head deep among
them." 17
   His comment on these events is simple and cogent.
   "It is too facile an explanation of these reactions to assume
that everything new and unknown appears terrible to these
creatures.   .   .   .   New things are not necessarily frightful to a
chimpanzee, any more than to a human child; certain inherent
qualities are requisite to produce this special effect. But, as
the examples cited above prove, any marked resemblance to
the living foes of their species does not seem at all essential,
and it almost seems as though the immediate impression of
something exceptionally frightful could be conveyed in an
even higher degree by constructing something frightful, than
by any living animal (with the possible exception of snakes).
For us human beings as well, many ghost-forms and specters,
with which no terrible experience can be individually con-
nected, are much more uncanny than certain very substantial
dangers which we may easily have encountered in daily
life." 18
   Not only fear, but also delight or comfort may be inspired
in these animals by objects that have no biological significance
for them; thus Gua, who was so attached to Mr. Kellogg that
she went into tantrums of terror and grief whenever he left
the house, could be comforted by being given his pair of
coveralls. "This she would drag around with her," the account
reads, "as a fetish of protection until his return.     Occa-.   .   .



sionally, if it was necessary for him to go away, the leave-
taking could be accomplished without emotional display on
the part of Gua if the coveralls were given her before the
time of departure." 19
   Here certainly is a case where the object is significant.
  17 Page 333.                  is Kohler, The Mentality of Apes, p. 334.
  is Kellogg, op. cit., p. 160.
                            LANGUAGE                        103
Superficially it reminds one of a dog's recognition of his
master's clothes. But whereas a dog is prompted to the action
of seeking the possessor of them, Gua let the possessor go out
and contented herself with the proxy. Therein lies the dif-
ference. Gua was using the coveralls even in his presence as
a fifelp to her imagination, which kept him near whether he
went out or not.
   Kohler describes how the chimpanzees will hoard perfectly
useless objects and carry them between the lower abdomen
and the upper thigh, a sort of natural trouser pocket, for
days on end. Thus Tschego, an adult female, treasured a
stone that the sea had rounded and polished. "On no pre-
text," he says, "could you get the stone away, and in the
evening the animal took it with it to its room and its nest." 20
   No one knows what made the stone so valuable to Tschego;
we cannot say that it was significant, as we can in the case of
Gua's keepsake. But certainly an object which is aesthetically
satisfying or horrifying is a good candidate for the office of
fetish or bogie, as the case may be. An ape that can transfer
the sense of her master's presence to a memento of him, and
that reacts with specific emotions to the sheer quality of a
perception, certainly is nervously organized above the level
of purely realistic conditioned response. It is not altogether
surprising, therefore, to find even more definite traces of
                                             —
symbolic behavior in the chimpanzee this time a real prep-
aration for the function of denotation, which is the essence
of language.
   This behavior is the performance of symbolic acts acts—
that really seem to epitomize the creature's apprehension of
a state of affairs, rather than to be just a symptom of emotion*.
The difference between a symbolic and a symptomatic act
may be illustrated by contrasting the intentional genuflexion
of a suppliant with the emotional quaver of his voice. There
is a convention about the former, but not about the latter.
And the conventional expression of a feeling, an attitude,
etc., is the first, the lowest form of denotation. In a conven-
tional attitude, something is summed up, understood, and
consciously conveyed. So it is deeply interesting that both
Kohler and Kellogg have observed in their apes quite un-
mistakable cases of symbolic (not signific) gesture. Kohler
reports that when a young chimpanzee would greet Tschego,
it would put its hand into her lap. "If the movement of the
arm will not go so far," he says, "Tschego, when in a good
mood   .   .  will take the hand of the other animal, press it
               .


to her lap, or else pat it amicably. . . . She will press our

  20 Kohler, The Mentality of Apes, p. 99.
104                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
hand   to just that spot    between her upper thigh and lower
abdomen where she keeps her precious objects. She herself,
as a greeting, will put her huge hand to the other animal's
lap or between their legs and she is inclined to extend this
greeting even to men." 21
   Here we certainly have the dawn of a conventional ex-
pression of good-will. But a still more clearly significant act
is described by the Kelloggs in their account of Gua: that is

the kiss of forgiveness. Kissing is a natural demonstration
on the part of chimpanzees, and has an emotional value for
them. In her human surroundings the little ape soon em-
ployed it in an unequivocally conscious way.
   She would kiss and offer her lips in recompense for small
errors many times a day.      .   .Thereafter she could be put
                                      .



down again and would play, but unless the ritual had been
satisfactorily completed she would not be quiet or turn away
until it had, or until some other climax superseded it." 22
   The upshot of all these considerations is that the tendency
to a symbolic transformation of experience, the primary
requisite for speech, is not entirely wanting in the ape, though
it is as rudimentary as the rest of his higher functions       —
                                                              his
perception of causal relations, for instance. If we take sym-
bolic representation, rather than communication, as the cri-
terion of a creature's capacity for language, we see that the
chimpanzee, at least, is in some measure prepared; he has a
rudimentary capacity for it. 23 Yet he definitely has no speech.
He makes no stumbling attempts at words, as he does at using
tools, decorating his body, dancing and parading, and other
primitive pursuits. He is conceptually not far from the su-
preme human achievement, yet never crosses the line. What
has placed this absolute barrier between his race and ours?
   Chiefly, I think, one difference of natural proclivities. The
ape has no instinctive desire to babble in babyhood. He does
not play with his mouth and his breath as human infants
do; there is no crowing and cooing, no "goo-goo" and "ba-ba"
and "do-de-da" in his otherwise uproarious nursery. Conse-
quently there are no sounds and syllables that please or
frighten him by their sheer aesthetic character, as he is
pleased, frightened, or comforted by purely phenomenal
sights. Oddly enough, it is just because all his utterances
                    —                                  —
have signification all are pragmatic or emotional that none
of them ever acquire significance. He does not even imitate

  21 hoc. cit., infra.               22 Kellogg, op. cit., p. 172.
                        of chimpanzee behavior, see Kohler, The Men-
  23 For a detailed study
tality of Apes, passim; for a general evaluation of the findings, the
appendix, pp. 281-342, "Some Contributions to the Psychology of
Chimpanzees."
                              LANGUAGE                    105
sounds for fun, as he imitates gestures, and gravely mimics
practices that have no utility for him.
   This mutism of the great apes has been little realized by
people who have not actually studied their habits; in fact,
our satirists have made much of the supposedly simian trait
of constant unsolicited chatter. "Heavens, what a genius for
tongues these simians have!" said Clarence Day in one of
his clever books. And assuming that we are descended from
such arboreal geniuses, he comments on our political prob-
lems: "The best government for simians seems to be based
on a parliament: a talk-room, where endless vague thoughts
can be warmly expressed. This is the natural child of those
primeval sessions that gave pleasure to apes." 24 And even
Kipling, who has lived in a land where monkeys and apes are
wild, did not observe that their chatter (when they do chat-
ter) is no more imitative than the "ch-ch-ch-chee" of an
angry squirrel; if he had, we might be the poorer by missing
that delightful parody on human loquacity, the council-scene
in "Cold Lairs."
   A genuine symbol can most readily originate where some
object, sound, or act is provided which has no practical mean-
ing, yet tends to elicit an emotional response, and thus hold
one's undivided attention. Certain objects and gestures ap-
pear to have this phenomenological, dissociated character for
some apes, as well as for man; sounds have it for man alone.
They annoy or please him even when they are not signs of
anything further; they have an inherently interesting charac-
ter. Add to this the fact that man spontaneously produces
random syllables in infancy, whereas the ape does not, and
it is  immediately apparent that verbal symbols are easily
available to tjje one and very remote and unnatural (o the
other. Man, though undoubtedly a simian, must trace his
descent from a vocalizing race      —
                                   a genus of ape, perhaps, in
which the rudiments of symbolic conception, that apparently
are dawning in the chimpanzee, were coupled with an in-
stinctive tendency to produce sounds, to play with the vocal
apparatus.
  Furness succeeded in teaching a young orang-utan two
words, which it certainly appeared to use intelligently. Un-
fortunately for science, as well as for the ape, it died five
months after this achievement, so we do not know how much
further it might have gone on the road to Parnassus. But the
experimenter had little confidence, despite his success. His
chief obstacle was not the subject's lack of understanding,
but of instinctive response, of any tendency to imitate his

  24 This Simian   World (1920), p. 69.
106                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
mouthings and articulations. Its lips had to be moved by
hand instead of by example. Once it learned the trick, it
soon had the words; but the trick was something it would
never in the world have thought of by itself. 25 For this reason,
if for no other, it is unlikely that the descendants of our great
apes, ten thousand years hence, will hold parliaments (the
prognosis is better for World Fairs). The apes will not evolve
verbal symbolism because they do not instinctively supply
themselves with verbal material, interesting little phonetic
items that can acquire conventional meanings because they
carry no natural messages.
   The notion that the essence of language is the formulation
and expression of conceptions rather than the communication
of natural wants (the essence of pantomime) opens a new

  25 Furness' own account of this training is worth repeating here. His
own estimate of his success seems to me too modest, considering the
difference in learning-time of the first word and the second. For he says:
"It seems wellnigh mcredible that in animals otherwise so close to us
physically there should not be a rudimentary speech-center in the brain
which only needed developing. I have made an earnest endeavor and am
still endeavoring, but I cannot say that I am encouraged.
    "In teaching articulate speech I found the first difficulty to be over-
come in both the orang and the chimpanzee is their lack of use of lips
or tongue in making their natural emotional cries.
   ". .  In the case of the orang-utan it took at least six months to teach
          .


her to say 'Papa.' This word was selected not only because it is a very
primitive sound, but also because it combined two elements of vocaliza-
tion to which orang-utans and chimpanzees are         .   .  unaccustomed,
                                                              .


namely: the use of lips and an expired vowel. ..." Presumably, this
latter fact precluded the occurrence of the "word" by accident, and the
danger of interpreting as a "word" some mere natural sound. The teacher
manipulated the ape's lips, and also made the motions and sounds for her
with his own mouth.
   "At the end of six months, one day of her own accord, out of lesson
time, she said 'Papa' quite distinctly and repeated it on command.      .  ..


She never forgot it after that and finally recognized it as my name. When
asked 'Where is Papa?' she would at once point to me or pat me on the
shoulder."
   Once, while being carried into the water, "she was panic-stricken^ she
clung with her arms about my neck; kissed me again and again and kept
saying 'Papa! Papa! Papa!' Of course, I went no further after that
pathetic appeal."
   Her next word was "cup." The greatest art was needed to teach her
the purely physical trick of pronouncing k with an open vowel, ka; but
once this was learned, "after a few lessons when I snowed her the cup
and asked 'What is this?' she would say 'cup' very plainly. Once when ill
at night she leaned out of her hammock and said 'cup, cup, cup,' which
I naturally understood to mean that she was thirsty and which proved to
be the case. I think this showed fairly conclusively that there was a
glimmering idea of the connection of the word with the object of her
desire." (Furness, "Observations on the Mentality of Chimpanzees and
Orang-Utans," pp. 281-284.)
   Once the idea of the spoken word was awakened in the ape, which
awakening took all of six months, the learning of a second word was
chiefly a matter of conquering the unnaturalness of the physical process.
Who knows how far this development might have gone if the subject had
lived?
                              LANGUAGE                               107
vista upon the mysterious problem of origins. For its begin-
nings are not natural adjustments, ways to means; they are
purposeless lalling-instincts, primitive aesthetic reactions, and
dreamlike associations of ideas that fasten on such material.
The preparations for language are much lower in the rational
scale than word-uses; they can be found below the evolution-
ary level of any communication by sounds.
   Moreover, this originally impractical, or better, conceptual,
use of speech is borne out by the fact that all attempts to
teach apes or the speechless "wild children" to talk, by the
method of making them ask for something, have failed;
whereas all cases where the use of language has dawned on
an individual, simian or human, under such difficult cir-
cumstances, have been independent of the practical use of
the word at the moment. Helen Keller's testimony has already
been cited (pp. 62-64); after all her teacher's efforts in formal
daily lessons to make the child use words like "cup" and
"doll" to obtain the denoted objects, the significance of the
word "water" suddenly burst upon her, not when she needed
water, but when the stream gushed over her hand! Likewise,
Yerkes' efforts to make Chim use an articulate syllable to ask
for a piece of banana all failed; he articulated no "word"
resembling the speech of man, nor did he seem to establish
a relation between the sound and any particular object. 26
Furness, on the other hand, carefully kept all practical in-
terests out of his experiment. He tried only to associate an
impression, a visual experience, with a word, so that by
constant association the two should fuse, not as sign and re-
sult, but as name and image; and he has had the greatest
success on record so far as I know. 27
   But the most decisive and, at the same time, pathetic*evi-
dence that the utilitarian view of language is a mistake, may
be found in the story of Victor, the Savage of Aveyron, writ-
ten by the young doctor who undertook to study and educate
him. Since the boy always took notice when anyone exclaimed
"Oh!" and even imitated the sound, Dr. Itard undertook to

   26 See Yerkes and Learned, op. cit., p. 56: "The experimenter suc-
ceeded in training him to speak for food as a dog may readily be taught
to do. This he did, however, not in imitation of the trainer but to secure
the food."
   27 See Furness, op. cit., p. 285: "As to a comprehension of the con-
nection of spoken words with objects and actions both the orang-utan and
the chimpanzee, I think, exceed any of our domestic animals; both of my
anthropoids have been able to understand what I said to them, more
intelligently than any professionally trained animals I have ever seen. In
their education the enticement of food has never been used as an incentive
to action, and praise and petting have been the only rewards. In other
words my object has been to endeavor to make them show signs of
thought rather than a perfunctory performance of tricks."
108               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
make him use the word "eau" as a sign when he wanted
water; but this attempt failed because he used every sign but
the vocal one, and water could not be indefinitely withheld
to force the issue. So a second attempt was made with the
word "lait," of which Itard gives the following account:
    "The fourth day of this, my second experiment, I suc-
ceeded to the utmost of my wishes; I heard Victor pronounce
distinctly, in a manner, it must be confessed, rather harsh,
the word lait, which he repeated almost incessantly; it was
the first time that an articulate sound had escaped his lips,
and of course I did not hear it without the most lively satis-
faction. I nevertheless made afterwards an observation, which
deduced very much from the advantage which it was reason-
able to expect from the first instance of success. It was not
till the moment, when, despairing of a happy result, I actually

poured the milk into the cup which he presented to me, the
word lait escaped him again, with evident demonstrations of
joy; and it was not till after I had poured it out a second
time, by way of reward, that he repeated the expression. It
is evident from hence, that the result of the experiment was

far from accomplishing my intentions; the word pronounced,
instead of being the sign of a want, it appeared, from the time
in which it was articulated, to be merely an exclamation of
joy. If this word had been uttered before the thing that he
desired had been granted, my object would have been nearly
accomplished: then the true sense of speech would have been
soon acquired by Victor; a point of communication would
have been established between him and me, and the most
rapid progress must necessarily have ensued. Instead of this
I had obtained only an expression of the pleasure which he
felt, insignificant as it related to himself, and useless to us
both. ... It was generally only during the enjoyment of the
thing, that the word lait was pronounced. Sometimes he hap-
pened to utter it before, and at other times a little after, but
always without having any view in the use of it. I do not
attach any more importance to his spontaneous repetition
of it, when he happens to wake during the course of the
night." 28
  Another word which Victor acquired quite spontaneously
was "Li," which Itard identifies as the name of a young girl,
Julie,who stayed at the house for several weeks, to Victor's
great delight; but this word he uttered to himself, all the
time, and "even during the night, at those moments when
there is reason to believe that he is in a profound sleep,"
so no importance was attached to it as a sign of reason.

  28 The Savage of Aveyron, pp.   93-96.
                              LANGUAGE                               109
   Unfortunately, the young doctor was such a faithful dis-
ciple of   Locke and Condillac that after his "failure" with the
word    "lait" he gave up the attempt to teach the Wild Boy
spoken    language, and tried to instruct him in the deaf-mutes'
alphabet instead. Victor picked up a few spoken words, sub-
sequently, by himself; but as he merely said them when he
contemplated their objects with joy or sorrow, not when
he lacked anything, no one paid much attention to these
"mere exclamations" or made response to them.
    Young children learn to speak, after the fashion of Victor,
by constantly using words to bring things into their minds,
not into their hands. They learn it fully whether their parents
consciously teach them by wrong methods or right or not at
all. Why did Victor not defy the doctor's utilitarian theories

and learn language by the babbling method?
    Because he was already about twelve years old, and the
lalling-impulse of early childhood was all but completely
outgrown. The tendency to constant vocalization seems to
be a passing phase of our instinctive life. If language is not
developed during this period, the individual is handicapped
—   like the apes—  by a lack of spontaneous phonetic material
to facilitate his speech experiments. The production of sounds
is conscious then, and is used economically instead of prod-
igally. Victor did not articulate to amuse himself; his first
word had to be stimulated. Wild Peter, we are told, never
babbled to himself, though he sang a great deal; Kamala,
the surviving little "wolf-girl" found at Midnapur, had learned
about forty words at the end of six years in human surround-
ings, and formed sentences of two or three words; but even
with this vocabulary, which would serve a three-ye^r-olcL
to carry on incessant conversations, Kamala never talked
unless she was spoken 1o. 29 The impulse to chatter had been
outgrown without being exploited for the acquisition of lan-
guage.
    In a social environment, the vocalizing and articulating
instinct of babyhood is fostered by response, and as the
sounds become symbols their use becomes a dominant habit.
Yet the passing of the instinctive phase is marked by the fact
that a great many phonemes which do not meet with response
are completely lost. 30 Undoubtedly that is why children, who

  29 The most trustworthy, because contemporary, accounts of the Mid-
napur children are probably the brief notes published in the American
Journal of Psychology by Kellogg and Squires. See P. C. Squires, " 'Wolf-
Children' of India," XXXVIII (1927), 31 3-3 15; W. N. Kellogg, "More
About the 'Wolf-Children' of India," XLII (1931), 508-509, and "A
Further Note on the 'Wolf-Children' of India,"    XLV     (1934), 149-150.
  30 Thus Israel Latif, speaking of the "lalling stage" of babyhood, says:
1   10              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
have not entirely lost the impulse to make random sounds
which their mother tongue does not require, can so easily
learn a foreign language and even master several at once,
like many English youngsters born in India, who learn not
only one vernacular, but speak with every native servant in
whatever happens to be his dialect. A British psychologist,
J. W. Tomb, has called attention to this phenomenon and
concluded from it that children have a linguistic intuition
which is lost later in life. 31
   But intuition is a slippery word, which has to cover, in
this case, understanding, reproduction, and use   i.e.     —
                                                       inde-
pendent, analogous application      —
                                   of words. It is hard to imag-
ine any "intuition" that would bestow so many powers. It
is better, perhaps, to say that there is an optimum period

of learning, and this is a stage of mental development in
which several impulses and interests happen to coincide: the
lalling instinct, the imitative impulse, a natural interest in
distinctive sounds, and a great sensitivity to "expressiveness"
of any sort. Where any one of these characteristics is absent
or is not synchronized with the others, the "linguistic intui-
tion" miscarries.
   The last requirement here mentioned is really the "higher
function" of the mind that shines forth so conspicuously in
human intercourse; yet it is the one that linguists and psy-
chologists either overlook entirely, or certainly do not credit
to early childhood. The peculiar impressionability of child-
hood is usually treated under the rubric of attention to exact
colors, sounds, etc.; but what is much more important, I
think, is the child's tendency to read a vague sort of meaning
into pure visual and auditory forms. Childhood is the great
period of synaesthesia; sounds and colors and temperatures,
forms and feelings, may have certain characters in common,
by which a vowel may "be" of a certain color, a tone may
"be" large or small, low or high, bright or dark, etc. There
is a strong tendency to form associations among sensa that
are not practically fixed in the world, even to confuse such
random impressions. Most of all, the over-active feelings
"Many more sounds are produced by the infant during this period than
are later used, at least in its own language.   ." (To this effect he
                       —
                                               .   .


cites many authorities    Stern, Lorimer, K. C. More, Stanley Hall,
Preyer, and Conradi.) "Now, out of this astonishingly rich and varied
                                                                 —
repertoire of sounds, those which are used by the child's elders are re-
inforced, and become habitual; the others cease to be uttered."    "The
Physiological Basis of Linguistic Development and the Ontogeny of
Meaning," Psychological Review, XLI (1934), 55-85, 153-176, 246-264.
See esp. p. 60.
  3i See his article "On the Intuitive Capacity of Children to Understand
Spoken Language," British Journal of Psychology, XVI (1925-26),
53-55.
                         LANGUAGE                          111
fastenupon such flotsam material. Fear lives in pure Ges-
talten,warning or friendliness emanates from objects that
have no faces and no voices, no heads or hands; for they all
                                             —
have "expression" for the child, though not as adults often
          —
suppose anthropomorphic form. One of my earliest recol-
lections is that chairs and tables always kept the same look,
in a way that people did not, and that I was awed by the
sameness of that appearance. They symbolized such-and-such
a mood; even as a little child I would not have judged that
they felt it (if any one had raised such a silly question).
                                     —
There was just such-and-such a look dignity, indifference, or
              —
ominousness about them. They continued to convey that
silent message no matter what you did to them.
   A mind to which the stern character of an armchair is
more immediately apparent than its use or its position in the
room, is over-sensitive to expressive forms. It grasps analo-
gies that a riper experience  would reject as absurd. It fuses
sensa that practical thinking must keep apart. Yet it is just
this crazy play of associations, this uncritical fusion of im-
pressions, that exercises the powers of symbolic transforma-
tion. To project feelings into outer objects is the first way
of symbolizing, and thus of conceiving those feelings. This
activity belongs to about the earliest period of childhood that
memory can recover. The conception of "self," which is
usually thought to mark the beginning of actual memory,
may possibly depend on this process of symbolically epito-
mizing our feelings.
  From this dawn of memory, where we needs must begin
any first-hand record, to adolescence, there is a constant de-
crease in such dreamlike experience, a growing shift^rom
subjective, symbolic, to practical associations." Sense-data now
keep to their categories,^ and signify further events. Percepts
become less weighted with irrelevant feeling and fantasy,
and are more readily ranged in an objective order. But if
in theory we count backward over the span which none of
us recollect, and which covers* the period of learning lan-
         —
guage is it likely that the mind was realistic in its earlier
phase? Is it not probable that association was even more
trivial, more ready, and that the senses fused more completely
in yielding impressions? No experience belongs to any class
as yet, in this primitive phase. Consider, now, that the vocal
play of the infant fills his world with audible actions, the
nearest and most completely absorbing stimuli, because they
are both inner and outer, autonomously produced yet un-
expected, inviting that repetition of accidental motions which
William James deemed the source of all voluntary acts; in-
triguing, endlessly variable noises mysteriously connected with
112              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
the child himself! For a while, at least, his idle experiments
in vocalization probably fill his world.
   If, now, his audible acts wake echoes in his surroundings
that is to say, if his elders reply to them — there is a growth
of experience; for the baby appears to recognize, gradually,
that the sound which happens there and comes to him, is
the same as his lalling. This is a rudimentary abstraction;
by that sameness he becomes aware of the tone, the product
of his activity, which absorbs his interest. He repeats that
sound rather than another. His ear has made its first judg-
ment.  A   sound (such as "da-da," or "ma-ma," probably) has
been conceived, and his diffuse awareness of vocalizing gives
way to an apparently delightful awareness of a vocable.
   It is doubtful whether a child who never heard any articu-
late sounds but his own would ever become conscious of
different phonemes. Voice and uttered syllable and the feel-
ing of utterance would probably remain one experience to
him; the babbling period might come and go without his
recognizing any product of his own activity. If this guess
is correct, it is easy to understand why Victor and Wild Peter
did not invent language, and were nearly, if not entirely,
past the hope of acquiring it when they were socialized.
  A    new vocable is an outstanding Gestalt. It is a possession,
too,  because it may be had at will, and this itself makes it
very interesting. Itard tells us that when Victor pronounced
his first word he repeated it "almost incessantly"; as does
every baby who has learned a new syllable. Moreover, an
articulate sound is an entirely unattached item, a purely
phenomenal experience without externally fixed relations; it
lies wide open to imaginative and emotional uses, synaesthetic
identifications, chance associations. It is the readiest thing
in the world to become a symbol when a symbol is wanted.
The next sharp and emotional arrest of consciousness, the
next deeply interesting experience that coincides with hearing
or uttering the vocable, becomes fixed by association with
that one already distinct item; it may be the personality of
the mother, the concrete character of the bottle, or what not,
that becomes thus identified with the recognizable, producible
sound; whatever it is, the baby's mind has hold of it through
the word, and can invoke a conception of it by uttering the
word, which has thus become the name of the thing.
   For a considerable time, playing with conceptions seems
to be the main interest and aim in speaking. To name things
is a thrilling experience, a tremendous satisfaction. Helen
Keller bears witness to the sense of power it bestows. Word
and conception become fused in that early period wherein
both grow up together, so that even in later life they are
                              LANGUAGE                                    113
hard to separate. In a sense, language is conception, and
conception is the frame of perception; or, as Sapir has put
it, "Language is heuristic ... in that its forms predetermine

for us certain modes of observation and interpretation.                   .   .   .


While it may be looked upon as a symbolic system which
reports or refers or otherwise substitutes for direct experi-
ence, it does not as a matter of actual behavior stand apart
from or run parallel to direct experience but completely
interpenetrates with it. This is indicated by the widespread
feeling, particularly among primitive people, of that virtual
identity or close correspondence of word and thing which
leads to the magic of spells.      .Many lovers of nature, for
                                       .   .



instance, do not feel that they are truly in touch with it
until they have mastered the names of a great many flowers
and trees, as though the primary world of reality were a
verbal one and as though one could not get close to nature
unless one first mastered the terminology which somehow
magically expresses it." 32
    The fact is that our primary world of reality is a verbal
 one. Without words our imagination cannot retain distinct
objects and their relations, but out of sight is out of mind.
 Perhaps that is why Kohler's apes could use a stick to reach
 a banana outside the cage so long as the banana and the
 stick could be seen in one glance, but not if they had to
 turn their eyes away from the banana to see the stick. Ap-
 parently they could not look at the one and think of the
         A
 other. 33   child who had as much practical initiative as the
 apes, turning away from the coveted object, yet still murmur-
 ing "banana," would have seen the stick in its instrumental
 capacity at once.                                        ym
    The transformation of experience into concepts, not the
 elaboration of signals and symptoms, is the motive of lan-
 guage. Speech is through and through symbolic; and only
 sometimes signific. Any attempt to trace it back entirely to
 the need of communication, neglecting the formulative, ab-
 stractive experience at the roolt of it, must land us in the
 sort of enigma that the problem of linguistic origins has
 long presented. I have tried, instead, to trace it to the char-
 acteristic human activity, symbolic transformation and ab-
straction,     of which pre-human beginnings                 may perhaps be
                             Yet we have not found the
attributed to the highest apes.
commencement of language anywhere between their state
and ours. Even in man, who has all its prerequisites, it de-

  32 From Sapir, Article "Language,"           p.   157,   by permission of The
Macmillan Company, publishers.
  33 Kohler,   The Mentality of Apes, p. 37.
114                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
pends on education not only for its full development, but
for its very inception. How, then, did it ever arise? And
why do all men possess it?
   It could only have arisen in a race in which the lower
                                      —
forms of symbolistic thinking dream, ritual, superstitious
       —
fancy were already highly developed, i.e. where the process
of symbolization, though primitive, was very active. Com-
munal life in such a group would be characterized by vigor-
ous indulgence in purely expressive acts, in ritual gestures,
dances, etc., and probably by a strong tendency to fantastic
terrors and joys. The liberation from practical interests that
is already marked in the apes would make rapid progress in
a species with a definitely symbolistic turn of mind; conven-
tional meanings would gradually imbue every originally ran-
dom act, so that the group-life as a whole would have an
exciting, vaguely transcendental tinge, without any definable
or communicable body of ideas to cling to.                 A
                                                      wealth of
dance-forms and antics, poses and manoeuvres might flourish
in a society that was somewhat above the apes' in non-prac-
tical interests, and rested on a slightly higher development of
the symbolific brain-functions. There are quite articulated
play-forms, verging on dance-forms, in the natural repertoire
of the chimpanzees; 34 with but a little further elaboration,
these would become most obvious material for symbolic ex-
pression. It is not at all impossible that ritual, solemn and
significant, antedates the evolution of language.
   In a vocalizing animal, such actions would undoubtedly
                                                     —
be accompanied by purely fanciful sounds wavering tones,

  34 Even at the risk of letting Kohler's apes steal the show in this chap-
ter,I must quote his account of these plays. Tschego and Grande de-
veloped a game of spinning round and round like dervishes, which found
favor with all the others. "Any game of two together," says Kohler, "was
apt to turn into this 'spinning-top' play, which appeared to express a
climax of friendly and amicable joie de vivre. The resemblance to a
human dance became truly striking when the rotations were rapid, or
when Tschego, for instance, stretched her arms out horizontally as she
                                  —
spun round. Tschego and Chica whose favorite fashion during 1916
                  —
was this 'spinning' sometimes combined a forward movement with the
rotations, and so they revolved slowly round their own axes and along
the playground.
   "The whole group of chimpanzees sometimes combined in more
elaborate motion-patterns. For instance, two would wrestle and tumble
near a post; soon their movements would become more regular and tend
to describe a circle round the post as a center. One after another, the
rest of the group approach, join the two, and finally march in an orderly
fashion round and round the post. The character of their movements
changes; they no longer walk, they trot, and as a rule with special em-
phasis on one foot, while the other steps lightly; thus a rough approxi-
mate rhythm develops, and they tend to 'keep time' with one another.   ..  .


   "It seems to me extraordinary that there should arise quite spontane-
ously, among chimpanzees, anything that so strongly suggests the dancing
of some primitive tribes." (The Mentality of Apes, pp. 326-327.)
                                           LANGUAGE                                 115
strings of syllables, echoing shouts. Voice-play, which as an
instinct is lost after infancy, wouldbe perpetuated in a group
by the constant stimulation of response, as it is with us when
we learn to speak. It is easy enough to imagine that young
human beings would excite each other to shout, as two apes
excite one another to jump, rotate, and strike poses; and the
shouting would soon be formalized into song. Once the vocal
habits are utilized, as in speech or song, we know that they
do not become lost, but are fixed as a life-long activity. In
a social group, the infantile lalling-instinct would be con-
stantly reinforced, and instead of being outgrown, would
become conventionalized in social play-forms. "Never a no-
madic horde in the wilderness, but must already have had
its songs," says Wilhelm von Humboldt, "for man as a species
is  a singing creature.      ." 35 Song, the formalization of
                                       .   .



voice-play, probably preceded speech.
   Jespersen, who is certainly one of our great authorities on
language, suggests that speech and song may well have sprung
from the same source (as Herder and Rousseau, without
                            imagined long ago). "Word-tones
really scientific foundation,
were originally frequent, but meaningless," he observes; "aft-
erwards they were dropped in some languages, while in others
they were utilized for sense-distinguishing purposes." 36 Fur-
thermore, he points out that in passionate speech the voice
still   tends        to   fluctuate,       that     civilization   only reduces this
effect  by reducing passionate utterance, and that savages
still use a sing-song manner of speaking; and in fine, he de-

clares, "These facts and considerations all point to the con-
clusion that there was once a time when all speech was song,
or rather when these two actions were not yet differenti-
ated.    .    .
                  ." 37   *
  Yet it is hard to believe that song was ever an essential
form of communication. How, then, was language derived
from it? He does not tell us; but the difficulty of tracing an
instrument like language to a free exercise like song is mini-
mized in his sagacious reflection: "Although we now regard
the communication of thought as the main object of speak-
ing, there is no reason for thinking that this has always been
the case." 38
   Strangely enough, Professor Jespersen seems to be un-
acquainted with an essay by J. Donovan, "The Festal Origin
of Human Speech," which appeared in the form of two
articles in Mind as long ago as 189 1-92, 39 and which de-

     35 Die       sprachphilosophischen         Werke Wilhelm von Humboldts          (ed.
Steinthal,         1884), p. 289.
     zs Language, p. 418, n.                   37 Ibid., p. 420.     38 Ibid., p. 437.
     39 Vol.      XVI
                  (O. S.), pp.     498-506, and vol. XVII, pp. 325-339.
116                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
velops, quite fully and logically, the very idea he advances.
Probably the fact that it appeared in a philosophical journal
caused it to escape the notice of philologists. Its thesis, how-
ever, is so well corroborated by Jespersen's more recent and
perhaps more reliable findings, that I present it here as a
very suggestive and arresting hypothesis; the sort of idea that
throws light at least on the problem of human articulate-
ness, once we accept the Leitmotif of symbolic activity, rather
than intelligent signaling, as the key to language.
   Donovan's theory is, in brief, that sound is peculiarly well
adapted to become symbolic because our attention to it re-
quires no utilitarian motive. "The passivity of the ear allowed
auditory impressions to force themselves into consciousness
in season and out of season, when they were interesting to
the dominant desires of the animal and when they were not.
These impressions got further into consciousness, so to speak,
before desire could examine their right of entrance, than was
possible for impressions which could be annihilated by a
wink or a turn of the head." 40 Since noises have this intrinsic
and commanding interest, and the ear cannot be closed, they
were peculiarly well suited to become "free" items where
they had no biological value, and to be utilized by the im-
agination in sheer play. Especially in the "play-excitement"
following successful communal enterprise (one is reminded
of the apes' outburst of pure joie de vivre culminating in a
dervish-like spin), such noises as rhythmic beating and hand-
clapping were used to emphasize the play-mood and keep
it steady—  for this primeval man was probably, like the ape,
incredibly distractible. The voice could be used, like the
drum, to attract attention and accentuate rhythm; and thus
the force of a change of pitch to make some notes stand out
 (one in four, etc.) was naturally discovered. Being more
variable than the drum, voices soon made patterns, and the
long wandering melodies of primitive song became an in-
tegral part of communal celebration.
   First the actions of the "dance" would tend to become
pantomimic, reminiscent of what had caused the great ex-
citement. They would become ritualized, and hold the mind
to the celebrated event. In other words, there would be con-
ventional modes of dancing appropriate to certain occasions,
so intimately associated with that kind of occasion that they
would presently uphold and embody the concept of it in           —
other words, there would emerge symbolic gestures.
  The   voice,  used to accompany such ritual acts, would
elaborate its own conventions; and in a babbling species, cer-

  40 Donovan,   "The Festal Origin of Human Speech," part I, p. 499.
                                  LANGUAGE                                117
tain syllables  would find favor above others and would give
color to festal plays.
   Now, the centering of certain festivities round particular
individuals, human or other            —
                                 death-dances round a corpse,
triumph-dances round a captive female, a bear, a treasure,
            —
or a chief would presently cause the articulate noises pecul-
iar to such situations to become associated with that central
figure, so that the sight of it would stimulate people to utter
those syllables, or more likely rhythmic groups of syllables,
even outside the total festive situation. "And every moment
during which such objects, connected as they are with the
natural appetites of the animal, could be dominated by the
emotional strength of festal play, and kept, however dimly,
in consciousness, without firing the train of passions natural
to them (e.g. to food, females), would mean the melting
away of a link in the chain which held the animals below
the possibility of human development." 41
   "In the early history of articulate sounds they could make
no meaning themselves, but they preserved and got intimately
associated with the peculiar feelings and perceptions that
came most prominently into the minds of the festal players
during their excitement. Articulate sounds           could only
                                                           .   .   .


wait while they entered into the order imposed on them by
the players' wild imitations of actions, and then preserve them
in that order. 42
   "Without the vestige of a conscious intention behind it,
this impulse (the play) induced the players to dwell on some
sort of an image of an individual in relation to the actions
imitated, whilst rhythmic and articulate utterances were ab-
sorbing ear and mind, and, at the same time, getting, jixed-s
upon the penteptions which they were associated with re-
peatedly." Thus a rhythmic group of syllables conventionally

  41 Ibid., part II, p. 330.    The importance here given to the festal as
opposed to the impulsive       spirit in   the origination of speech stands in
striking contrast to the opinion expressed by Markey, who also recognizes
the probability of an emotional, perhaps ritual, source; in The Symbolic
Process Markey writes: "Symbols must have developed only after long
association had conditioned instinctive cries or sounds to specific be-
havior in which two or more individuals were involved. In order that the
mnesic traces become sufficiently vivid and consistent to result in the
necessary integration, a highly emotional state was probably neces-
sary. While the festive group occasion of song and dance may have
served as a background, it is probable that definite sex behaviour fur-
nished the relatively similar, recurrent, and specific activity necessary for
the conditioning process associated with a highly emotional facilitating
state. Specific sounds being associated with this type of behaviour, would
furnish a similar stimulus which could be produced and interchanged by
each person" (p. 159). But specific sex behavior is just the sort of overt
expression that obviates the need of imaginative consciousness and its
symbolic expression.
  42 Donovan, op. cit., part II, p. 332.
 118                   PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY

                                                     —
 associated with the object or central figure of a certain type
of celebration   —say, with a certain warrior    "would become
 its vocal mark, and be uttered when any objects of nature
 gave impressions which could, however faintly, touch the
 springs of the latent mass of sensations belonging to the festal
imagining of the destroying warrior." 43
    This passage is interesting for two reasons: (1) because it
 assumes that the original use of language lies in naming,
fixating, conceiving objects, so that the communicative use
of words is only a secondary one, a practical application of
something that has already been developed at a deeper psy-
chological level; and (2) because it suggests the very early,
very primitive operation of metaphor in the evolution of
speech. The nature of metaphor is another topic which can-
not be properly understood without a symbolistic rather than
a signalistic view of language; but to this matter we will
presently return.
    "When particular syllables got fixed upon particular ac-
tions," Donovan continues, "they would be brought up with
them, and here two chief interests of the festal excitement
would begin to clash, the interest of significance, and that
belonging to the impulse to make the vocal apparatus pro-
duce the easiest possible enticements to the ear. ... In the
familiar observation of travellers about 'the unmeaning inter-
jections scattered here and there to assist the metre' of savage
songs, as well as in the most polished alliterations, assonances,
rhymes, refrains and burthens, there can be no doubt that
we behold the demands for aural absorption trying to make
their way among syllables which have been fixed by sig-
nificance." 44
    Recent anthropological literature has certainly borne out
the observations of the travellers he cites; we need only turn
to Boas' statement, quoted by Jespersen, 45 that Indian song
may be carried on purely rhythmic nonsense syllables, or
"consist largely of such syllables, with a few interspersed
words suggesting certain ideas and feelings; or it may rise
to the expression of emotions connected with warlike deeds,
with religious feeling, love, or even to the praises of the
beauties of nature." 46
    The first symbolic value of words is probably purely con-
notative, like that of ritual; a certain string of syllables, just

  Mlbid., part   II,   pp. 334-335.
  44 Ibid., part II, p. 337.
  45 Jespersen, Language, p. 437.
  46 The purely phonetic origin of song texts survives in   our "hey-nonny-
nonny" and   "tralala"; Donovan remarks that such nonsense syllables
have been relegated entirely to the choruses of our songs, and are no
longer mixed with genuinely verbal elements; but in purely festal songs,
                             LANGUAGE                              119
like a rite, embodies a concept, as "hallelujah" embodies much
of the concept expressed in the Easter service. But "halle-
lujah" is not the name of any thing, act, or property; it is
neither noun, verb, adjective, nor any other syntactical part
of speech. So long as articulate sound serves only in the ca-
pacity of "hallelujah" or "alack-a-day," it cannot fairly be
called language; for although it has connotation, it has no
denotation. But denotation is the essence of language, be-
cause it frees the symbol from its original instinctive utter-
ance and marks its deliberate use, outside of the total situation
that gave it birth.   A denotative word is related at once to
a conception, which may be ever so vague, and to a thing
(or event, quality, person, etc.) which is realistic and public;
so it weans the conception away from the purely momentary
and personal experience and fastens it on a permanent ele-
ment which may enter into all sorts of situations. Thus the
definiteness of sticks and stones, persons and acts and places,
creeps into the recollection and the anticipation of experi-
ence, as its symbols, with their whole load of imagery and
feeling, gradually become anchored to real objects.
   The utterance of conception-laden sounds, at the sight of
things that exemplify one or another of the conceptions which
those sounds carry, is first a purely expressive reaction; only
long habit can fix an association so securely that the word
and the object are felt to belong together, so that the one is
always a reminder of the other. But when this point is reached,
the humanoid creature will undoubtedly utter the sound in
sport, and thus move the object into nearer and clearer
prominence in his mind, until he may be said to grasp a
conception of it by means of the sound; and now the'gbuncT
               "*
is a word.
   In a sociable speciesthis game would presumably become
a joint affair almost at once. The word uttered by one pre-
Adamite would evoke a fuzzy, individual conception in an-
other; but if the word, besides, stimulating that conception,
were tied up to the same object for the hearer as it was for
the speaker, the word would have a common meaning for

such as drinking and cheering songs, we still find such conglomerations
of words and babble as:

             "With a veevo, with a vivo,
              With a veevo-vivo-vum,
              Vum get a rat-trap bigger than a cat-trap,
              Vum get a cat-trap bigger than a rat-trap,
              Cannibal, cannibal, sizz-boom-bah,
              (College, college), rah rah rah!"

Nothing in the savages' repertoire could answer better to Boas' descrip-
tion, "nonsense syllables with a few interspersed words."
120               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
them both. The hearer, thinking his own thought of the
object,would be moved thereby to say the word, too. The
two creatures would look at one another with a light of
understanding dawning under their great brow-ridges, and
would say some more words, and grin at some more objects.
Perhaps they would join hands and chant words together.
Undoubtedly such a wonderful "fashion" would become im-
mensely popular.
   Thus in a genuinely pre-human manner, and not by social
contract or practical forethought, articulate sounds with a
festal expressive value may have become representative. Of
course this is pure speculation; but all theory is merely specula-
tion in the light of significant facts. Linguists have avowedly
given it up, in this case, for lack of such facts; a general
study of symbolism may supply them, and yield at least a
plausible theory in place of the very unsatisfactory current
conviction that language simply cannot have begun in any
thinkable way.
   But another mystery remains. Given the word, and the
thought of a thing through the word, how did language rise
from a sheer atomic conglomeration of symbols to the state
of a complex relational structure, a logical edifice, such as
it is among all tribes and nations on earth? For language is

much more than a set of symbols. It is essentially an organic,
functioning system, of which the primary elements as well as
the constructed products are symbols. Its forms do not stand
alone, like so many monoliths each marking its one isolated
grave; but instead, they tend to integrate, to make complex
patterns, and thus to point out equally complex relationships
in the world, the realm of their meanings.
   This tendency is comprehensible enough if we consider
the preeminence which a named element holds in the kaleido-
scopic flow of sheer sense and feeling. For as soon as an
object is denoted, it can be held, so that anything else that
is experienced at the same time, instead of crowding it out,
exists with it, in contrast or in unison or in some other
definite way. If the ape who wants a banana beyond his cage
could only keep "banana, banana," in his head while he
looks behind him at the convenient bamboo, he could use
the rod to fetch his lunch. But without language, relations
are either taken for granted in action     —   as by a dog, for
instance, who looks hopefully inside the garbage pail, or
takes shelter from punishment under the sofa      —   or they can-
not be experienced at all. The ape simply     knew  nothing  about
the relation of stick and fruit when       their co-presence   was
not visible.
   This phenomenon of holding on to the object by means
of its symbol is so elementary that language has grown up on
                                       LANGUAGE                            121

it.    A
       word fixes something in experience, and makes it the
nucleus of memory, an available conception. Other impres-
sions group themselves round the denoted thing and are
associatively recalled when it is named.                 A
                                                  whole occasion
may be retained in thought by the name of an object or a
person that was its center. The one word "river" may bring
back the excitement of a dangerous crossing, a flood, a
rescue, or the thought of building a house at the water's edge.
The name of a person, we all know, brings to mind any
number of events in which he figured. That is to say, a
mnemonic word establishes a context in which it occurs to
us; and in a state of innocence we use it in the expectation
that it will be understood with its context. A baby who says
"cookie" means, and trusts his nurse to know, that he sees,
or wants, or has a cookie; if he says "out" he may mean that
he is going out, that someone has gone out, that the dog
wants to go out, etc., and he confidently expects his utter-
ance to be understood with its tacit context.
    Carl Biihler has called this elementary stage the "empractic"
use of language. 47 The context is the situation of the speaker
in a setting visible to the hearer; at the point where their
thinking is to converge, a word is used, to fix the crucial
concept. The word is built into the speaker's action or situa-
tion, in a diacritical capacity, settling a doubt, deciding a
response. 48
    The distinction between the novel predication in a state-
ment and the merely qualifying situation, given by visible
and demonstrable circumstance (Biihler calls it das Zeigfeld),
or verbally by exposition (das Symbolfeld), was recognized
fifty years ago by Philip Wegener; in a little book called
 I)'ntersuchungm     iiber die   Grundfragen des Sprachlebens
Wegener expounded the growth of explicit statement from
such a matrix, such communication by mere key words,
eked out by pointing and by their setting in an obvious state
of affairs. He recognized two general principles of linguistic
development: emendation, which begets syntactical forms of
speech, and metaphor, the source of generality. The first
principle serves to solve the problem of structure, so I will
briefly set        it     forth.
      Since a word, in the elementary social use which babies

      47 See Biihler, Sprachtheorie, chap, iii, passim.
      48 "Where a diacritical verbal sign is built into the action, it frequently
needs no surrounding framework or other verbal indicators. For in place
of such substitute it is surrounded by that for which they are proxy, and
is supported by it. That the patron of a restaurant intends to consume
something ... is thoroughly understood by his partner (the waiter). The
customer uses a verbal sign       only at the moot point in his otherwise
                                   .   .   .


tacit,            behavior, as a diacritical sign. He inserts it, and the
           intelligible
ambiguity is removed; that is the empractic use of language." Ibid., p. 158.
122                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
and foreigners make of it, and which probably represents a
primitive stage of its communicative function, is meant to
convey a concept not of a mere object, but also of the part
played by that object in a situation which is supposed to be
"understood," such a single word is really, in meaning, a
one-word sentence. But it requires a certain amount of good
will and like-mindedness to understand the speaker of a one-
word sentence.       Wealways assume that our own attitude
toward things is shared by our fellows, and needs only the
"empractic" use of a vocable to designate our particular
thought in that setting, until we find ourselves misunder-
stood. Then we supplement the lone verb or noun with
                     —
demonstratives little words like "da!" "his!" From such
syllables, added as supplements to the one-word sentence,
arise inflections, which indicate more specifically what the
word-sentence asserts about the expressed concept. Wegener
has traced interesting parallels between inflections and demon-
stratives. More and more vocables are need to modify the
original expression, and to accompany and emphasize gestures
and attitudes; so the grammatical structure evolves by emen-
dation of an ambiguous expression, and naturally follows quite
closely the relational pattern of the situation that evokes it
In this way, the context of the primitive word-sentence is
more and more adequately expressed in verbal terms. At first
modifiers and identifiers follow the crucial word that expressed
the required predication in too great haste. "Appositives and
relative clauses are subsequent corrections of our deficient
presentations." 49 Hence the cognate nature of relative and
interrogative, or relative and demonstrative pronouns. All
these auxiliary utterances Wegener calls the "exposition" of
the original word, which contains the real "novelty" to be
asserted. This exposition finally becomes the verbal context in
which the assertion is made. When the speaker is fully aware
of the context and the need of stating it, his speech is full-
fledged. As Wegener puts it, "Only the development of speech
as an art and a science finally impresses on us the duty of
rendering the exposition before the novel predication." 50
   Since language is grafted on a vocalizing tendency in im-
mature humans and is kept up only by becoming habit,
linguistic forms very easily become fixed, because they are
habitual responses. The trick of accompanying all communica-
tion with words quickly becomes an ingrained custom; so
that words without important meanings creep in simply to
fill gaps in the vocal pattern, and utterances become sentences

of certain standard forms. At the highest development of
  4 » Wegener,   Untersuchungen, p. 34.
  so Ibid., p. 40.
                            LANGUAGE                          123
these language-making functions, the resultant systems are
immensely inflected. Then separate items, or "roots," become
conventionally attached to very bare items of conception,
abstractable from the articulated whole; and the logic of lan-
guage, which appears to us in our awareness of syntax,
emerges as an amazing intellectual structure.
   The significant feature of Wegener's theory is that it
derives grammatical structure from the undifferentiated con-
tent of the one-word sentence, and the literal, fixed denota-
tion of separate words from the total assertion by gradual
crystallization, instead of trying to build the complexities
of discursive speech out of supposed primitive "words" with
distinctly substantive or distinctly relational connotations. No
savage society of unintellectual hunters and squaws could
ever build a language; they could only produce it by some
such unconscious process as endless misunderstanding, modi-
fication, reduplication for emphasis (as we reduplicate baby
       —
words "goody-goody," "naughty-naughty," "bye-bye," etc.)
and "filling in" by force of a formal feeling based on habits.
   The structure of language may, indeed, have grown up by
gradual emendation, but not so its other essential value,
generality. Even a contextual language is still primarily spe-
cific as long as the verbal exposition merely replaces the
situation of an "empractically" used word, and the word is a
name. Here we encounter the second, and I think more vital,
principle of language (and perhaps of all symbolism) Meta-:


phor.
   Here again Wegener's study shows us a natural process,
born of practical exigencies, effecting what ultimately proves
                                                                 *'
to be an incomparable achievement. But to follow his reason-
ing it is necessary to go back to his conception of the nature
of communication.
   All discourse involves two elements, which may be called,
respectively, the context (verbal or practical) and the novelty.
The novelty is what the speaker is trying to point out or to
express. For this purpose he will use any word that serves
him. The word may be apt, or it may be ambiguous, or even
new; the context, seen or stated, modifies it and determines
just   what   it   means.
  Where a precise word is lacking to designate the novelty
which the speaker would point out, he resorts to the powers
of logical analogy, and uses a word denoting something else
that is a presentational symbol for the thing he means; the
context makes it clear that he cannot mean the thing literally
denoted, and must mean something else symbolically. For
instance, he might say of a fire: "It flares up," and be clearly
understood to refer to the action of the fire. But if he says:
124              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
"The king's anger flares up," we know from the context that
"flaring  up" cannot refer to the sudden appearance of a
physical flame; it must connote the idea of "flaring up" as
a symbol for what the king's anger is doing. We conceive
the literal meaning of the term that is usually used in con-
nection with a fire, but this concept serves us here as proxy
for another which is nameless. The expression "to flare up"
has acquired a wider meaning than its original use, to de-
scribe the behavior of a flame; it can be used metaphorically
to describe whatever its meaning can symbolize. Whether it
is to be taken in a literal or a metaphorical sense has to be
determined by the context.
   In a genuine metaphor, an image of the literal meaning is
our symbol for the figurative meaning, the thing that has
no name of its own.    H   we say that a brook is laughing in
the sunlight, an idea of laughter intervenes to symbolize the
spontaneous, vivid activity of the brook. But if a metaphor
is used very often, we learn to accept the word in its meta-

phorical context as though it had a literal meaning there. If
we say: "The brook runs swiftly," the word "runs" does not
connote any leg-action, but a shallow rippling flow. If we say
that a rumor runs through the town, we think neither of leg-
action nor of ripples; or if a fence is said to run round the
barnyard there is not even a connotation of changing place.
Originally these were probably all metaphors but one (though
it is hard to say which was the primitive literal sense). Now

we take the word itself to mean that which all its applications
have in common, namely describing a course. The great
extent and frequency of its metaphorical services have made
us aware of the basic concept by virtue of which it can function
as a symbol in so many contexts; constant figurative use has
generalized its sense.
   Wegener calls such a word a "faded metaphor," and shows,
in an argument too long and elaborate to be reproduced here,
that all general words are probably derived from specific ap-
pellations, by metaphorical use; so that our literal language
is a very repository of "faded metaphors."

   Since the context of an expression tells us what is its sense
—  whether we shall take it literally or figuratively, and how,
                                          —
in the latter case, it is to be interpreted  it follows that the

context itself must always be expressed literally, because it
has not, in turn, a context to supplement and define its
sense. Only the novel predication can be metaphorical.        A
discourse divorced from physical situations, i.e. a discourse
in which the context is entirely expressed and not bound to
"empractic" utterances, is not possible until some words have
acquired fixed, general connotations, so that they may serve
                             LANGUAGE                                125
in a conventional, literal fashion, to render the exposition of
the crucial assertion. "All words, therefore, which may be
logical subjects (of predications)and hence expository," says
Wegener, "have acquired this capacity only by virtue of their
'fading' in predicational use. And before language had any
faded words to denote logical subjects, it could not render a
situation by any other means than a demonstrative indication
of it in present experience. So the process of fading which
we have here adduced represents the bridge from the first
(one-word)    .   .phase of language to the developed phase
                      .



of a discursive exposition." 51
  Metaphor is our most striking evidence of abstractive see-
ing,of the power of human minds to use presentational
symbols. Every new experience, or new idea about things,
evokes first of all some metaphorical expression. As the idea
becomes familiar, this expression "fades" to a new literal use
of the once metaphorical predicate, a more general use than
it had before. It is in this elementary, presentational mode

that our first adventures in conscious abstraction occur. The
spontaneous similes of language are our first record of simi-
larities perceived. The fact that poverty of langauge, need
of emphasis, or need of circumlocution for any reason what-
ever, 52 leads us at once to seize upon a metaphorical word,
shows how natural the perception of common form is, and
how easily one and the same concept is conveyed through
words that represent a wide variety of conceptions. The use
of metaphor can hardly be called a conscious device. It is
the power whereby language, even with a small vocabulary,
manages to embrace a multimillion things; whereby new
words are born and merely analogical meanings becomer-
stereotyped into literal definitions. (Slang is almost entirely
far-fetched metaphor. Although much of it is conscious and
humorous in intent, there is always a certain amount of
peculiarly apt and expressive slang which is ultimately taken
into the literary language as "good usage."
   One might say that, if ritual is the cradle of language,
metaphor is the law of its life. It is the force that makes
it essentially relational, intellectual, forever showing up new,

abstractable forms in reality, forever laying down a deposit of
old, abstracted concepts in an increasing treasure of general
words.
   The intellectual vocabulary grows with the progress of
  5i Wegener, Untersuchungen, p. 54.
  52 For detailed studies of motives governing the use of
                                                  metaphor, see
Heinz Werner, Die Ursprunge der Metapher (1919); Hermann Paul,
Principles of the History of Language (1888; German         1880); Alfred
Biese, Die Philosophic des Metaphor ischen (1893).
126                     PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
conceptual thinking and civilized living. Technical advances
make demands on our language which are met by the elabora-
tion of mathematical, logical, and scientific terminologies.
Anthropomorphic metaphors are banned, and the philologi-
cal laws of word-change become almost all-important in the
production of further nomenclatures and usages. Meanings
become more and more precise; wherefore, as Jespersen says,
"The evolution of language shows a progressive tendency
from inseparable conglomerations to freely and regularly
combinable short elements." 53 Speech becomes increasingly
discursive, practical, prosaic, until human beings can actually
believe that it was invented as a utility, and was later em-
bellished with metaphors for the sake of a cultural product
called poetry.
    One more problem invites our speculation: Why do all men
possess language? The answer, I think, is that all men possess
it because they all have the same psychological nature, which

has reached, in the entire human race, a stage of development
where symbol-using and symbol-making are dominant activi-
ties. Whether there were many beginnings of language or
few, or even only one, we cannot tell; but wherever the first
stage of speaking, the use of any denotative symbol, was at-
tained, there the development of speech probably occurred
with phenomenal speed. For the notion of giving something
a name is the vastest generative idea that ever was conceived;
its influence might well transform the entire mode of living
and feeling, in the whole species, within a few generations.
We    ourselves have seen how such a notion as the power-
engine can alter the world, how other inventions, discoveries,
and adaptations crowd in its wake.      We
                                         have watched human
industry change from handicraft to mass production in every
phase of life, within the memory of individuals. So with the
advent of language, save that it must have been more revolu-
tionary. Once the spark was struck, the light of reason was
lit; an epoch of phenomenal novelty, mutation, perhaps even

cerebral evolution, was initiated, as Man succeeded to the
futile simian that had been himself. Once there were speak-
ing men on earth it would take utter isolation to keep any
tribe from speaking. And unless there have been many
cradles of mankind, such total isolation of a society, from
pre-human aeons to historic times, is hard to imagine.
    The general theory of symbolism here set forth, which
distinguishes between two symbolic modes rather than re-
stricting intelligence to discursive forms and relegating all
other conception to some irrational realm of feeling and

 53 Op.   cit.,   p. 429.
            life-symbols: the roots of sacrament            127
instinct,  has the great advantage of assimilating all mental
activity    toreason, instead of grafting that strange product
upon a fundamentally unintellectual organism. It accounts
for imagination and dream, myth and ritual, as well as for
practical intelligence. Discursive thought gives rise to science,
and a theory of knowledge restricted to its products culmi-
nates in the critique of science; but the recognition of non-
discursive thought makes it just as possible to construct a
theory of understanding that naturally culminates in a cri-
tique of art. The parent stock of both conceptual types,
of verbal and non-verbal formulation, is the basic human
act of symbolic transformation. The root is the same, only
the flower is different. So now we will leave language and
all its variants, and turn, for other flowers, to other fields.
