6.      Life-Symbols: The Roots of Sacrament


If language is born, indeed, from the profoundly symbolific
character of the human mind, we may not be surprised to find
that this mind tends to operate with symbols far below the
level of speech. Previous studies have shown that even the sub-
jective record of sense experience, the "sense-image," is not a
direct copy of actual experience, but has been "projected," in
the process of copying, into a new dimension, the more or less
stabile form we call a picture. It has not the protean, mercurial
elusiveness of real visual experience, but a unity and lasting"
identity that makes it an object of the mind's possession rather
than a sensation. Furthermore it is not firmly and fixedly deter-
mined by the pattern of natural phenomena, as real sensa-
tions are, but is "free," in the same manner as the little noises
which a baby produces by impulse and at will. We can call
up images and let them fill the virtual space of vision between
us and real objects, or on the screen of the dark, and dismiss
them again, without altering the course of practical events.
They are our own product, yet not part of ourselves as our
physical actions are; rather might we compare them with our
uttered words (save that they remain entirely private), in that
they are objects to us, things that may surprise, even frighten
us, experiences that can be contemplated, not merely lived.
   In short, images have all the characteristics of symbols.
If they were weak sense-experiences, they would confuse the
order of nature for us. Our salvation lies in that we do not
normally take them for bona fide sensations, but attend to
128                     PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
them only in their capacity of meaning things, being images
of things      —
            symbols whereby those things are conceived, re-
membered, considered, but not encountered.
   The best guarantee of their essentially symbolic function
is their tendency to become metaphorical. They are not only
capable of connoting the things from which our sense-experi-
ence originally derived them, and perhaps, by the law of
association, the context in which they were derived (as the
sight of a bell may cause one to think of "ding-dong" and
also of dinner), but they also have an inalienable tendency
to "mean" things that have only a logical analogy to their
primary meanings. The image of a rose symbolizes feminine
beauty so readily that it is actually harder to associate roses
with vegetables than with girls. Fire is a natural symbol of
life and passion, though it is the one element in which nothing
can actually live. Its mobility and flare, its heat and color,
make it an irresistible symbol of all that is living, feeling, and
active. Images are, therefore, our readiest instruments for
abstracting concepts from the tumbling stream of actual im-
pressions. They make our primitive abstractions for us, they
are our spontaneous embodiments of general ideas.
   Just as verbal symbolism has a natural evolution from the
mere suggestive word or "word-sentence" of babyhood to the
grammatical edifice we call a language, so presentational sym-
bolism has its own characteristic development. It grows from
the momentary, single, static image presenting a simple
concept, to greater and greater units of successive images
having reference to each other; changing scenes, even visions
of things in motion, 1 by which we conceive the passage of
events. That is to say, the first thing we do with images is
to envisage a story; just as the first thing we do with words
is to tell something, to make a statement.
   Image-making is, then, the mode of our untutored think-
ing, and stories are its earliest product. We think of things
happening, remembered or imaginary or prospective; we see
with the mind's eye the shoes we should like to buy, and the
transaction of buying them; we visualize the drowning that
almost happened by the riverbank. Pictures and stories are
the mind's stock-in-trade. Those larger, more complex ele-
ments that symbolize events may contain more than merely
visual ingredients, kinesthetic and aural and perhaps yet other
factors, wherefore it is misleading to call them "story-images";
I will      refer to   them as "fantasies."
  Like        all   symbols, fantasies are derived from specific ex-

  i   Cf.   M. Drummond, "The Nature of Images,"    British Journal of
Psychology,    XVII (1926), 1: 10-19.
        life-symbols: the roots of sacrament                 129
 perience; even the most elaborately monstrous ones go back
 to witnessed events. But the original perception     —  like any
 item that sticks in the mind — is promptly and spontaneously

 abstracted, and used symbolically to represent a whole kind
of actual happening. Every process we perceive, if it is to
be retained in memory, must record itself as a fantasy, an
envisagement, by virtue of which it can be called up in
imagination or recognized when it occurs again. For no actual
process happens twice; only we may meet the same sort of
occasion again. The second time we "know" already what the
event is, because we assimilate it to the fantasy abstracted
from the previous instance. It will not fit exactly, and it need
not; the fantasy need only convey certain general features,
the new case only exemplify these generalities in its own way,
to make us apprehend a recurrence of a familiar event.
   Suppose a person sees, for the first time in his life, a train
arriving at a station. He probably carries away what we
should call a "general impression" of noise and mass, steam,
human confusion, mighty motion coming to heated, panting
rest. Very possibly he has not noticed the wheels going round,
but only the rods moving like a runner's knees. He does not
instantly distinguish smoke from steam, nor the hissing from
squeaking, nor freight cars from windowed coaches, nor even
boiler, cab, and coal car from each other. Yet the next time
he watches a train pull in the process is familiar. His mind
retains a fantasy which "means" the general concept, "a
train arriving at a station." Everything that happens the second
time is, to him, like or unlike the first time. The fantasy which
we   call his conception of a halting train gradually^Jxiiltk
itself up ou^of many impressions; but its framework was
abstracted from the very first instance, and made the later
ones "familiar."
   The symbolic status of fantasies (in this technical sense
of action-envisagements) is further attested by the regularity
with which they follow certain basic laws of symbols. Like
words and like images, they have not only literal reference to
concepts, but tend to convey metaphorical meanings. Events
and actions, motions and emotions, are inexhaustible in our
short lives; new experience overwhelms us continually; no
mind can conceive in neat literal terms all the challenges
and responses, the facts and acts, that crowd in upon it. Yet
conception is its essential technique, and conception requires
a language of some sort. Among cur fantasies there is usually
something, at least, that will do as a metaphor, and this
something has to serve, just as the nearest word has to serve in
a new verbal expression. An arriving train may have to em-
body nameless and imageless dangers coming with a rush to
130               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
unload their problems before me. Under the pressure of fear
and confusion and shrinking, I envisage the engine, and the
pursuant cars of unknown content, as a first symbol to shape
my unborn concepts. What the arriving train represents is the
first aspect of those dangers that I can grasp. The fantasy that
literallymeans a railroad incident functions here in a new
capacity, where its literal generality, its applicability to trains,
becomes irrelevant, and only those features that can symbolize
the approaching future    —  power, speed, inevitable direction
                                             —
 (symbolized by the track), and so forth remain significant.
The fantasy here is a figure, a metaphor of wordless cognition.
   Metaphor is the law of growth of every semantic. It is not
a development, but a principle. This is strikingly attested by
the fact that the lowest, completely unintentional products of
the human brain are madly metaphorical fantasies, that often
make no literal sense whatever; I mean the riotous symbolism
of dreams.
   The first thing we instinctively strive to conceive is simply
the experience of being alive. Life is a network of needs and
fulfilments and further needs, with temporary frustrations
here and there. If its basic needs are long unsatisfied, it ends.
Our first conciousness is the sense of need, i.e. desire. There-
fore our most elementary conceptions are of objects for desire.
   The shapes and relations and names of such objects are un-
known to the infant's mind. Food it knows, but not the source
of food, beyond the mere touch and vague form of the
mother's breast. Comfort and security, human nearness, light
            —
and motion all these objects have neither substance nor fixed
identity. The first images that sense impression begets in his
mind have to serve for the whole gamut of his desires, for all
things absent. Everything soft is a mother; everything that
meets his reach is food. Being dropped, even into bed, is
            —
terror itself   the first definite form of insecurity, even of
death (all our lives we speak of misfortune as a "fall"; we fall
into the enemy's hands, fall from grace, fall upon hard
times).
   In the brief waking spells when his sense organs are learn-
ing to make report, when noises overcome his initial deaf-
ness and colors or light-spaces arrest his wandering focus,
his infantile symbols multiply. Wish and fantasy grow up to-
gether. Since the proper function of his mind is conception,
he produces ideas without number. He does not necessarily
feel desire for everything he can think and dream; desire is
only the power behind the mind, which goads it into action,
and makes it productive. An overactive mind is uncritical,
as a voracious appetite is unfastidious. Children mix dream
and reality, fact and fiction, and make impossible combina-
         life-symbols: the roots of sacrament                          131
tions of ideas in their haste to capture everything, to conceive
an overwhelming flood of experiences. Of course the stock
of their imagery is always too small for its purpose, so every
symbol has to do metaphorical as well as literal duty. The
result is a dreamlike, shifting picture, a faery "world."
   Something like this may be seen not only in our children,
whose free fancy is somewhat hemmed by the literal logic of
adults around them, but in primitive societies, where the
best thought still bears a childlike stamp. Among certain
peoples whom we call "savage," the very use of language ex-
hibits a rampant confusion of metaphorical meanings cling-
ing to every symbol, sometimes to the complete obscurance
of any reasonable literal meaning. Cailliet, 2 who made a study
of this phenomenon, calls this the "vegetative" stage of
thought, likening the tremendous tangle of non-literal sym-
bolism to a jungle where things choke each other in their
overgrowth. 3 The cause for this sumptuous prodigality of
symbols lies in the intellectual needs of an adolescent race.
When new, unexploited possibilities of thought crowd in upon
the human mind, the poverty of everyday language becomes
acute. Apprehension outruns comprehension so far that every
phrase, however homely and literal it may be in its traditional
meaning, has a vague aura of further significance. Such
a state of mind is peculiarly favorable to the development of
metaphorical speech. 4
   It is characteristic of figurative images that their allegori-
cal status is not recognized. Only a mind which can appre-
hend both a literal and a "poetic" formulation of an idea is in
a position to distinguish the figure from its meaning. In spon-
                                                                   *
taneous envisagement there is no such duality of form* and
content. In our most primitive presentations          —
                                                    the metaphori-
cal imagery of dreams      —
                           it is the symbol, not its meaning, that

seems to command our emotions.             We
                                            do not know it as a
symbol. In dream-experience we very often find some fairly
                        —
commonplace object a tree, a fish, a pointed hat, a staircase
—  fraught with intense value or inspiring the greatest terror.
We cannot tell what makes the thing so important. It simply
seems to be so in the dream. The emotional reaction is, of

  2£mile Cailliet, Symbolisme et dmes primitives (1936), chap. iv.
   s The same figure was used by Jespersen (Language, p. 428) to describe
the form-producing period of primitive language, and by Whitehead
(Symbolism, p. 61) in speaking of undisciplined symbol-mongering.
  4 There are certain backward races which, like backward persons,
seem to have become arrested in the age of their adolescence. They are
no longer vigorously imaginative, yet have never outgrown the effect of
that "vegetative" stage; so they have incorporated figurative speech in the
genteel tradition of their social intercourse. Their metaphors are not new
and revealing, they are conventional, and serve only to interfere with the
progress of literal conception.
132                      PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
course, evoked by the idea embodied in that object, but so
long as the idea lives only in this body we cannot distinguish
it from its symbolic incarnation which, to literal-minded
common sense, seems trivial.
   Primitive thought is not far removed from the dream level.
It operates with very similar forms. Objects that could func-
tion as dream-symbols have a mysterious significance for the
waking mind, too, and are viewed with emotion, even though
they have never served a practical purpose for good or for
evil. The Australian's churinga, the Egyptian's scarab, the
charms which Greek women carried to the altar, are such
objects of indescribable value, dream-symbols found and
treasured in waking life. With their realistic presence, the
imaginative process is carried over from dream to reality;
fantasy is externalized in the veneration of "sacra."
   The study of dreams gives us a clue to the deeper meaning
of these bizarre holy articles: they are phallic symbols and
death-symbols.       We
                      need not consult the psychoanalysts to
learn this truth; any student of anthropology or archeology
can assure us of it. Life and life-giving, death and the dead,
are the great themes of primitive religion. Gods are at first
merely emblems of the creative power; fetishes, trees, men-
hirs. Certain animals are natural symbols to mankind: the
snake hidden in earth, the bull strong in his passion, the
mysterious long-lived crocodile who metes out unexpected
death. When, with the advance of civilization, their images
are set up in temples or borne in processions, such images
are designed to emphasize their symbolic force rather than
their natural shapes. The snake may be horned or crowned
or bearded, the bull may have wings or a human head.
   Such sacra command a peculiar emotion, which is not the
simple joy of possessing something advantageous, e.g. a strong
weapon or a new slave; the "rejoicing" of a religious cere-
monial is not a spontaneous delight which causes people to
raise the cry of triumph, as we shout when we catch a big
fish or win a game. The supposed power of the god to pro-
tect his worshippers would be no more apt to evoke cries
of "hallelujah" than the tacitly accepted power of a father
to protect his children. Our children live under the guarantee
of our superior strength and have a sense of security in it,
but they do not periodically burst into praises of it. Reli-
gious rejoicing is bound entirely to set occasions, when the
god-symbol     —which probably   always there, tucked away
                                     is
in   its        — brought
           shrine   is               officially contemplated.
                                 forth    and
Even this is not enough; someone leads the shouting and
makes a demonstration of joy; gradually the feeling develops,
and delight seizes the congregation. Their joy is not in an
        life-symbols: the roots of sacrament                133
event, but in a presented idea. It centers round objects that
are themselves quite passive, and useless for any other pur-
pose than conveying the idea.
                              —                     —
   The power of conception of "having ideas" is man's
peculiar asset, and awareness of this power is an exciting sense
of human strength. Nothing is more thrilling than the dawn
of a new conception. The symbols that embody basic ideas
of life and death, of man and the world, are naturally sacred.
But naive thinking does not distinguish between symbol and
import; it sees only the physical churinga or the clay thesmos,
or, where the symbol is not made by human art, but chosen
among natural objects, it sees the actual snake or ibis, oak
tree or arbor vitae. There is no explicit reason why sacredness
belongs to such an object, only a strong feeling that in it the
luck and hope and power of man is vested. The prac-
tical efficacy attributed to sacra is a dream-metaphor for the
might of human ideation. Their "mightiness" is thought of as
specific efficacy; whatever expresses Life is regarded as a
source of life, whatever expresses Death as an agent of death.
The savage's alleged stupidity about causal relations rests on
this very profound law of mind, which is exemplified not only
in primitive religions, but in our own pious beliefs, e.g. that
the devil can be averted by holding up a little cross against
him, or that a picture of the Virgin Mother protects a house
against evil. Such notions rest on a natural identification of
symbolic values with practical values, of the expressive with
the physical functions of a thing. But this identification is too
deeply grounded to be put aside as a "silly" mistake. It is
symptomatic of our supreme and constant preoccupation with^
ideas, our spontaneous attention to expressive forms'* that
causes us to mix their- importance with the importance of
other activities by which life is carried on.
   The contemplation of sacra invites a certain intellectual
          —
excitement intellectual because it centers in a mental activ-
  —
ity   the excitement of realizing life and strength, manhood,
contest, and death. The whole cycle of human emotions is
touched by such a contemplation. Undoubtedly the first out-
ward show of sacred emotions is purely self-expressive, an
unconscious issue of feelings into shouting and prancing or
rolling on the earth, like a baby's tantrum; but soon the
outburst becomes a habitual reaction and is used to demon-
strate, rather than to relieve, the feelings of individuals.
Lively demonstration makes an emotion contagious. Shout
answers shout, the collective prancing becomes dancing. Even
those who are not compelled by inner tension to let off
steam just at this moment, fall into step and join the common
cry.
134                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
   But as soon as an expressive act is performed without inner
momentary compulsion      it is no longer self-expressive; it is
expressive in the logical sense. It is not a sign of the emotion
it conveys, but a symbol of it; instead of completing the
natural history of a feeling, it denotes the feeling, and may
merely bring it to mind, even for the actor. When an action
acquires such a meaning it becomes a gesture. 5
   Genuine acts are completed in every detail unless they are
forcibly interrupted, but gestures may be quite abortive
imitations of acts, showing only their significant features.
They are expressive forms, true symbols. Their aspect be-
comes fixed, they can be deliberately used to communicate
an idea of the feelings that begot their prototypes. Because
they are deliberate gestures, not emotional acts, they are no
longer subject to spontaneous variation, but bound to an
often meticulously exact repetition, which gradually makes
their  forms as familiar as words or tunes.
   With the formalization of overt behavior in the presence of
the sacred objects, we come into the field of ritual. This
is, so to speak, a complement to the life-symbols; for as the

latter present the basic facts of human existence, the forces
of generation and achievement and death, so the rites enacted
at their contemplation formulate and record man's response
to those supreme realities. Ritual "expresses feelings" in the
logical rather than the physiological sense. It may have what
Aristotle called "cathartic" value, but that is not its charac-
teristic; it is primarily an articulation of feelings. The ulti-
mate product of such articulation is not a simple emotion,
but a complex, permanent attitude. This attitude, which is
the worshipers' response to the insight given by the sacred
symbols, is an emotional pattern, which governs all individual
lives. It cannot be recognized through any clearer medium
than that of formalized gesture; yet in this cryptic form it
is recognized, and yields a strong sense of tribal or congrega-

tional unity, of Tightness and security. A rite regularly per-
formed is the constant reiteration of sentiments toward "first
and last things"; it is not a free expression of emotions, but a
disciplined rehearsal of "right attitudes."
   But emotional attitudes are always closely linked with the
exigencies of current life, colored by immediate cares and
desires, by specific memories and hopes. Since the sacra are
consciously regarded not as symbols of Life and Death, but
   s Cf. L. A. Reid, "Beauty and Significance," Proceedings of the Aristo-
                   XXIX
telian Society, N.S.       (1929), 123-154, esp. p. 144: "If an expression,
which at first was automatic, is repeated for the sheer joy of expression,
at that point it becomes aesthetic..   Anger enjoyed in being acted con-
                                       .   .



sciously is not mere instinctive anger, but dramatic (sometimes melo-
dramatic) anger, a very different thing."
           life-symbols: the roots of sacrament                       135
as life-givers and death-dealers, they are not only revered,
but also besought, trusted, feared, placated with service and
sacrifice. Their power is invoked for the salvation of wor-
shipers in times of danger. They can break the drought, end
famine, stay a pestilence, or turn the tide of battle. The
sacred ark going up before the Children of Israel gives them
their victory.    Held by the Philistines,   it   visits   disease   on   its

captors.   Its   efficacy seen in every triumph of the com-
                            is

munity, every attainment and conquest. Specific events as
well as definite feelings become associated with a Holy of
Holies, and seek expression round the altar.
   This is the source of mimetic ritual. The memory of cele-
brated events is strong in the celebration that renders thanks
to the saving Power; it enters, perhaps quite unconsciously
at first, into the gestures and shouts traditionally conveying
such thanks. The story is retold, because it reveals the
character of the Holy One, and as the telling soon becomes
a formula, the gesticulations that accompany it become tradi-
tional gestures, new bodily expressions that can be woven
into ritual patterns. The flourish of swords that accompanies
the recall of a great exploit is presently carried out at definite
points in the narrative, so that the congregation may join
in it, as it joins in shouts like "Hallelujah," "Iacchos," or
"Amen" at recognized periods. The gesture acquires a swing
and rhythm of its own so it can be performed in genuine
unison. At the end of the story it may be elaborated into a
long demonstration, a "sword-dance."
   Another and even more obvious origin of mimetic rites
lies not in sacred story, but in supplication. Here conception--
is even more^ivid, more urgent than in memory; an act is
to be suggested and recommended to the only Being that
can perform it, the Holy One; the suppliants, in their eager-
ness to express their desire, naturally break into pantomime. 6
Representations of the act mingle with gestures of entreaty.
And just as the expressive virtue of sacra is conceived as
physical virtue, so the symbolic power of mimetic rites is
presently regarded as causal efficacy; hence the world-wide
and world-old belief in sympathetic magic. It really sinks to
the inane conception of "magic" only when one assumes a
direct relation between the mimicked event and the expected
real one; in so far as the pantomime is enacted before a fetish,
a spirit, or God, it is intended to move this divine power to
act, and is simply a primitive prayer.       We
                                              are often told that

  6 Cf W. W. Newell, "Ritual Regarded as the Dramatization of Myth,"
      .



International Congress of Anthropology (1894), 237-245; also W. Mat-
thews, "Some Illustrations of the Connection between Myths and Cere-
mony," ibid., pp. 246-251.
136               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
savage religion begins in magic; but the chances are, I think,
that magic begins in religion. Its typical form  —   the confident,
practical use of a formula, a brew, and a rite to achieve a
              —
physical effect   is the empty shell of a religious act. Confused,

inferior minds may retain it, even in a society that no longer
thinks in terms of hidden agency, but sees causally connected
phenomena; and so we come to the absurd practice of a
"magic" that is supposed to defy natural law.
   Religion is a gradual envisagement of the essential pattern
of human life, and to this insight almost any object, act, or
event may contribute. There is no ingredient in ritual that
may not also be found outside it. Sacred objects are not in-
trinsically precious, but derive their value from their reli-
gious use. Formalized expressive gesture occurs in the most
casual social intercourse, in greetings, marks of deference, or
mock defiance (like, the grimaces school-children make be-
hind the back of an unpopular teacher, mainly for each
other's benefit). As for mimetic gestures, they are the current
and often unconscious accompaniment of all dramatic imagi-
nation. It need not be of serious or important acts. Mimicry
is the natural symbolism by which we represent activities to
our minds.   It is so obvious a semantic that even where no
act is carried out, but every idea merely suggested, panto-
mime is universally understood. Victor the Wild Boy of
Aveyron, and even Wild Peter who was less intelligent, could
understand mimetic expression at once, without any training,
though neither ever learned language.
   Before a symbolic form is put to public religious use
before it serves the difficult art of presenting really profound
ideas — it has probably had a long career in a much homelier

capacity. Long before men perform rites which enact the
phases of life, they have learned such acting in play. And the
play of children is very instructive if we would observe the
peculiarly intellectual (non-practical) nature of gesture. If
its purpose were, as is commonly supposed, to learn by imi-

tation, an oft-repeated enactment should come closer and
closer to reality, and a familiar act be represented better than
a novel one; instead of that we are apt to find no attempt
at carrying out the suggested actions of the shared day-dreams
that constitute young children's play.
                     —
    "Now I go away" three steps away from the center of the
game constitute this process. "And you must be crying"
the deserted one puts her hands before her face and makes a
little pathetic sound. "Now I sew your fairy dress"     —  a hand
with all five fingertips pressed together describes little circles.
But the most convincingly symbolic gesture is that of eating.
Children are interested in eating, and this much-desired oc-
        life-symbols: the roots of sacrament                 137
casion arises often in their games. Yet their imitation of that
process is perhaps their least realistic act. There is no attempt
to simulate the use of a spoon or other implement; the hand
that carries the imaginary food to the mouth moves with the
speed of a short clock-pendulum, the lips whisper "B-b-b-b-b."
This sort of imitation would never serve the purpose of learn-
ing an activity. It is an abbreviated, schematized form of an
action. Whether or no the child could perform the act is
irrelevant; eating is an act learned long ago, sewing is prob-
ably a total mystery. Yet the imitation of sewing, though
clumsy, is not as poor as that of the banquet.
   The better an act is understood and the more habitually
it is associated with a symbolic gesture, the more formal and

cursory may be the movement that represents it. Just as the
white settlers of this country first called an Indian feast a
"Pow! Wow! Wow!" and later referred to it quite off-handedly
as "a pow-wow," so a child's representation of sewing, fight-
ing, or other process will be really imitative at first, but dwin-
dle to almost nothing if the game is played often. It becomes
an act of reference rather than of representation.
   The fact that so much of primitive religious ritual is
mimetic, and that mimicry is the typical form of children's
play, has misled some excellent philosophers, notably John
Dewey, to believe that rites are simply a repetition of practical
                                           —
behavior for the fun of the action itself a repetition which
presently becomes habitual, and has to be dignified by the
imputation of magical usefulness. "Men make a game of
their fishing and hunting, and turn to the periodic and dis-
ciplinary labor of agriculture only when inferiors, women or
slaves, cannq£ be had to do the work. Useful labor isf^vhenP
ever possible, transformed by ceremonial and ritual accom-
paniments,    subordinated to art that yields immediate
enjoyment; otherwise it is attended to under compulsion of
circumstance during abbreviated surrenders of leisure. For
leisure permits of festivity, in revery, ceremonies and con-
versation. The pressure of necessity is, however, never wholly
lost, and the sense of it led men, as if with uneasy conscience
at their respite from work, to impute practical efficacy to
play and rites, endowing them with power to coerce events
and to purchase the favor of the rulers of events. ... It was
not conscience that kept men loyal to cults and rites, and
faithful to tribal myths. So far as it was not routine, it was
enjoyment of the drama of life without the latter's liabilities
that kept piety from decay. Interest in rites as means of in-
fluencing the course of things, and the cognitive or explan-
ation office of myths were hardly more than an embroidery,
repeating in pleasant form the pattern which inexpugnable
138                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
necessities imposed upon practice. When rite and myth are
spontaneous rehearsal of the impact and career of practical
needs and doings, they must also seem to have practical
force." 7
   From this standpoint it is hard to understand why savage
rites   so   often   involve   terrible   tortures   —branding,        flaying,
knocking out teeth, cutting off finger-joints, etc. Puberty-rites,
for instance, in which boys sometimes die under the knife
or the whip, can hardly be described as "enjoyment of the
drama of life without the latter's liabilities." Such actions
are far removed from play. Their instrumental value for
bringing about victories, fertility, or general good luck is
undoubtedly secondary, as Professor Dewey says; but their
primary achievement is not entertainment, but morale. They
are part of man's ceaseless quest for conception and orienta-
tion. They embody his dawning notions of power and will,
of death and victory, they give active and impressive form
to his demoniac fears and ideals. Ritual is the most primitive
reflection of serious thought, a slow deposit, as                it   were, of
people's imaginative insight into          life.   That   is   why it is in-
trinsically solemn, even though some rites of rejoicing or
triumph may degenerate into mere excitement, debauchery,
and license.
   If men's minds were essentially playful, they could have
no "uneasy conscience at their respite from work." Young
dogs and young children, to whom play is a necessity, have
no such conscience. Only people who feel that play displaces
something more vital can disapprove of it; otherwise, if the
bare necessities were taken care of, work in itself could com-
mand no respect, and we would play with all the freedom in
the world, if practical work and sheer enjoyment were our
only alternatives.
   But the driving force in human minds is fear, which begets
an imperious demand for security in the world's confusion:
a demand for a world-picture that fills all experience and
gives each individual a definite orientation amid the terrify-
ing forces of nature and society. Objects that embody such
insights, and acts which express, preserve, and reiterate them,
are indeed more spontaneously interesting, more serious than
work.
   The universality of the concepts which religion tries to
formulate draws all nature into the domain of ritual. The
apparently misguided efforts of savages to induce rain by
dancing and drumming are not practical mistakes at all; they
are rites in which the rain has a part. White observers of

  7 Experience   and Nature (1925), pp. 78-79.
          life-symbols: the roots of sacrament                          139
Indian rain-dances have often commented on the fact that
in  an extraordinary number of instances the downpour really
"results." Others, of a more cynical turn, remark that the
leaders of the dance know the weather so well that they time
their dance to meet its approaching changes and simulate
"rain-making." This may well be the case; yet it is not a
pure imposture.      A"magic" effect is one which completes a
rite. No savage tries to induce a snowstorm in midsummer,
nor prays for the ripening of fruits entirely out of season, as
he certainly would if he considered his dance and prayer the
physical causes of such events. He dances with the rain, he
invites the elements to do their part, as they are thought to
be somewhere about and merely irresponsive. This accounts
for the fact that no evidence of past failures discourages his
practices; for if heaven and earth do not answer him, the
rite is simply unconsummated; it was not therefore a "mis-
take." Its failure can be redeemed by finding some extenu-
ating circumstance, some "counter-charm" that explains the
miscarriage of the usual climax. There is no evil intent in
the devices of medicine men to insure, or even to simulate,
answers to magical invocations; for the most important virtue
of the rite is not so much its practical as its religious success.
Rain-making may well have begun in the celebration of an
imminent shower after long drought; that the first harbinger
clouds would be greeted with entreaty, excitement, and mi-
metic sugestion is obvious. The ritual evolves while a caprici-
ous heaven is making up its mind. Its successive acts mark
the stages that bring the storm nearer. Its real import         its    —
power to articulate a relation between man and nature, vivid^
at the moment     —
                  can be recognized only in the metaphorical
guise of a physical power to induce the rain. 8
   Sympathetic magic, springing from mimetic ritual, belongs
mainly to tribal, primitive religion. There is, however, a
type of ceremonial that runs the whole gamut from the most
savage to the most civilized piety, from blind compulsive
behavior, through magical conjuring, to the heights of con-
scious expression: that is the Sacrament.
  »The expressive function of ritual is properly distinguished from the
practical in an article by Alfred Vierkandt, "Die entwicklungspsycholo-
gische Theorie der Zauberei," Archiv fiir gesammte Psychologie, XCVIII
(1937), 420-489. Vierkandt treats the causal conception as • superim-
posed one. "The [mimetic] activity," he says, "appears as a means to the
desired end. If this end is all that motivates the rite, then the latter has
changed from a purely expressive act to a purposive act. ... In the
course of this change there may be all possible gradations of the relation-
ship between these two structures, from the merest superimposition of a
purposive activity to the complete extinction of the expressive need. At
the one extreme, the practical end is a mere superstructure, an ideology,
while the driving force is the desire for expression.      .   . The other
                                                                   .



extreme is the genuine purposive act, in which the whole is organized
according to the categories of means and ends."
140                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
   The overt form of a sacrament is usually a homely, familiar
action, such as washing, eating, drinking; sometimes a more
special performance    —slaughter, or sexual union       —
                                                        but still
an act that is essentially realistic and vital. At first sight it
seems strange that the highest symbolic import should attach
to the lowliest activities, especially as the more commonplace
and frequent of these are the most universal sacraments. But
if we consider the genesis of such profound and ancient
symbols we can understand their origin in commonplace
events.
   Before a behavior-pattern can become imbued with second-
ary meanings, it must be definite, and to the smallest detail
familiar. Such forms are naturally evolved only in activities
that are often repeated. An act that is habitually performed
acquires an almost mechanical form, a sequence of motions
that practice makes quite invariable. Besides the general
repetition of what is done there is a repetition of the way it
is done by a certain person. For instance, two people putting
bread into their mouth are doing the same thing, but they
may do it in widely different manner, according to their re-
spective temperaments and traditions; their behavior, though
purposive and real, contains unconsciously an element of
gesture.
   This formal element offers high possibilities to the symbol-
seeking mind. Just as one person develops personal "ways,"
so a tribe develops tribal "ways," which are handed down
as unconscious mannerisms, until some breach in the usual
pattern makes people aware of them, and they are deliberately
practiced as "correct forms." As soon as they are thus ab-
stracted, these proper gestures acquire tribal importance;
someone sees a secondary meaning in an act which has at-
tained such a formal unity and style. It seems to have a
symbolic as well as a practical function; a new, emotional
importance attaches to it. In a society whose symbolific im-
pulse is in the riotous, "vegetative" stage, a practical act
like dividing food, or eating the first new corn of the season,
may be so exciting as an idea that it actually loses its old
material interest in the new, mystical one. Many savages have
foods that may be eaten only ritually, and there have been
Christians who frowned on all washing and bathing that was
not incidental to a rite.
   These last-named acts of cleansing and purification furnish
a good case in point. Washing away dirt is a simple, practical
act; but its symbolic value is so striking that one might say
the act has a "natural meaning." 9 Eating, likewise, is a daily

  9 Professor Urban reserves the term "true symbol" entirely for ex-
pressions whose meaning is thus "naturally" suggested, and treats all
         life-symbols: the roots of sacrament                          141

practice, but is so easily significant of the kinship among those
who eat together, and the even closer connection identi-         —
fication—  of the eaters with the eaten, that it has a certain
sacramental character for any mind that is capable of general
concepts at all. As soon as the symbolical import of (say)
eating an animal dawns, the feast is conducted in a new
spirit; not food, but animal characteristics, constitute its fare.
The meat becomes a host; though the indwelling virtue may
have no name of its own, and therefore may be thinkable
only in terms of this eating, this gathering, this taste and
smell and place. Because an occasion is the only symbol by
which the new virtue is known, that occasion must have
permanent form, that it may be repeated, the virtue recalled,
reinvoked; and so the abstractable features of the occasion
the manners and mannerisms that were simply learned folk-
ways, habitual patterns      —
                            are exalted into sacred procedure.
The meat must be served in the same order, cut in the same
shape and from the same part, every time it is to be eaten
ritually. Gradually every detail becomes charged with mean-
ing. Every gesture signifies some step in the acquisition of
animal virtue. According to the law of all primitive symbol-
ization, this significance is felt not as such, but as genuine
efficacy; the feast not only dramatizes, but actually negotiates
the desired acquisition. Its performance is magical as well
as expressive. And so we have the characteristic blend of
power and meaning, mediation and presentation, that belongs
to sacraments. 10
   Whether a dim perception of sacramental forces and dan-
gers in the routine actions of life underlies the rigid religious
control that ^almost all primitive societies hold ovef*daily*
food and drink and housekeeping, we cannot stop to investi-
gate here. What matters in the present context is merely that
meaning and magic pervade savage life to such an extent that
any behavior-pattern, any striking visual form or musical
rhythm, any question or announcement made often enough
to become a formula, acquires some symbolic or mystical
function;   this      stage of thinking is the creative period for
religion.   In   it    the great life-symbols are established and

other symbols as signs (cf. Language and Reality, part II, esp. pp. 402-
409). For reasons explained above, I cannot subscribe to this usage, as
the distinction between signs and symbols seems to me to he in a different
dimension.
  io For a modern example, consider the following statement by W. H.
Frere: "The Eucharist is one homogeneous and continuous action and
goes forward, if one may say so, like a drama; it has its prelude, its
working up, its climax, its epilogue..   The Eucharist was to sum up and
                                         .   .


supersede all older rites and sacrifices; and it has been from the first
the central Christian sacrament, not significant only, but efficacious." The
Principles of Religious Ceremonial (1928), pp. 37—39 (italics mine).
142                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
developed. Concepts which are far beyond the actual grasp
of savage or semi-savage minds are apprehended, though not
comprehended, in physical embodiments, sacred fetishes, idols,
animals; human attitudes, vaguely recognized as reasonable
and right, are expressed by actions which are not spontaneous
emotional outlets but prescribed modes of participation and
assent.
   Rites of supplication and offering cannot forever be ad-
dressed to a nameless symbol, a mere bundle of sticks, jaw-
bone, grave-mound, or monolith. The Holy One has a part,
howbeit a silent part, to play in the ceremony; as the cult
develops, the presiding power acquires an epithet expressing
this function: "She who Harkens," "He of Appeasement,"
"He of Sword-play, He of the Sword." The epithet serves
as a name, and soon becomes a name; the name fixes a
character which gradually finds expression in new physical
representations. So the pillar that was once a phallic symbol
becomes a "Herm," and the rock that was itself taboo shelters
a sacred snake to account for its holiness. The snake can
see and hear, respond or retire, strike or spare. The snake can
be a forgiver, the Herm can be a watcher.
   Of course this is a step from sheer superstition toward the-
ology, toward conceiving gods instead of mere magical cult-
objects. But the envisagement of such "gods" is as yet entirely
naive; "He of the Sword" may be represented as a sword,
and "She who Harkens" may not only have, but be, an ear. 11
The first idea of a god is not that of an anthropomorphic
being that dwells in an object, e.g. in a certain tree; it is simply
a notion of the object itself as a personality as an agent par-
                                                    ,



ticipating in the ritual. This participation is what lifts it
above mere magical potency to something like a personal will.
The might of the cult-objects, charms or sacred arks or holy
wells, is simply efficacy; that of gods, whether they be trees,
animals, statutes, or dead men, is ability. A charm is made to
operate by a correct ritual; a deity is invoked by being pleased,
either by service or flattery. The rite may persist for ages, but
when the Holy One becomes a god, the keynote of ritual
becomes prayer. One cannot simply draw "mana" from him
as from the presence of holy things; one has to ask him
to exert his talents. Therefore his worshipers recite the
catalogue of his virtues   —  his valor, wisdom, goodness, the
wonders of his favor, the      terrors of his displeasure. In this
way his traits become very definitely and publicly accepted.
Every     asset his worshipers seek   is   his,   and   in his gift.   His

  11 See Jane Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion
(1908), p. 187.
           life-symbols: the roots of sacrament              143
image tends more and more to express this enhanced charac-
ter; he is the summary of a human ideal, the ideal of his tribe.
   Herein lies the rationale of animal worship, which seems
to have preceded, almost universally, the evolution of higher
religions. A god who symbolizes moral qualities does well to
appear in animal form; for a human incarnation would be
confusing. Human personalities are complex, extremely varied,
hard to define, hard to generalize; but animals run very true
to type.The strength of the bull, the shiftiness of the rabbit,
the sinuous mobility of the snake, the solemnity of the owl,
are exemplified with perfect definiteness and simplicity by
every member of their respective species. Before men can find
these traits clearly in themselves they can see them typified in
animals. The beast that symbolizes a virtue, physical or moral,
is divine to men who see and envy that virtue in it. It is the
possessor, hence the possible dispenser, of its peculiar quality.
Therefore it is honored, wooed, placated, and sometimes
sacramentally eaten by its worshipers.
   The man who sees his ideal in an animal calls himself by
its name, because, exemplifying his highest aspirations as it

does, it is his "true self." We who have higher gods still
describe our enemies as the beasts we despise        —   they are
"perfect asses," "just pigs," or on extreme provocation
"skunks." Men who still look up to animals bestow analo-
gous titles on human beings in a reverent spirit. Those to
whom the swift, intensely vital and prolific hare is a symbol
of life and fertility, think of themselves as hares, and attribute
even more harishness to their venerated, beatified ancestors.
They were the "Great Hares." A civilized man would^mean.
this epithet metaphorically, but the primitive mind is always
losing its way between symbol and meaning, and freely
changes "My earliest ancestor was a 'Hare,' " into "A hare
was my first ancestor."
   Here is probably the genesis of totemism. The fact that
totems feature all kinds of aniirials and even plants does not
preclude such an origin; for once a tribe has adopted an
animal form to express its essence, other tribes will follow
suit by sheer imitation, without the same motive, choosing
different animals to distinguish them from their neighbors.
They may have no original notion of any ideal. A tribal ideal
is then formed in keeping with the symbol, if at all. But the

primary conception of a totem must have sprung from some
insight into the human significance of an animal form; perhaps
a purely sexual significance, perhaps a sublimer notion of
savage virtue.
  Such speculation is borne out by the fact that it is the
animal form rather than any living representative of the
144                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
species that is preeminently holy. Emile Durkheim, who has
made a close study of totemism in Les formes elementaires
de la vie religieuse, warns against the fallacy of seeing a
simple animal worship in its practices; for in the course of
such study, he says, "One comes to the remarkable con-
clusion that images of the totem-creature are more sacred than
the totem-creature itself " 12
   "Here is the real nature of the totem: it is nothing but the
material form by which human minds can picture that im-
material substance, that energy diffused throughout all sorts
of heterogeneous things, that power which alone is the true
object of the cult." 13 Moreover, it is this Power concentrated
in the character of the clan                   —
                                  the social influence and author-
  —
ity   which, in M. Durkheim's opinion, is the real divinity.
    "The totem is the banner of the clan," he says; and fur-
ther, "Since the religious Power is nothing else than the
collective and nameless Power of the clan, and since this is
not capable of representation except through the totem, the
totemic emblem is like the visible body of the god.                     .   .   .



This explains why, in the hierarchy of things sacred, it holds
the highest place     .    .       .



    "Why is it forbidden to kill and eat the totem-animal, and
why has its flesh these positive virtues which give it its part
in ritual? Because this animal resembles the tribal emblem,
namely its own image. And as of course it resembles it more
closely than man, it has a higher rank than he in the hierarchy
of holies." 14
    Durkheim's whole analysis of totemism bears out the con-
tention that it is, like all sacraments, a form of ideation, an
expression of concepts in purely presentational metaphor.
    "Religion is, first and foremost, a system of ideas by means
of which individuals can envisage the society of which they
are members, and the relations, obscure yet intimate, which
they bear to it. That is the primordial task of a faith. And
though it be metaphorical and symbolical, it is not therefore
untrue. On the contrary, it conveys all that is essential in
the relations it claims to portray.        ." 15    .   .



    "The believer is not deceiving himself when he puts his
faith in the existence of a moral potency, on which he is de-
pendent, and to which he owes his better part; this Power
exists, it is Society.        Doubtless, he is mistaken when he
                               .       .   .



believes that the enhancement of his vital strength is the
work of a Being that looks like an animal or a plant. But
 his error lies only in the literal reading of the symbol by


  12 Op. cit., p. 189.                             13 Ibid., p. 270.
  14 Ibid., pp. 315-318.                            1* Ibid., p. 323.
        life-symbols: the roots of sacrament                    145
which this Being is presented to his mind, the external aspect
under which his imagination conveys it, and does not touch
the fact of its existence. Behind these figures and metaphors,
however gross or refined they may be, there lies a concrete
and living reality." 16
  From such primitive sacramentalism to a real theology, a
belief inOlympians who lie on beds of asphodel, or in a
heavenly Jerusalem where a triune God sits enthroned, may
seem so far a call that one may incline to doubt whether
human imagination could have passed continuously from
one to the other. The mentalities of Australian aborigines
and of European worshipers, ancient and modern, appear to
be just worlds apart; the Sacred Emu does not give any
promise of a future Zeus, nor does a lizard in a cave appear
to foreshadow the Christian God of Love. Yet when we trace
the histories of such high divinities back to their antecedents
in earlier ages, there is an astonishing kinship between those
antecedents and the local deities of Australian, African, or
American savages. We have no evidence that genuine totem-
ism ever existed in Europe; but of animal cults we have con-
vincing proof. Luck has it that one of the most civilized
religions of all time, namely the Greek, has inscribed the
whole course of its evolution for us on the places where it
flourished  —on the temples and households, cemeteries and
libraries that tell the story of Hellas   from its dawn to its slow
destruction; and that a classical scholar with patience and
insight has traced that evolution from its earliest recoverable
phases to its last decadent forms. For, as Professor Gilbert
Murray has said, "In this department as in others, ancient.
Greece has th^ triumphant if tragic distinction of beginning
at the very bottom and- struggling, however precariously, to
the very summits. There is hardly any horror of primitive
supersition of which we cannot find some distant traces in
our Greek record. There is hardly any height of spiritual
thought attained in the world that has not its archetype or its
echo in the stretch of Greek literature that lies between
Thales and Plotinus.     ." 17
                             .   .



   The scholar to whom we are most indebted for a truly
coherent picture of religious origins is Jane Harrison, whose
Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion sets forth with
all detail the evolution of Olympian and Christian divinities
from their humble, zoolatrous beginnings in tombs and
snake-holes and chimney-corners. This evolution is a long
story. It has been briefly retold by Professor Murray in the
book from which the above quotation is taken, 18 and here
  is Ibid., p. 322.n Five Stages of Greek Religion (1925), pp. 15-16.
  18 See esp. chaps,   i   and ii.
146                                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
I   can do no more than indicate its beginning, direction, and
moral.
        Its   beginning        —contrary        to   our traditional ideas of the
                     —
Greek mind is not at all in bright fancies, lovely anthro-
pomorphic conceptions of the sun, the moon, and the rain-
bow. Professor Murray remarks this at the outset.
   "The things that have misled us moderns in our efforts
towards understanding the primitive stage in Greek reli-
gion," he says, "have been first the widespread and almost
ineradicable error of treating Homer as primitive, and more
generally our unconscious insistence on starting with the
notion of 'Gods.'      The truth is that this notion of a god
                                        —
                                    .   .   .



far away in the sky   I do not say merely a First Cause who
is 'without body parts or passions,' but almost any being that

                                                      —
we should naturally call a 'god' is an idea not easy for
primitive man to grasp. It is a subtle and rarefied idea, satu-
rated with ages of philosophy and speculation." 19
   The Olympian gods, who seem like free inventions of an
innocent, delighted imagination, "are imposed upon a back-
ground strangely unlike themselves. For a long time their
luminous figures dazzled our eyes; we were not able to see
the half-lit regions behind them, the dark primeval tangle
of desires and fears and dreams from which they drew their
vitality. The surest test to apply in this question is the evi-
dence of actual cult. Miss Harrison has here shown us the
right         method.      .   .
                                    ." 20

        Her findings by this method were, in brief, that in the
great      Greek festivals the Olympian gods played no role at
all; their names were quite externally associated with these
occasions, and were usually modified by an epithet, to make
the connection at least reasonable. Thus the Athenian Diasia
is held in honor of "Zeus Meilichios," or "Zeus of Placation."
   "A god with an epithet," says Murray, "is always suspi-
cious, like a human being with an 'alias.' Miss Harrison's
examination shows that in the rites Zeus has no place at all.
Meilichios from the beginning has a fairly secure one. On
some of the reliefs Meilichios appears not as a god, but as
an enormous, bearded snake, a well-known representation
of underworld powers or dead ancestors.                         .   .   .


    "The Diasia was a ritual of placation, that is, of casting
away various elements of pollution or danger and appeasing
the unknown wraths of the surrounding darkness. The near-
est approach to a god contained in this festival is Meilichios.
.   . His name means 'He of appeasement,' and he is nothing
         .




else."
        "The Thesmophoria formed the great festival of Demeter
        is Ibid., p. 24.                             20 ibid., p. 28.
           life-symbols: the roots of sacrament                           147
and her daughter Kore, though here again Demeter appears
with a clinging epithet, Thesmophoros. We know pretty clearly
the whole course of the ritual.        The Olympian Demeter
                                           .   .   .



and Persephone dwindle away as we look closer, and we are
left with the shadow Thesmophoros, 'She who carries Thes-
moi,' not a substantive personal goddess, but merely a personi-
fication  of the ritual itself; an imaginary charm-bearer
generated by so much charm-bearing, just as Meilichios in
the Diasia was generated from the ritual of appeasement." 21
   The first entirely anthropomorphic conception seems to
have come into Greece with the conquering Achaeans, whose
Olympian Zeus, a mountain god, 22 had attained human form,
at a time when the native Pelasgian gods still retained their
animal shapes or were at best monstrous hybrids; Athena still
identified with an owl, or figured as the Diver-Bird or bird-
headed "Diver-Maid" of Megara. 23 The effect of this per-
sonified Achaean god on the barbarian worship then current
in Aegean lands was probably spectacular; for a single higher
conception can be a marvellous leaven in the heavy, amor-
phous mass of human thought. The local gods took shape
in the new human pattern, so obvious once it had been
conceived; and it is not surprising that this Achaean moun-
tain-god, or rather mountain-dwelling sky-god, became either
father or conqueror of those divinities who grew up in his
image.
   "He had an extraordinary power of ousting or absorbing the
various objects of aboriginal worship which he found in his
path," says Professor Murray. "The story of Meilichios [whose
cult he usurped] is a common one." 24
   But even this^ great Olympian could not attain his pefrect
form, his definite relations to the heavens, the gods, and the
human world, until he became a figure in something more
than ritual; it is in the great realm of myth that human con-
ceptions of divinity really become articulated.              A
                                                      symbol may
give identity to a god, a mimetic dance may express his favors,
but what really fixes his character is the tradition of his origin,
actions, and past adventures. Like the hero of a novel or a
drama, he becomes a personality, not by his sheer appearance,
but by his story. Moloch, however widely worshiped, has
never become an independent being apart from his rites, be-
cause if he had any myth, it never became coherent in any
systematic account. But Zeus and all his family had their
genealogist in Homer, to mention only the greatest myth-
maker we know. Herodotus was probably not far from the
   21 Ibid., pp. 28-31.
   22 ibid., p. 66. "It ['Olympus'] is a   pre-Greek word applied to Moun-
tains."
   23 Harrison, Prolegomena, p. 304.       24 Murray, op. cit. s p. 70.
 148                   PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
 truth     when he said that Homer gave the Greek gods their
 names and        stations   and even   shapes. 25 Divinities are
                                                their
born of ritual, but theologies spring from myth. Miss Harri-
son, in describing the origin of a Kore or primitive earth-
goddess, says: "The May-pole or harvest-sheaf is half-way to a
harvest Maiden; it is thus         that a goddess is made.
                                        .   .   .                                     A
song is sung, a story told, and the very telling fixes the out-
line of the personality. It is possible to worship long in the
spirit, but as soon as the story-telling and myth-making
instinct awakes you have anthropomorphism and theology." 28
   The "myth-making instinct," however, has a history of its
own, and its own life-symbols; though it is the counterpart
of sacrament in the making of higher religion, it does not be-
long to the lower phases; or, at least, it has little importance
below the level of dawning philosophic thought, which is the
last reach of genuine religion, its consummation and also its
dissolution.
