Life-Symbols: The Roots of Myth


While religion grows from the blind worship of Life and
magic "aversion" of Death to a definite totem-cult or other
sacramentalism, another sort of "life-symbol" develops in its
own way, starting also in quite unintentional processes, and
culminating in permanent significant forms. This medium is
myth. Although we generally associate mythology with re-
ligion, it really cannot be traced, like ritual, to an origin in
anything like a "religious feeling," either of dread, mystic
veneration, or even festal excitement. Ritual begins in motor
attitudes, which, however personal, are at once externalized
and so made public. Myth begins in fantasy, which may re-
main tacit for a long time; for the primary form of fantasy
is   the entirely subjective and private phenomenon of dream.
     The lowest form of story is not much more than a dream-
narrative. It has no regard whatever for coherence or even
consistency of action, for possibility or common sense; in
fact, the existence of such yarns as for instance the Papuans
tell, in a society which is after all intelligent enough to gauge

the physical properties of clubs and arrows, fire and water,
and the ways of animals and men, shows that primitive story
has some other than literal significance. It is made essentially

     25 Harrison, Prolegomena, p. 64.           26 Harrison, op.   cit.,   p.   80.
                 LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                 149
    of dream-material; the images in it are taken from life, they
    are things and creatures, but their behavior follows some
    entirely unempirical law; by realistic standards it is simply
    inappropriate to them.
       Roland Dixon, in his Oceanic Mythology, 1 cites a story
    from Melanesia, in which two disputants, a buffalo and a
    crocodile, agree to ask "the next to come down the river"
    to arbitrate their quarrel; their request for a judgment is
    refused successively by a leaf-plate, a rice-mortar, and a mat,
    before the Mouse-Deer finally acts as judge. 2 There is an-
    other tale which begins: "One day an egg, a snake, a centi-
    pede, an ant, and a piece of dung set out on a head-hunting
    expedition.  .   .
                        ." 3 In yet  another narrative, "while two
    women were sleeping in a house, a tapa-beater transformed
    itself into a woman resembling one of the pair, and waking
    the other, said to her, 'Come, it is time for us to go fishing.'
    So the woman arose, and they took torches and went out to
    sea in a canoe. After a while she saw an island of driftwood,
    and as the dawn came on, perceived that her companion had
    turned into a tapa-beatei, whereupon she said: 'Oh, the tapa-
    beater has deceived me. While we were talking in the evening
    it stood in the corner and heard us, and in the night it came

    and deceived me.' Landing her on the island, the tapa-beater
:   paddled away and abandoned her.       .   .
                                               ." After a miraculous

    rescue and return, "the woman told her parents how the
    tapa-beater had deceived and kidnapped her; and her father
    was angry, and building a great fire, he threw the tapa-beater
    into it and burned it up." 4
        In these stories we have certainly a very low stage of hupjan
    imagination; one cannot call them "myths," let alone "reli-
    gious myths." For the leaf-plate which refused to arbitrate
    a quarrel (it was peeved, by the way, because it had been
    thrown out when it was still perfectly good), the equally
    unobliging mortar and mat, the piece of dung that went head-
    hunting, and the deceitful tapa-beater, are not "persons" in
    a strange disguise; despite their humanoid activities they are
     just domestic articles. In fact, the tapa-beater is in disguise
    when it resembles a woman, and when the rising sun breaks
     the spell it must return to its real form. But even as a tapa-
     beater it has no trouble in paddling the canoe home, and
     returning alone to the house.
        No sane human being, however simple, could really "sup-
     pose" such events to occur; and clearly, in enjoying this sort

      iVol. ix of The Mythology of All Races (1916).
      2 Dixon, Oceanic Mythology,
                                  p. 198.
      3 Ibid.,p. 202.
      *lbid., pp. 141-142.
150                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
of story nobody is trying to "suppose" anything. To imagine
the assorted hunting-party really on its way through the jungle
is perhaps just as impossible for a Papuan as for us. The only

explanation of such stories is, then, that nobody cares whether
their dramatis personae act in character or not. The act is
not really proper to its agent, but to someone its agent repre-
sents; and even the action in the story may merely represent
the deeds of such a symbolized personality. In other words,
the psychological basis of this remarkable form of nonsense
lies in the fact that the story is a fabrication out of subjective
symbols, not out of observed folkways and nature-ways. The
psychoanalysts, who have found such unconscious metaphor
to be the rationale of our otherwise inexplicable dreams, can
give us ample illustration of this sort of fantasy. It is entirely
bound to feelings and wishes of its author, cast in its bizarre
or monstrous mold by his unavowed fears and reticences,
formulated and told and retold as a means of self-expression.
As we meet it in these Melanesian stories, it is really only
a cut above genuine dream. But even so, the story is an
improvement on mere dream, because the very telling of it
requires a little more coherence than our nightmares usually
have. There must be a thread of logic; a tapa-beater who is
also a woman must, in one capacity or the other, be "in
disguise"; the head-hunting dung, egg, and animals must set
out together, and   — though the head-hunt is forgotten before
the end of the story —   they must either do something together
or get separated. Characters have to be generally accounted
for,which is more than we do in dreaming.
  So long as a story is told to a very uncritical audience by
the person who made it up, it may be ever so silly without
giving offense. Anyone who has heard young children telling
yarns to each other can corroborate this. But as soon as the
story goes abroad, it meets with more rigorous demands for
significance. If it survives in a larger sphere, it undergoes
various modifications, in the interests of coherence and pub-
lic appeal. Its purely personal symbols are replaced by more
universal ones; animals, ghosts, and witches take the place of
tapa-beaters and suchlike in the villain's role. Just as sacra
change their form, and become gradually personified with the
growth of ritual action, so the development and integration of
story-action makes the symbols of fantasy take on more and
more reasonable outward form to fit the role in which they
are cast.  A   higher fictional mode emerges     —  the animal fable,
the trickster story, or the orthodox ghost story. 5 Often the
   5 It must be borne in mind here that the primitive animal fable has
no conscious allegorical import, as Aesop's or La Fontaine's fables have,
and that the ghost story has no naturalistic "explanation," because
ghosts are accepted beings in the savage's cosmos.
             LIFE-SYMBOLS THE ROOTS OF MYTH
                              I                                 151

theme    is quite ephemeral  —  merely the homecoming of a
strayed person, the theft of a cocoanut, or somebody's meeting
with a cannibalistic ghoul in the bush   —  but such simple plots
grow, with the advancing arts of life and social organization,
into the well-known genre of fairytale.
   Here we have a literary product belonging to the civilized
races of Europe just as much as to the savage cultures of
darker continents. Aristocratic beings, chiefs or princes, now
play the leading role; dragons and ogres and wicked kings,
or beautiful witches of great power, replace the monkeys,
crocodiles, angry dead men, or local cannibals of the older
tradition. The wishful imagination of man has been disci-
plined, by public exposure and realistic reflection, into a
genuine art-form, as far removed from personal dreaming
as the ritual dance from self-expressive bouncing and shouting.
   Yet this high development of fantasy has brought us no-
where in the direction of mythology. For although fairy-story
is probably an older form than myth, the latter is not simply
a higher development of the former. It, too, goes back to
primitive fantasy, but the point of its origin from that source
lies far back in cultural history, long before the evolution of
                        —
our modern fairytale of Kunstmarchen, as the Germans
say, or even Volksmdrchen. It required not a higher stage of
story-telling, but a thematic shift, to initiate what Miss Harri-
son called "the myth-making instinct."
    The difference between the two fictional modes many    —
scholars to the contrary notwithstanding 6     — is a crucial one.

For the fairytale is irresponsible; it is frankly imaginary, and
its purpose is to gratify wishes, "as a dream doth flatter."

Its heroes and fferoines, though of delightfully^ high station,
wealth, beauty, etc., are simply individuals; "a certain prince,"
"a lovely princess." The end of the story is always satisfy-
ing, though by no means always moral; the hero's heroism
may be slyness or luck quite as readily as integrity or valor.
The theme is generally the triumph of an unfortunate one
an enchanted maiden, a youngest son, a poor Cinderella, an
 alleged fool—   over his or her superiors, whether these be
kings, bad fairies, strong animals (e.g. Red Riding Hood's
wolf), stepmothers, or elder brothers. In short, the fairytale
 is a form of "wishful thinking," and the Freudian analysis
 of it fully explains why it is perennially attractive, yet never
 believed by adults even in the telling.
    Myth, on the other hand, whether literally believed or not,

  6 See esp. P. Ehrenreich, Die allgemeine Mythologie und ihre ethno-
logischen Grundlagen (1910); E. Mudrak, "Die deutsche Heldensage,"
Jahrbuch fur historische Volkskunde, VII (1939): and Otto Rank,
Psychoanalytische Beitrdge zur Mythenforschung (1922).
152               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
istaken with religious seriousness, either as historic fact or as
a "mystic" truth. Its typical theme is tragic, not Utopian;
and its personages tend to fuse into stable personalities of
supernatural character. Two divinities of somewhat similar
type  —perhaps miraculously born, prodigious in strength,
heroically defeated and slain — become identified; they are one
god under two names. Even those names may become mere
epithets linking the god to different cults.
   This sets the hero of myth strikingly apart from the fairy-
tale hero.  No matter how closely the Prince Charming of
Snow White's story resembles the gentleman who wakens
Sleeping Beauty, the two characters do not become identified.
No one thinks that the trickster "Little Claus" is the little
tailor who slew "seven at a stroke," or that the giant whom
Jack killed was in any way related to the ogre defeated by
Puss in Boots, or that he figured elsewhere as Bluebeard.
Fairy stories bear no relation to each other. Myths, on the
other hand, become more and more closely woven into one
fabric, they form cycles, their dramatis personae tend to be
intimately connected if not identified. Their stage is the actual
      —
world the Vale of Tempe, Mount Olympus, the sea, or the
     —
sky and not some ungeographical fairyland.
  Such radical dissimilarities between two kinds of story lead
one to suspect that they have fundamentally different func-
tions. And myth has, indeed, a more difficult and more serious
purpose than fairytale. The elements of both are much alike,
but they are put to quite different uses. Fairytale is a per-
sonal gratification, the expression of desires and of their
imaginary fulfillment, a compensation for the shortcomings of
real life, an escape from actual frustration and conflict. Be-
cause its function is subjective, the hero is strictly individual
and human; for, although he may have magic powers, he is
never regarded as divine; though he may be an oddity like
Tom Thumb, he is not considered supernatural. For the same
reason    —
          namely that his mission is merely to represent the
"self" in a day-dream   — he is not a savior or helper of man-
kind. If he is good, his goodness is a personal asset, for which
he is richly rewarded. But his humanitarian role is not the
point of the story; it is at best the setting for his complete
social triumph. The beneficiary of his clever acts, his prowess,
or his virtue is he himself, not mankind forever after. And
because an individual history is what the fairytale fancies, its
interest is exhausted with the "happy ending" of each finished
story. There is no more mutual reference between the ad-
ventures of Cinderella and those of Rapunzel than between
two separate dreams.
   Myth, on the other hand, at least at its best, is a recogni-
                LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                      153
tion of natural conflicts, of human desire frustrated by non-
human powers, hostile oppression, or contrary desires; it is a
story of the birth, passion, and defeat by death which is
man's common fate. Its ultimate end is not wishful distortion
of the world, but serious envisagement of its fundamental
truths; moral orientation, not escape. That is why it does not
exhaust its whole function in the telling, and why separate
myths cannot be left entirely unrelated to any others. Because
it presents, however metaphorically, a world-picture, an in-

sight into life generally, not a personal imaginary biography,
myth tends to become systematized; figures with the same
poetic meaning are blended into one, and characters of quite
separate origin enter into definite relations with each other.
Moreover, because the mythical hero is not the subject of an
egocentric day-dream, but a subject greater than any indi-
vidual, he is always felt to be superhuman, even if not quite
divine. He is at least a descendant of the gods, something
more than a man. His sphere of activity is the real world,
because what he symbolizes belongs to the real world, no
matter how fantastic its expression may be (this is exactly
contrary to the fairytale technique, which transports a natural
individual to a fairyland outside reality).
   The material of myth is, indeed, just the familiar symbolism
of dream    —
            image and fantasy. No wonder psychologists have
discovered that it is the same material as that of fairytale; that
both have symbols for father and son, maiden and wife and
mother, possession and passion, birth and death. 7 The dif-
ference is in the two respective uses of that material: the one,
primarily for supplying vicarious experience, the other essen-
tially for understanding actual experience. 8 Both interests
may be served in one and the same fiction; their complete
separation belongs only to classic cases. Semi-mythical mo-
tives occur in sheer day-dream and even night-dream, and
an element of compensation-fantasy may persist in the most
universalized, perfected myths. That is inevitable, because

  "
      Cf.Sigmund Freud, Collected Papers, vol. IV (1925), Essay ix (pp.
173-183), "The      Relation of the Poet to Day-Dreaming"; also Otto
Rank, op. cit., esp. essays vi (pp. 119-145), "Das Briidermarchen," and
vii (pp. 146-184), "Mythus und Marchen."
   s This distinction w. s m ..e fairly long ago by E. Bethe, in his mono-
                —
graph, Mythus Sage    —    Marchen (1905), in which he writes: "Myth,
legend, and fairytale differ from one another in origin and purpose.
Myth is primitive philosophy, the simplest presentational (anschauliche)
form of thought, a series of attempts to understand the world, to ex-
plain life and death, fate and nature, gods and cults. Legend is primi-
tive history, naively formulated in terms of love and hate, unconsciously
transformed and simplified. But fairytale has sprung from, and serves,
no motive but entertainment." Cf. also A. Thimme, Das Marchen
(1909).
154                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
the latter type has grown at some point out of the former,
as all realistic thinking springs from self-centered fancy. There
is no clean dividing line. Yet the two are as distinct as sum-

mer and winter, night and day, or any other extremes that
have no exact zero-point between them.
  We    do not know just where, in the evolution of human
thought, myth-making begins, but it begins somewhere with
the recognition of realistic significance in a story. In every
fantasy, no matter how Utopian, there are elements that repre-
sent real human relations, real needs and fears, the quandaries
and conflicts which the "happy ending" resolves. Even if the
real situation is symbolized rather than stated (a shocking
condition may well be disguised, or a mysterious one strangely
conceived), a certain importance, an emotional interest, at-
taches to those elements. The ogre, the dragon, the witch, are
intriguing figures in fairy-lore. Unlike the hero, they are
usually ancient beings, that have troubled the land for many
generations. They have their castles or caves or hermitages,
their magic cook-pots and sorcerer's wands; they have evil
deeds laid up against them, and extremely bad habits, usually
of a cannibalistic turn. Their records are merely suggested in
the story, which hastens to get on with the fortunes of the
hero; but the suggestion is enough to activate a mind which is,
after all, committed to some interests besides dream-spinning.
Because they represent the realistic setting from which the
dream starts its fanciful escape, they command a serious sort
of contemplation.
   It is significant that people who refuse to tell their children
fairytales do not fear that the children will believe in princes
 and princesses, but that they will believe in witches and
bogeys. Prince or princess, to whom the wish-fulfilment hap-
pens, we find in ourselves, and need not seek in the outer
 world; their reference is subjective, their history is our dream,
 and we know well enough that it is "make-believe." But the
incidental figures are material for superstition, because their
meanings are in the real world. They represent those same
powers that are conceived, first perhaps through "dreadful"
objects like corpses or skulls or hideous idols, as ghosts, keres,
hoodoos, and similar spooks. The ogres of literature and the
ghouls of popular conception embody the same mysterious
Powers; therefore the fairytale, which even most children will
not credit as a narrative, may carry with it a whole cargo of
ideas, purely secondary to its own purpose, that are most
convincing elements for superstition. The awful ancestor in
the grave goes abroad as the goblin of story: that is the god
of superstition.   The world-picture of spook-religion is a re-
flection of fairytale, a dream whose nightmare elements be-
            LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                 155
come attached to visible cult objects and thus taken seriously.
   There is nothing cosmological about the being such a symbol
can embody. Deities in the classical sense cannot be born of
tales whose significance is personal, because the setting of
such tales is necessarily a genre picture, a local, temporal,
human environment, no matter how distorted and disguised.
The forces that play into an individual's dream are social
forces, not world-powers. So long as the hero is the self, the
metaphorical dragons he slays are his elders, his rivals, or
his personal enemies; their projection into the real world
as sacred beings can yield only ancestors, cave-monsters, mani-
tos, and capricious demigods.
   It is noteworthy that when these secondary characters of
day-dream or story are incorporated into our picture of the
external world as objects of superstition, they represent a
generalized, heightened conception of the social forces in
question: not a man's father, but his fathers, the paternal
power in all generations, may be seen in the fabulous animal-
ancestor he reveres; not his brother, but a "Great Brother,"
in the manito-bear that is his familiar of the forest. The
process of symbolization, while it often obscures the origin
of our ideas, enhances their conceptual form. The demon,
therefore, presents to us not a specific person, but the human
estate of such a person, by virtue of which we are oppressed,
challenged, tempted, or triumphant. Though he is born of a
purely self-centered imagination, he is super-personal; a pro-
duct not only of particular experience, but of social insight.
He is the envisagement of a vital factor in life; that is why
he is projected into reality by the symbolism of religion.
    The great stfip from fairytale to myth is taken whe6*not
                   —
 only social forces persons, customs, laws, traditions    —  but
 also cosmic forces surrounding mankind, are expressed in the
 story; when not only relationships of an individual to society,
 but of mankind to nature, are conceived through the spon-
taneous metaphor of poetic fantasy.
   Perhaps this transition from subjectively oriented stories,
separate and self-contained, to the organized and permanent
envisagement of a world-drama could never be made if crea-
tive thought were not helped by the presence of permanent,
obvious symbols, supplied by nature: the heavenly bodies,
the changes of day and night, the seasons, and the tides. Just
as the social framework of personal life, first conceived in
dream-like, inchoate forms, is gradually given enduring rec-
ognition through religious symbols, so the cosmic setting of
man's existence is imponderable, or at best a mere nightmare,
until the sun and the moon, the procession of stars, the winds
and waters of earth, exhibit a divine rule, and define the
156                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
realm of human activity. When these gods arrive, whose
names connote heavenly powers and natural processes, the
deities of local   caves and groves   become mere    vassals   and
lesser lights.
   It has often been asked, not without justification, how men
of sane observant minds   —   however unschooled or innocent
can be led to identify sun, moon, or stars with the anthropo-
morphic agents of sacred story. Yet the interpretation of gods
and heroes as nature-symbols is very ancient; it has been
variously accepted and rejected, disputed, exploded, and re-
established, by Hellenic philosophers, medieval scholars,
modern philologists, archeologists, and theologians, over a
period of twenty-five hundred years. Mystifying as it is to
psychology, it challenges us as a fact. Demeter was certainly
an earth-goddess, and the identity of Olympian Zeus with the
heavens, Apollo with the sun, Artemis with the moon, etc.,
is so authentic that it has long been considered a truism to
declare these gods "personifications" of the corresponding
natural phenomena. Yet such a process of personification
seems like an unnatural flight of fancy. It is a fairly safe
rule not to impute to the savage mind processes that never
even threaten to arise in our own minds. The difference be-
tween savage and civilized mentality is, after all, one of naive
versus critical thinking; bizarre and monstrous imagery pops
into our heads, too, but is rejected almost instantly by the
disciplined reason. But I do not think that either in dream or
in childhood we are prone to think of the sun as a man. As
for the stars, it takes a sophisticated literary tradition to make
them people, or even Lady Moon's sheep.
   How then did heroic adventures become attached to these
most impersonal actors, as they almost universally did? The
process, I believe, is a natural phase of the evolution of myth-
ology from fairy-story, and indeed represents a potent factor
in that development. The change is a gradual one, and has
necessarily its intermediate steps; one of these is marked by
the introduction of the first cosmic symbols. This transitional
stage between the egocentric interest of folktale, focussed on
a human hero, and the emergence of full-fledged nature-
mythology dealing with divine characters of highly general
import, is the so-called legend, which produces the "culture-
hero."
   This widely represented fictional character is a hybrid of
subjective and objective thinking; he is derived from the
hero of folktale, representing an individual psyche, and con-
sequently retains many of that personage's traits. But the
symbolic character of the other beings in the fairytale has in-
fected him, too, with a certain supernaturalism; he is more
              LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                       157
than an individual wrestling with powers of society. Just what
else he is, must be gathered from his personality as it reveals
itself in the legendary mode.
   He is half god, half giant-killer. Like the latter, he is often
a Youngest Son, the only clever one among his stupid
brothers. He is born of high parentage, but kidnapped, or
exposed and rescued, or magically enslaved, in his infancy.
Unlike the dream-subject of fairytale, however, his deeds only
begin with his escape from thraldom; they go on to benefit
mankind. He gives men fire, territory, game, teaches them
agriculture, ship-building, perhaps even language; he "makes"
the land, finds the sun (in a cave, in an egg, or in a foreign
country), and sets it in the sky, and controls wind and rain.
But despite his greatness he slips back frequently into his role
of folktale hero, and plays the trickster, outwitting human
enemies, local ghosts, or even a venerable ancestor just for
mischief.
  The status of the culture-hero is thus very complex. His
activities lie in the real   world, and their effects are    felt   by
real   men forever after; he therefore has a somewhat vague,
yet unmistakable historical relation to living men, and a tie
to the locality on which he has left his mark. This alone would
suffice to distinguish him from the hero of fairyland, whose
acts are bound up entirely with a story, so that he can be
dispensed with at the end of it, and a new hero introduced
for the next story. The historical and local attachments of the
culture-hero give his being a certain permanence. Stories
gather round him, as they gather round real heroes of history
whose deeds have become legendary, such as Charlemagne,
Arthur, or Kubla Khan. But whereas these princes are creiiited
with enhanced^and exaggerated human acts, the primitive
culture-hero interferes wfth the doings of nature rather than
of men; his opponents are not Saracens or barbarians, but
sun and moon, earth and heaven.
  A  perfect example of such a demigod is the Indian Mana-
bozho or Michabo, also known as Hiawatha. 9 He is at once
a supernatural being, and a very human character. The fact
that he is a manito who can take whole mountain ranges at a
couple of strides, that he chastises his father the West Wind
for the indignities inflicted on his moon-descended mother,
does not put him above feeling the pinch of hunger in winter,
or getting stung in robbing a bee-tree.
   Brinton, one of the earliest systematic collectors of Indian

  9 The first printed source of the Hiawatha legend seems to be J. V.
Clark's History of Onondaga (1849), from which Longfellow drew the
materials for his version. H. R. Schoolcraft's The Myth of Hiawatha
(1856) is fuller and more coherent, but less authentic.
158                        PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
folk-lore, looking for "natural theology" in the Red Man, was
baffled and distressed by the character of Manabozho; for "He
is fullof pranks and wiles, but often at a loss for a meal of
                                magic arts on great beasts and
victuals; ever itching to try his
often meeting ludicrous failure therein; envious of the powers
of others, and constantly striving to outdo them in what they
do best; in short, little more than a malicious buffoon de-
lighting in practical jokes, and abusing his superhuman
powers for selfish and ignoble ends." At the same time, "From
a grain of sand brought from the bottom of the primaeval
ocean he fashioned the habitable land and set it floating on
the waters.   .   One of his footsteps measured eight leagues,
                  .   .




the Great Lakes were the beaver dams he built, and when the
cataracts impeded his progress he tore them away with his
hands." 10 He invented picture writing and made the first
fishing-nets. Obviously he is a deity; yet his name, in every
dialect that varies or translates it, means "Great Hare" or
"Spirit Hare." Brinton was convinced that the popular stories
about him are "a low, modern, and corrupt version," and
that his name rests on a philological mistake which all the
Indians made, confusing wabo, "hare," with wapa, "the dawn";
that his various names originally designated a sun-god, but
led to his representation as a hare, by an accident of lan-
guage. 11
   Manabozho is in all likelihood not a degraded Supreme
God, but an enhanced, exalted fictional hero. He still bears
the marks of his human origin, though he has established rela-
tions to the great forces which encompass human life, the
heavens, the seasons, and the winds. His superhuman deeds
have raised him to a comradeship with these powers; and his
pseudo-historic relation to mankind leads to his identification
with the totem-animal, the mystic ancestor of his people.
Therefore he is at once the son of the West Wind, grandson
of the Moon, etc., and the Great Hare; and at the same time


   10 D. Brinton,         The Myths of the New World (1896), pp. 194-195.
  nlbid., p. 194 ff. On Brinton's theory, one might suppose that the
Sacred Cod of Massachusetts, enshrined in the State House, and some-
times pictured, totem-like, on Massachusetts number-plates, had origi-
nated through a little confusion in the Puritan mind between "Cod"
and "God." The Indian is no more likely than the white man to mis-
take even exact homonyms for each other where their meanings are so
diverse that their interchange is patently absurd. The same objection
holds against every attempt to rest mythology on verbal errors or
garbled versions of fact, as Max Muller and Herbert Spencer proposed
to do. We do not learn religious thinking, on the one hand, nor on the
other turn gospel into bed-time stories, just by mistake       —
                                                            by reading
"son" for "sun," or confusing Simon called Peter with Peter Rabbit;
and presumably right-minded Indians don't, either.
                LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                  159
the clever trickster, the great chief, the canoe-builder, and
the superman.
    We  meet the culture-hero again, in all his glory, as Maui,
the Polynesian demigod. 12 He, too, combines the buffoon,
trickster, or naughty boy with heroic and even divine quali-
ties. Like Manabozho, he is of cosmological descent, though
his normal shape is human. Maui is too widely claimed to
bear the marks of any totem, but can change himself into fish,
bird, or beast at will. He is, indeed, everything from a troll
to a deity, because he belongs to all stages of culture      —
                                                           he is
known as a prankster in Papuan fairytale, the fire-stealer
and dragon-killer ("hero" in a classical sense) in more ad-
vanced legends, the demiurge who shapes earth and sky in
Hawaiian cosmology, and in the mythology of New Zealand
he actually becomes a benevolent patron of humanity, self-
sacrificed inan attempt to bestow immortality on men.
   Yet Maui, like Manabozho, is not worshiped. He has no
cult, his name is not sacred, nor do men feel or fear his
power as a factor in current events. He has died, or gone
west, or otherwise ended his local career; one may see his
footprints in the lava, his handiwork in the arrangements of
heaven and earth, but he no longer presides over these. His
old adversary the Sun still runs the course Maui bade him
follow; his ancestress and murderess, the Moon, still vaunts
her immortality in one resurrection after another. These are
visible powers, deities to be entreated or honored.    Why
                                                        is their
son, grandson, conqueror, or playmate, the culture-hero, not
an eternal god, set as a star in the sky, or imagined as a king
of the sea?
   Because he is not as seriously "believed in" as godsend
spirits are. Like the hero of fairytale, the culture-hero is a
vehicle of human wishes" His adventures are fantasies. But,
whereas the story-hero is an individual overcoming personal
           —
opponents father, master, brothers, or rivals the culture-
hero is Man, overcoming the superior forces that threaten
him. A   tribe, not a single inventor, is unconsciously identified
with him. The setting of his drama is cosmic; storm and night
are his foes, deluge and death his ordeals. These are the
realities that inspire his dream of deliverance. His task is the
control of nature  —  of earth and sky, vegetation, rivers, season
—  and the conquest of death.
   Just as the fairytale served to clarify a personal environ-
ment and human relations in its secondary characters, its

   12 See Roland Dixon, Oceanic Mythology; E. Shortland, Maori Re-
ligion and Mythology (1882); J. C. Andersen, Maori Life in Ao-tea (no
date; c. 1907); W. D. Westervelt, Legends of Maui, a Demigod of Poly-
nesia, and of his Mother Hina (1910).
160                    PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
kings, witches, ghosts, and fairies (which were often identified
with real beings and so abstracted from the mere tale), so the
culture-hero's story furnishes symbols of a less personal en-
circling reality. The hero's exploits are largely make-believe
even to their inventors; but the forces that challenge him are
apt to be taken seriously. They belong to the real world, and
their symbols mean something beyond the pipe dream in
which they were formulated. Maui is a superman, a wishful
version of human power, skill, and importance; but his place
among the forces of nature is Man's own place. Where did he
come from? From nature, from heaven and earth and sea. In
cosmic terms, he came "out of the Night." In human terms
he came out of Woman. In his myth, therefore, he is de-
scended from Hine-nui-te-po, Great Woman of Night. 13
  The Polynesian word "Hine" (variants "Hina," "Ina") has
an interesting etymology. By itself, it seems to be always either
a proper noun or an adjective connoting either light (e.g.
white, pale, glimmering) or falling, declining; in composite
words it usually refers to woman. 14 As a name, it denotes the
woman or maiden of such-and-such character, somewhat like
the Greek Kore. The mixture of common and proper mean-
ing gives the word a generalizing function; therefore it ap-
plies with special aptness to supernatural beings which, as we
have seen, are generalized personalities. 15 But when several
personages bear the same name because they have essentially
the same symbolic value, they naturally tend to merge. Since
every "Great Woman," "Mountain Maid," "Mother," or "She"
is Woman, we find a great confusion of Hinas.
   In Polynesian mythologies the various Hina characters are
developed mainly as secondary figures in the story of Maui.
They appear as his mother, sister, grandmother, or very first
ancestress. As few English readers are familiar with the legend,
I will sketch briefly the most important tales of this powerful,
mischievous, and brilliant hero.

                            1.      THE QUEST OF FIRE
  Maui was the youngest of four or five brothers, all named
Maui with various epithets. The Mauis were all stupid except
  13 See      Dixon, op.
                     cit., p. 52; Shortland, op. cit., p. 23; Westervelt,
op.   cit.,133; for complete genealogy see Andersen, op. cit., p. 182.
              p.
  14 The general word for "woman" is "wahine." See H. R. Hitchcock,
English-Hawaiian Dictionary (1887); E. Tregear, The Maori-Polynesian
Comparative Dictionary (1891); L. Andrews, Dictionary of the Hawaiian
Language (1865).
  is Shortland {op.        cit.,   chap, ii) gives the following translations:
          Hine-ahu-one  — the Earth-formed Maid       created woman).
                                                             (first
          Hine-a-tauira — the Pattern Maid      begotten woman).
                                                    (first
          Hine-tu-a-maunga —the Mountain Maid.
          Hine-nui-te-po— Great Woman of Night.
                   LIFE-SYMBOLS THE ROOTS OF MYTH
                                      :                               1   6

this youngest son, who was miraculous from his infancy. He
had been prematurely born, and his mother Hina, not in-
terested in such a weakling, threw him into the sea. But a
jellyfish nursed him, and the elements returned him to his
home, where consequently he was received as a foundling. He
was full of power and mischief, always in trouble with his
brothers and his elders.
   Maui's mother slept in a hut with her children, like any
Polynesian mother. But when the first dawn light appeared
she would depart, and keep herself in some mysterious retreat
all day. Young Maui, determined to find her out, blocked all
the chinks and window-holes of the hut, so that no ray of
light wakened her until it was full day; then, when she woke
and hastily fled, he followed her, and discovered the path she
took to the Underworld, where she was wont to spend the
day with her dead ancestors. Maui, in the form of a bird,
joined this company of chthonic gods, who gave him his first
taste of cooked food. Here he found the ancestress in whose
custody was the precious secret of fire.
   There are many versions of his Promethean exploit. In
one of these, the ancestress gives him one of her fingers, in
which the principle of fire dwells; sometimes he wrests it
from her, and sometimes he learns the secret of fire-making
from the Alae, "the bird of Hina," a mud-hen sacred to that
ancestral fire-woman. But in every case, an ancient Hina,
living in a volcano, in a cave, or simply in the earth, possesses
the treasure, and Maui obtains it by trickery, cajoling, or
violence.
                       2.   THE MAGIC FISH-HOOK                       ,m

     This story, current in      New Zealand, tells how Maui was
sent to take food to one of his aged progenitors; "but when
he came to his ancestress he found her very ill, one half of
her body being already dead, whereupon he wrenched off
her lower jaw, made from it a fish-hook, which he concealed
about him, and then returned to his home." 16 With this hook
he went fishing, and drew up a huge fish, which proved to be
the dry land. Had his foolish brothers who were in the canoe
with him not cut up the fish, there would have been a con-
tinent; as it was, the land fell apart into several islands.

3.        THE HINA OF HILO, AND MAUl'S DEED OF SNARING THE
                              SUN 17
  "The Wailuku river, which flows through the town of Hilo,
has its own peculiar and weird beauty. For miles it is a series
     16 Dixon,   Oceanic Mythology,       p.   43   ff.
     17   An excerpt from Westervelt, Legends of Maui, pp. 140-145.
162                       PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
of waterfalls and rapids. ... By the side of this river Hina's
son Maui had his lands. In the very bed of the river, in a cave
under one of the largest falls, Hina made her home. ... By
the side of this river, the legends say, she pounded her tapa
and prepared her food.          The days were very short and
                                    .   .   .



there was no time for rest while making tapa-cloth.            .          .   .



Although Hina was a goddess and had a family possessing
miraculous power, it never entered the mind of the Hawaiian
legend tellers to endow her with ease in producing wonderful
results.      .   .   .



   "The Hina of Hilo was grieved as she toiled because after
she had pounded the sheets out so thin that they were ready
to be dried, she found it almost impossible to secure the
necessary aid of the sun in the drying process.         The sun
                                                              .   .   .



always hurried so fast that the sheets could not dry.                     .   .   .


Hina found her incantations had no influence with the sun.
She could not prevail upon him to go slower and give her
more time for the completion of her task. Then she called on
her powerful son, Maui-ki-i-ki-i, for aid.
   ". .  He took ropes made from the fibre of trees and vines
          .



[in another version, his sister Ina-Ika's hair] 18 and lassoed
the sun while it climbed the side of the mountain and entered
the great crater which hollows out the summit. The sun came
through a large gap in the eastern side of the crater, rushing
along as rapidly as possible. Then Maui threw his lassoes one
after the other over the sun's legs (the rays of light), holding
him fast and breaking off some of them. With a magic club
Maui struck the face of the sun again and again. At last,
wounded and weary, and also limping on its broken legs, the
sun promised Maui to go slower forevermore."

                          4.   THE DEATH OF MAUI

   This story belongs to New Zealand, and has a tragic, ethical
ring that really suggests a more epic phase of mythology than
the Oceanic. For here the mischievous, wily hero appears in
a serious mood, contemplating the unhappy fate of mankind,
whereby every man must sooner or later go through the gate
of death, and never return. Maui, in the pride of his magic
power, tries to undo this fate, to find life beyond death and
bring it to men on earth.
   Maui, after his many successful exploits, came home to his
parents in high spirits. His father, though duly admiring the
hero's feats, warned him that there was one who might yet
overcome him.

  i&lbid., p. 54. Ina-Ika      is   another "Hina," for "Ina" = "Hina."
             LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                       163
   When Maui   asked incredulously by whom he could be
overcome, "His father answered him, 'By your great ances-
tress,by Hine-nui-te-po, who, if you look, you may see flash-
ing, and as it were, opening and shutting there, where the
horizon meets the sky.     .  What you see yonder shining so
                               .   .



brightly are her eyes, and her teeth are as sharp and hard
as volcanic glass; her body is like that of man, and as for the
pupils of her eyes, they are jasper; and her hair is like the
tangles of long seaweed, and her mouth is like that of a
              ;
               19
barracouta.'
   Maui, despite all warnings, set forth to find the dreadful
ancestress Hina, and to creep through her gaping mouth into
her belly, where Eternal Life was hidden in her womb. He
                                                  —
took his friends the little birds with him presumably for
moral support, since they certainly offered no other aid on      —
his way down the shining path to the horizon; and he adjured
them to make no noise that might wake the monster before
he was safely out of her mouth again. Then he crept into her,
past her obsidian teeth that were the gates of death. He found
the treasure of Eternal Life, and started to make his escape.
But just as he was between the sharp gates once more, one of
the silly small birds could no longer contain itself at the sight
of his undignified exit, and burst into loud, chirping laughter.
Hine-nui-te-po awoke, and Maui was bitten in two. So his great
ancestress conquered him, as she conquers all men             for—
through her jaws they must all go in the end.

   Maui is the same person in various poses throughout these
stories; but it is certainly bewildering to find so many strange
females bearing the name of Hina, and claiming to be Maui's
mother, grandmother, first begotten ancestress, first divine an-
cestress, sister, or other relative. Between his mother who
lived in a hut, and threw him away for a useless weakling
a very true Polynesian lady, we may assume         —
                                                  and the terrible
giantess Hine-nui-te-po, there seCms to be little likeness. Why
do all these mythical women merge their weird personalities
in one name?
  The mystery lightens when we consider that Hina also
means the moon. 20 In the various Hinas of Polynesian myth
we have just so many stages of "personification" of the moon,
from the luminous, hollow woman on the horizon at the end
of the shining path, to the mother who spends the nights with

  19 From Sir George Grey, Polynesian Mythology and Ancient Tradi-
tional History of theNew     Zealand Race, as Furnished by their Priests
and Chiefs, quoted by Dixon, op. cit., p. 52.
   20 Cf. Westervelt, op. cit., p. 165; also Martha Beckwith, Hawaiian
Mythology (1940), p. 220 fi.
164                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
her children but goes down beneath the earth by day. The an-
cestress    who is alive on one side and dead on the other, who
appears to be the same Hina that owned the fire-secret, is
clearly a lunar deity; 21 the Hina of Hilo, emerging from a
cave to spread her tapa-c\oth, seems to be a transitional figure.
   If the gods of mythology really arose by a process of "per-
sonification," then Maui's mother who threw him away and
later re-adopted him must be regarded as the end-result of a
process beginning with a mere animistic conception of the
moon. But in view of the fairytale character of all primitive
story, the complete lack of cosmic interest in the truly savage
mind, and the clear nature-symbolism in the higher mytholo-
gies, I believe the process of development to be exactly the
contrary: Hina is not a symbol of the moon, but the moon
is a symbol of Hina, Woman.
   The moon, by reason of its spectacular changes, is a very
expressive, adaptable, and striking symbol    far more so than—
the sun, with its simple career and unvarying form. A little
contemplation shows quite clearly why the moon is so apt a
feminine symbol, and why its meanings are so diverse that
it may present many women at once                      —
                                          Hina in many, often
incompatible forms, mother and maid and crone, young and
old. The human mind has an uncanny power of recognizing
symbolic forms; and most readily, of course, will it seize
upon those which are presented again and again without
aberration. The eternal regularities of nature, the heavenly
motions, the alternation of night and day on earth, the tides
of the ocean, are the most insistent repetitious forms outside
our own behavior-patterns (the symbolic value of which was
discussed in the previous chapter). They are the most obvious
metaphors to convey the dawning concepts of life-functions
—  birth, growth, decadence, and death.
   Woman is, to primitive reflection, one of the basic mysteries
of nature. In her, life originates; only the more enlightened
societies know that sexual union initiates it. To naive ob-
servation, her body simply waxes and wanes with it for a
certain length of years. She is the Great Mother, the symbol
as well as the instrument of life.
   But the actual process of human conception and gestation
is too slow to exhibit a pattern for easy apprehension. One

needs a symbol, to think coherently about it. Long before
discursive thought could frame propositions to this purpose,
men's minds probably recognized that natural symbol of
womanhood, the waxing and waning moon.
    It is   a characteristic of presentational symbolism that many

  21 Cf.    Dixon, op.   cit.,   p.   43;   Westervelt, op.   cit.,   p. 23.
              LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH               165

concepts may be telescoped into one total expression, without
being severally presented by its constituent parts. The psy-
choanalysts, who discovered this trait in dream-symbolism,
call it "condensation." The moon is a typical "condensed"
symbol. It expresses the whole mystery of womankind, not
only in its phases, but in its inferiority to the sun, its appar-
ent nearness to the clouds that veil it like garments; perhaps
the element of mystery that moonlight invariably creates,
and the complicated time-cycle of its complete withdrawal
(women, in tribal society, have elaborate schedules of taboo
and ritual, of which a man cannot keep track), are not to be
underestimated as symbolical factors.
   But just as life grows to completeness with every waxing
phase, so in the waning period one can see the old moon take
possession, gradually, of the brilliant parts; life is swallowed
by death in a graphic process, and the swallowing monster
was ancestor to the life that dies. The significance of the
moon is irresistible. Ages of repetition hold the picture of life
and death before our eyes. No wonder if men learn to con-
template it, to form their notions of an individual life on the
model of that cycle, and conceive death as a work of ghostly
forbears, the same who gave life                  —
                                         Hina the ancestress is
image of them all; nor that notions of resurrection or rein-
carnation should arise from such contemplation.
   All this may explain why the name Hina should be be-
stowed on the moon, and why that luminary should be deified.
But since savage ideation does not require human form to.
embody a power, why should this Hina be personified?^*
   It is a generally accepted doctrine, almost a truism, that
a savage thinks everything that acts on him must be a person
like himself, and attributes human forms, needs, and motives
to inanimate objects because he cannot explain their activi-
ties in any other way. Again and again we read how primi-
tive men, the makers of mythology, believed the sun, moon,
and stars to be people like themselves, with houses and fami-
lies, because the untutored mind could not distinguish be-
tween heavenly bodies and human bodies, or between their
respective habits. Almost any book on primitive myth that one
picks up repeats this credo, expounded long ago in the classic
work of Tylor:
   "To the lower tribes of man, sun and stars, trees and rivers,
winds and clouds, become personal animate creatures, leading
lives conformed to human or animal analogies, and perform-
ing their special functions with the aid of limbs like beasts or
of artificial instruments like men." 22 Or, in the words of
Andrew Lang:
  22 Tylor, Primitive Culture,   I,   p.   285.
166                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
   "The savage draws no hard and fast line between himself
and the things in the world.      .   He assigns human speech
                                      .   .



and feelings to sun and moon and stars and wind, no less than
to beasts, birds and fishes." 23
   Now, there is no doubt that Maui was said to have cut off
the sun's legs, 24 and that the god Tane saw daylight under the
armpit of his father Rangi, the sky; 25 these natural elements
were certainly anthropomorphized in their full-fledged myths.
What I do not believe, however, is that savages originally and
spontaneously see the sun as a man, the moon as a woman,
etc., else cosmological fantasy would be found much lower in
the scale of human mentality than it is; nor do I think that
nature-myths are originally attempts to explain astronomical
or meteorological events. Nature-myths are originally stories
of a superman hero, Maui, Hiawatha, Balder, or Prometheus,
who is a superman because he is felt to be more than a man
—   he is Mankind in a single human figure. He battles with
the forces of nature, the very same forces that made him and
still sustain him. His relation to them is both filial and social;

and it is his incarnation that leads his elemental ancestors,
brethren, and opponents to be personified. In his story, he has
a mother who is human enough; but, as he is Man, so she is
Woman. Now the symbol of womanhood is the moon; and as
a myth-making mentality does not keep symbol and meaning
apart, the  moon not only represents, but presents, Woman,
the mother of Maui. Not personification of the moon, but a
lunarization of Hina, gives rise to Polynesian cosmology.
   Here we have the genesis of myth from legend. The savage
does not, in his innocence, "think" the moon is a woman be-
cause he cannot tell the difference; he "thinks" it is a round
fire, a shining disk; but he sees Woman in it, and names it
Woman, and all its acts and relationships that interest him are
those which carry out that significance. The connection of the
culture-hero with the moon helps to humanize and define the
functions of that deity, because the culture-hero is unequiv-
ocally human; so the lunar changes of light and form and
place, nameless and difficult as mere empirical facts, acquire
importance and obviousness from their analogy to human
relations  and functions: conceiving, bearing, loving, and
hating, devouring and being devoured. The moon lends itself
particularly to such interpretations, because it can present so
many phases of womanhood. A host of different Hinas are
lunar deities. Yet the unity of the underlying symbol reacts
on the theological conception to make the various distinct
  23 Lang, Myth, Ritual and Religion, I, p. 47.
  24 Cf. Westervelt, Legends of Maui, p. 46.
  25 Cf. Shortland, Maori Religion and Mythology, p. 20.
                 LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                   167
Hinas all of one blood, the "mother" with her "daughters."
This calls for mythological elaboration, and gives rise to
genuine nature-myths.
   The apparently irrational genealogies of gods and demigods
spring from the fact that family relationships in myth may
represent many different physical or logical relationships in
nature and in human society. Night "gives birth" to Hanging
Night, Drifting Night, Moaning Night; Morn, by a different
logic, to Abiding Day, Bright Day, and Space. 26 And Man, in
yet a different sense, is descended from the family of all these
Powers. 27 The moon's "daughters" owe their filial status to a
very different source than Maui his sonship, yet they are, by
reason of both relations, unquestionably his sisters. Thus it is
that one may find a personage who is clearly a moon-goddess
taking part in one of Maui's fishing adventures. 28
   I have dwelled so long on the personification of the moon
because it is, in the first place, the most convincing example
of myth-making, and in the second place it may well have
been the original inspiration to that age-long and world-wide
process. There is a school of mythologists who maintain that
not only the first, but all, mythology is moon-mythology. 29 I
doubt whether this sweeping assumption is justified, since
analogous treatment would most naturally be accorded the
sun, stars, earth, sea, etc., as soon as human mentality ad-
vanced to the conception of an anthropomorphic lunar deity.
Such an epoch-making stride of creative imagination could
hardly have been limited to one subject or one symbol. Once
we envisage h^n's status in nature as that of a hero among
cosmic gods, we cannot fail to see a host of gods all round us;
one would naturally expect, at this point, a "vegetative period"
of religious fantasy.
   The term "religious fantasy" is deliberately used here, al-
though many mythologists quite explicitly reject it. Lessmann,
of the afore-mentioned school, points out as a peculiar fact
that "Greek mythology creates an impression as though reli-
gion and mythology were two closely related phenomena," 30
and explains the origin of that deceptive appearance through
a confusion of Greek mythological gods with the Babylonian
cultus-gods. The gods of ritual are related to ancestral spooks,
devils, and local deities; but "at bottom," he says, "demon-
ology is nothing but a low state of religion, and has no more
than the latter to do with mythology." 31 I have tried to show
  26 Ibid., p. 12.          27 Cf. Dixon, Oceanic Mythology, pp. 26-27.
  28 Cf. Westervelt, op. cit., p. 156.
  29 Gesellschaft fur vergleichende Mythenforschung.
  so H. Lessmann, Aufgaben und Ziele der vergleichenden Mythenfor-
schung (1907-1908), p. 7.
  3i hoc. cit.
168                      PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
how this "confusion" is the normal meeting point of ritual
gods and story gods, how the harvest sheaf who becomes a
harvest maid takes over the story of some maiden of myth-
ology,   whereby the story becomes theology, and enters             into
genuine religious thought.
  In a book called La genese des mythes, A. H. Krappe de-
clares categorically that myths are made up out of whole
cloth by poets, are purely aesthetic productions, and are not
believed unless they happen to be incorporated in some sacred
book. 32 But this is to confuse the myth-making stage of
thought with the literal stage. Belief and doubt belong essen-
tially to the latter; the myth-making consciousness knows only
the appeal of ideas, and uses or forgets them. Only the de-
velopment of literal-mindedness throws doubt upon them and
raises the question of religious belief. Those great conceptions
which can only dawn on us in a vast poetic symbolism are
not propositions to which one says yea or nay; but neither are
they literary toys of a mind that "knows better." The Homeric
Greeks probably did not "believe in" Apollo as an American
fundamentalist "believes in" Jonah and the whale, yet Apollo
was not a literary fancy, a pure figment, to Homer, as he was
to Milton. He was one of the prime realities             —
                                                    the Sun, the
God, the Spirit from which men received inspirations. Whether
anyone "believed" in all his deeds and amours does not matter;
they were expressions of his character and seemed perfectly
rational. Surely the Greeks believed in their gods just as we
believe in ours; but they had no dogma concerning those gods,
because in the average mind no matter-of-fact doubts of
divine story had yet arisen, to cloud the significance of those
remote or invisible beings. Common sense had never asserted
itself against such stories, to make them look like fairytales or
suggest that they were figures of speech. They were figures of
thought, and the only figures that really bold and creative
thought knew.
  Yet there is something to be said for the contention that
mythology is made by the epic poets. The great dreams of
mankind, like the dreams of every individual man, are protean,
vague, inconsistent, and so embarrassed with the riches of
symbolic conception that every fantasy is apt to have a hun-
dred versions.           We see this   in   the   numberless variants   in
which legends are handed down by peoples who have no
literature.   One identical hero has quite incompatible adven-
tures, or one and the same adventure is ascribed to several
heroes, gods, or ogres. Sometimes one cannot tell a maiden
from a bird, or from her own mother, whose "attributive

  32 See p.   23   ff.
               LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                              169
animal" may be that same bird; and this bird-mother-daughter
may be the Earth-Goddess and the Moon and the First
Woman. Mythological figures in their pristine stages have no
fixity, either of form or meaning; they are very much like
dream images, elusive, over-determined, their stories con-
densations of numberless ideas, their names often the only
evidence of any self-identity. 33 As soon as their imaginative
growth is accomplished, traditions become meaningless and
corrupt. Disconnected fragments of great primitive world-
concepts survive in superstitions or in magic formulae, which
the skilled mythologist may recognize as echoes of a more
ancient system of thought, but which the average intelligent
mortal can only view as bizarre and surprising forms of
foolishness.
   The great mythologies which have survived both the over-
growth of mystic fable and the corruption of popular tradi-
tion are those that have become fixed in national poems, such
as the Iliad, the Eddas, the Ramayana, the Kalevala. For an
epic may be fantastic, but it cannot be entirely inconsistent;
it is a narrative, its incidents have temporal order, its world

is geographical and its characters personal. Just as the intro-

duction of nature-symbols gave fantasy a certain dominant
pattern by seeing its monsters and personages exemplified in
the behavior of sun and moon and stars, so the great vehicle
of mythological tradition,           the     epic,   places   its   peculiar re-
strictions on the rampant imagination and disciplines it fur-
ther into consistency and coherence. For it demands nefPonly"
personification, not only some sort of rise and fall in heroic
action, but poetic form", a unity above the separate incidents,
a beginning, climax, and solution of the entire mythical drama.
Such formulation requires a radical handling of the story-
material which tradition is apt tp supply in prodigal quantities
and utter confusion; therefore the principle of poetic form is
a powerful agent in the refashioning of human ideas. This
has given rise to the belief, stated in somewhat doctrinaire
and exaggerated terms by Krappe, that mythology is essentially
the work of epic poets. "Without the epic, no mythology.

   33 Miss Harrison has given recognition to this fact, and it was this very
insight which led her to find the primitive sources of religion behind the
civilized forms of Greek antiquity which she knew as a scholar.
   "Our minds are imbued with classical mythology," she says, "our
imagination peopled with the vivid personalities, the clear-cut outlines of
Olympian gods; it is only by a severe mental effort that we realize          .   .   .



that there were no gods at all,  .   .but only conceptions of the human
                                         .



mind, shifting and changing colour with every human mind that con-
ceived them. Art which makes the image, literature which crystallizes
attributes and functions, arrest and fix this shifting kaleidoscope; but,
until the coming of art and literature and to some extent after, the
formulary of theology is 'all things are in flux.' " Prolegomena, p. 164.
170                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
Homer is the author of the Hellenic mythology, the Nor-
wegian and Icelandic Skalds have created the mythology of
Scandinavia. The same phenomenon may be seen in India, in
Ireland,  and in Japan." 34
   Indeed, the mythologies of Hellas and of the Eddas seem
very remote from the crazy dreamlike yarns of savages. For
the great epics may move against a background of divine
powers and cosmic events, but their heroes are human, not
mystical, and the most wonderful deeds are logically moti-
vated and accomplished. Ulysses or Siegfried or Beowulf sets
out on a definite quest, and the story ends with its success or
frustration; the whole structure presents the career of a super-
human personage, a representative of the race in its strength
and pride, definitely oriented in a world of grand forces and
conflicts, challenges, and destinies. When we look from these
perfected cosmic and social conceptions in the great epics to
the fantasies of Iroquois and South Sea Islanders, we may
well be tempted to say that savages have no mythology worthy
of the name, and that the poets are the creators of that vast
symbolic form.
   Yet this is not true. The "making" of mythology by crea-
tive bards is only a metamorphosis of world-old and universal
ideas. In the finished works of Homer and Hesiod we may see
only what looks like free invention for the sake of the story,
but in the poetry of ruder tribes the popular, religious origin
of myth is still clearly apparent despite the formative influ-
ence of a poetic structure.
   The Finnish Kalevala is a classic example of the transition
from mystical nature-theology and immemorial legend, to a
national treasure of philosophical beliefs and historical tra-
ditions embodied in permanent poetic form. It is probably
the most primitive     —                               —
                        though by no means the oldest of all
epics; and it is quite obviously a transcript of savage mythol-
ogy, more concerned with cosmic origins, conflicts of nature-
deities, incantations, feats and contests of magic, than with
the exploits of brave men and the good or evil ways of
women. It knows no Trojan wars, no planned campaigns of
vengeance; neither lifelong quests, nor founding of cities and
temples. In its first "rune," or canto, the Water-Mother swims
in the sea for seven hundred years; at last she lets the blue
teal nest on her lifted knee, until from the fragments of its
broken eggs the land, the shallows, the deeps and the sky are
fashioned; after this creation she carries the hero in her womb
for thirty years, whereupon he is born an old man full of
magic. The Queen of Night supplies him with Rainbow

  34 Krappe,   La genese des mythes, p. 57.
            LIFE-SYMBOLS! THE ROOTS OF MYTH                 171
Maidens and Air Princesses for unwilling ladyloves whom he
never actually manages to marry. Wainamoinen, this strangely
old and unsuccessful hero, plants forests and fells them, super-
vises the creation of grain, invents the steam bath, builds
boats by sheer magic, and makes the first harp. He is no
fairytale prince beloved of women, but is purely a culture-
hero. When he conquers an adversary he does so by magic
songs, and his rash young enemies and rivals challenge him
not to armed combat, but to singing-contests.
   The whole story really reads more like Polynesian mythol-
ogy than like European epic poetry. Animals are men's mes-
sengers or servants, heroes are custodians of sun, moon, fire
and water, maidens go to live with fishes, their mothers are
Night Queens and their brothers Frost Giants. Kalevala is
essentially a string of magic fishings and plantingsand strange
encounters, like a told dream, patched together with such
human episodes as sledge-building, broom-binding, and the
Finns' inevitable baths, to hold heroes and spirits somehow
to the local scene. How far a call to Helen and Menelaus
and Paris, the Achaean armies encamped, the death of Hector,
the sorrow of Andromache!
   Yet there are culture-heroes in Greek legend, too, who
steal fire from the gods, and youths who would contend with
the sun; and in the Kalevala there are sudden passages of
human import set in its strange mystical frame. When ancient
Wainamoinen seeks the Rainbow Maid, the daughter of the^
Night Woman, that very real and lovely little girl {Brows
herself into a lake rather than give herself to the weird magi-
cian who was old when'he was born. The maiden Aino is too
childlike, too human for him. She sits on a rock above the
water, bewailing her youth and freedom and the cruel decree
of her parents. Her plight is realistic and touching, and her
suicide quite naturally taboos the lake for the family, the
tribe, and the unhappy lover.
   There is nothing in Polynesian or Indian mythology that
comes as near to real life as the lament and desperate act of
the Rainbow Maiden Aino. Every nature mythology treats
the rainbow as an elusive maiden, but it requires the thought-
ful formulation of poetry to see the rainbow's ephemeral
beauty in a girl too wayward and beautiful for her aged lover,
to put the human story first and incorporate the heavenly
phenomenon merely in her symbolic name. Here is the be-
ginning of that higher mythology wherein the world is essen-
tially the stage for human life, the setting of the true epic,
which is human and social. This development in fantasy de-
pends on the clarifying and unifying medium of conscious
composition, the discipline of the compact metrical verse,
172              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
which inevitably sets up standards of coherence and continuity
such as the fragmentary dream-mode does not know or
require.
   The effect of this poetic influence is incomplete in the
Kalevala, but it is there, and lets us see the process by which
mythology is "made" in the epic. The embodiment of myth-
ology in poetry is simply its perfected and final form; because
it has no subsequent higher phases, we regard this formula-

tion as the "true" mythical imagination. And because the sym-
bolic forms stand forth so clearly as pure articulations of
fantasy, we see them only as fictions, not as the supreme con-
cepts of life which they really represent, and by which men
orient themselves religiously in the cosmos.
   It is a peculiar fact that every major advance in thinking,
every epoch-making new insight, springs from a new type of
symbolic transformation. A higher level of thought is prima-
rily a new activity; its course is opened up by a new departure
in semantic. The step from mere sign-using to symbol-using
marked the crossing of the line between animal and man;
this initiated the natural growth of language. The birth of
symbolic gesture from emotional and practical movement
probably begot the whole order of ritual, as well as the dis-
cursive mode of pantomime. The recognition of vague, vital
                             —
meanings in physical forms perhaps the first dawn of sym-
       —
bolism gave us our idols, emblems, and totems; the primitive
function of dream permits our first envisagement of events.
The momentous discovery of nature-symbolism, of the pattern
of life reflected in natural phenomena, produced the first
universal insights. Every mode of thought is bestowed on us,
like a gift, with some new principle of symbolic expression.
It has a logical development, which is simply the exploitation
 of all the uses to which that symbolism lends itself; and when
these uses are exhausted, the mental activity in question has
found its limit. Either it serves its purpose and becomes
truistic, like our orientation in "Euclidean space" or our ap-
preciation of objects and their accidents (on the pattern of
language-structure, significantly called "logic"); or it is super-
seded by some more powerful symbolic mode which opens
new avenues of thought.
   The origin of myth is dynamic, but its purpose is philo-
sophical. It is the primitive phase of metaphysical thought,
the first embodiment of general ideas. It can do no more than
initiate and present them; for it is a non-discursive symbolism,
it does not lend itself to analytic and genuinely abstractive

techniques. The highest development of which myth is capable
is the exhibition of human life and cosmic order that epic
poetry reveals. We cannot abstract and manipulate its con-
               LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                       173

cepts any further within the mythical mode. When this mode
is exhausted, natural religion is superseded by a discursive and

more literal form of thought, namely philosophy.
   Language, in its literal capacity, is a stiff and conventional
medium, unadapted to the expression of genuinely new ideas,
which usually have to break in upon the mind through some
great and bewildering metaphor. But bare denotative lan-
guage is a most excellent instrument of exact reason; it is, in
fact, the only general precision instrument the human brain
has ever evolved. 35 Ideas first adumbrated in fantastic form
become real intellectual property only when discursive lan-
guage rises to their expression. That is why myth is the in-
dispensable forerunner of metaphysics; and metaphysics is
the literal formulation of basic abstractions, on which our
comprehension of sober facts is based. All detail of knowl-
edge, all exact distinction, measure, and practical manipula-
tion, are possible only on a basis of truly abstract concepts,
and a framework of such concepts constitutes a philosophy of
nature, literal, denotative, and systematic. Only language has
the power to effect such an analysis of experience, such a
rationalization of knowledge. But it is only where experience
is already presented     —
                         through some other formative medium,
                                                     —
some vehicle of apprehension and memory that the canons
of literal thought have any application. We must have ideas
before we can make literal analyses of them; and really new
ideas have their own modes of appearance in the unpredict^
able creative mind.
                                                        'm
   The first inquiry as to the literal truth of a myth marks
the change from poetic to discursive thinking. As soon as
the interest in factual values awakes, the mythical mode of
world-envisagement is on the wane. But emotional attitudes
that have long centered on a myth are not easily broken; the
vital ideas embodied in it cannot be repudiated because some-
one discovers that the myth does not constitute a fact. Poetic
significance and factual reference, which are two entirely
different relations in the general symbol-and-meaning pattern,
become identified under the one name of "truth." People who
discover the obvious discrepancy between fantasy and fact
deny that myths are true; those who recognize the truth of
myths claim that they register facts. There is the silly conflict
of religion and science, in which science must triumph, not
because what it says about religion is just, but because religion
rests on a young and provisional form of thought, to which
philosophy of nature
         —                 —
                          proudly called "science," or "knowl-
edge" must succeed if thinking is to go on. There must be a

  35 I   regard mathematical symbolism as a linguistic form of expression.
174                      PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
rationalistic period  from this point onward. Some day when
the vision is totally rationalized, the ideas exploited and ex-
hausted, there will be another vision, a new mythology.
   The gods have their twilight, the heroes are forgotten; but
though mythology has been a passing phase in man's mental
history, the epic lives on, side by side with philosophy and
science and all the higher forms of thought. Why? What is
the epic, the apotheosis of myth, to those who have repudiated
that metaphorical view of life?
                                  —
   The epic is the first flower or one of the first, let us say
of a new symbolic mode, the mode of art. It is not merely a
receptacle of old symbols, namely those of myth, but is itself
a new symbolic form, great with possibilities, ready to take
meanings and express ideas that have had no vehicle before.
What these new ideas are to which art gives us our first, and
perhaps our only, access, may be gathered from an analysis
of that perfectly familiar yet cryptic notion, "musical signifi-
cance," to which we proceed in the next chapter.
