8.        On Significance in Music

What distinguishes a work of art from a "mere" artifact?
What distinguishes the Greek vase, as an artistic achievement,
from the hand-made bean pot of New England, or the wooden
bucket, which cannot be classed as a work of art? The Greek
vase is an artifact, too; it was fashioned according to a tradi-
tional pattern; it was made to hold grain or oil or other
domestic asset, not to stand in a museum. Yet it has an artis-
tic    value for all generations. What gives it that preeminence?
      To reply, "Its beauty," is simply to beg the question, since
      value is beauty in the broadest sense. Bean pots and
artistic
wooden buckets often have what artists call "a good shape,"
i.e., they are in no wise offensive to the eye. Yet, without

being at all ugly, they are insignificant, commonplace, non-
artistic rather than /^artistic. What do they lack, that a work
of art   —                                         —
          even a humble, domestic Greek vase possesses?
   In the words of a well-known critic, Mr. Clive Bell, " 'Sig-
nificant Form' is the one quality common to all works of
visual art." 1 Professor L. A. Reid, a philosopher well versed
in the problems of aesthetics, extends the scope of this char-
acteristic to all art whatsoever. For him, "Beauty is just ex-
pressiveness," and "the true aesthetic form ... is expressive

  lArt (1914),      p.    8.
                    ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                        175
form." 2 Another art critic, Mr. Roger Fry, accepts the term
"Significant Form," though he frankly cannot define its mean-
ing. From the contemplation of (say) a beautiful pot, and as
an effect of its harmony of line and texture and color, "there
comes to us," he says, "a feeling of purpose; we feel that all
these sensually logical conformities are the outcome of a par-
ticular feeling, or of what, for want of a better word, we call
an idea; and we may even say that the pot is the expression of
an idea in the artist's mind." 3 After many efforts to define the
notion of artistic expressiveness, he concludes: "I seem to be
unable at present to get beyond this vague adumbration of
significant form. Flaubert's 'expression of the idea' seems to
me to correspond exactly to. what I mean, but alas! he never
explained, and probably could not, what he meant by the
'idea.' " 4
      There is a strong tendency today to treat art as a significant
phenomenon rather than as a pleasurable experience, a grati-
fication of the senses. This  is probably due to the free use of

dissonance and so-called "ugliness" by our leading artists in
all fields  —
            in literature, music, and the plastic arts. It may
also be due in some measure to the striking indifference of
the uneducated masses to artistic values. In past ages, these
masses had no access to great works of art; music and paint-
ing and even books were the pleasures of the wealthy; it
could be assumed that the poor and vulgar would enjoy art
if they could have it. But now, since everybody can read, visit
museums, and hear great music at least over the radio* the'
judgment of the masses on these things has become a reality,
and has made it quite obvious that great art is not a direct
                                                       —
sensuous pleasure. If it were, it would appeal like cake or
cocktails   —
            to the untutored as well as to the cultured taste.
This fact, together with the intrinsic "unpleasantness" of much
contemporary art, would naturally weaken any theory that
treated art as pure pleasure. Add to this the current logical
and psychological interest in symbolism, in expressive media
and the articulation of ideas, and we need not look far afield
for a new philosophy of art, based upon the concept of
"significant form." 5
  2   A Study in Aesthetics (1931). See esp. pp. 43 and 197. See also
Knowledge and Truth (1923), esp. the final chapter, and "Beauty and
Significance," Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, N.S. XXIX (1928-
29), pp. 123-154.
   3 Vision and Design (1925), p. 50.   * Ibid., p. 302.
   s This tendency was recognized long ago by the author of an article on
symbolism, which opens with the words: "An exhaustive treatise on the
symbol is an aesthetic in miniature; for in recent years symbolism has
acquired such a central position in aesthetics that one can hardly take a
step in that wide domain without stumbling upon some sort of symbolic
relation." R. M. Wernaer, "Das aesthetische Symbol," Zeitschrift fur
Philosophic und philosophische Kritik,  CXXX       (1907), 1: 47-75.
176                   PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
  But if forms in and of themselves be significant, and
indeed must be so to be classed as artistic, then certainly the
kind of significance that belongs to them constitutes a very
special problem in semantics. What is artistic significance?
What sort of meaning do "expressive forms" express?
   Clearly they do not convey propositions, as literal symbols
do.   We all know that a seascape (say) represents water and
rocks, boats and fish-piers; that a still-life represents oranges
and apples, a vase of flowers, dead- game or fish, etc. But
such a content is not what makes the paint-patterns on the
canvas   "expressive forms." The mere notion of rabbits,
grapes, or even boats at sunset is not the "idea" that inspires
a painting. The artistic idea is always a "deeper" conception.
   Several psychologists have ventured to unmask this
"deeper" significance by interpreting pictures, poems, and
even musical compositions as symbols of loved objects,
mainly, of course, of a forbidden nature. Artistic activity,
according to the psychoanalysts who have given it their
attention, is an expression of primitive        dynamisms, of
unconscious wishes, and uses the objects or scenes represented
to embody the secret fantasies of the artist. 6
  This explanation has      much to recommend it. It accounts
for the fact that     we are inclined to credit works of art with
significance, although (by reason of the moral censorship
which            the appearance of basic desires) we can
           distorts
never say what they signify. It does justice to the emotional
interest, the seriousness with which we receive artistic ex-
perience. Above all, it brings this baffling department of
human activity into the compass of a general psychological
         —
system the so-called "dynamic psychology," based on the
recognition  of certain fundamental human needs, of the
conflicts resulting from their mutual interference, and of
the mechanism whereby they assert, disguise, and finally
realize themselves. The starting-point of this psychology is
the discovery of a previously unrecognized symbolic mode,
   e See Ch. Badouin, Psychanalyse de Yart (1929); A. M. Bodkin, "The
Relevance of Psychoanalysis to Art Criticism," British Journal of Psy-
chology, XV (1924-25), part II, 174-183; J. W. Brown, "Psychoanalysis
in the Plastic Arts," International Journal of Psychoanalysis, X, part I
(January 1929); J. Landquist, "Das kiinstlerische Symbol," Imago, VI
(1920), 4: 297-322; Hanns Sachs, "Kunst als Personlichkeit," Imago,
XV (1929), 1: 1-14; the same author's bibliographical essay, "Aesthetics
and Psychology of the Artist," International Journal of Psychoanalysis,
II (1921), part I, 94-100; George Whitehead, Psychoanalysis and Art
(1930). With special reference to music, see A. Elster, Musik und Erotik
(1925); Max Graf, Die innere Werkstatt des Musikers (1910); K. Eggar,
"The Subconscious Mind and the Musical Faculty," Proceedings of the
Musical Association, XLVII (1920-21), 23-38; D. Mosonyi, "Die ir-
rationalen Grundlagen der Musik," Imago, XXI (1935), 2: 207-226;
A. van der Chijs, "Ueber das Unisono in der Komposition," Imago,
XII (1926), 1: 23-31. This list is not exhaustive, but representative.
                   ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                           177
typified in dream, and perfectly traceable in all works of
fantasy. To assimilate art to the imaginative life in general is
surely not a forced procedure. It seems, moreover, to bring
the problem of aesthetic experience into the symbol-centered
philosophy that constitutes the theme of this book.
   These are strong recommendations for the psychoanalytic
theory of aesthetics. But despite them all, I do not think
this theory (though probably valid) throws any real light
on those issues which confront artists and critics and con-
stitute the philosophical problem of art. For the Freudian
interpretation, no matter how far it be carried, never offers
even the rudest criterion of artistic excellence. It may explain
why a poem was written, why it is popular, what human
features it hides under its fanciful imagery; what secret ideas
a picture combines, and why Leonardo's women smile mys-
teriously. But it makes no distinction between good and bad
art.   The features to which it attributes the importance and
significance of a great masterpiece may all be found just as
well in an obscure work of some quite incompetent painter
or poet. Wilhelm Stekel, one of the leading Freudian psychol-
ogists interested in artistic productions as a field for analysis,
has stated this fact explicitly: "I want to point out at once,"
he says, "that it is irrelevant to our purpose whether the poet in
question is a great, universally acknowledged poet, or whether
we are dealing with a little poetaster. For, after all, we are in-
vestigating only the impulse which drives people to create." 7
   An analysis to which the artistic merit of a work is iiTele-
vant can hardty be regarded as a promising technique of art-
criticism, 8 for it can look only to a hidden content of the

  7 Die Traume der Dichter (1912), p. 32.
  8 Oddly enough, this fact is overlooked by so excellent a literary critic
as J. M. Thorburn, who says: "The poet must, I think, be regarded as
striving after the simplicity of a childish utterance. His goal is to think
as a child, to understand as a child. .   .       .


   "When he has written, and the work is good, the measure of his genius
is the depth to which he has gone back, the originality of his idiom and
the degree of its antiquity." {Art and the Unconscious, pp. 70-71.)
  "If art be symbolic, it is the artist who discovers the symbol. But he
need not —                           —
            though of course he may recognize it as a symbol. We, the
appreciative recipients of his work, must so recognize it." {Ibid., p. 79.)
  This makes artistic judgment a special development of psychoanalytic
technique. "We try to reconstruct his [the artist's] personality from what-
ever sources we may." {Ibid., p. 21.) The more dreamlike and subjective
the work, the more primitive is its language; the greatest poets should
then be the most graphic dreamers. Stekel has pointed out, however, that
at the level of symbol production the poet does not differ from the most
prosaic soul. After analyzing three dreams                —
                                                one reported by a woman
under his care, one by Goethe, and one by that poet's friend and hench-
                 —
man, Eckermann he observes: "Is it not remarkable that the great poet
Goethe and the unknown little woman          should have constructed such
                                              .   .   .


similiar dreams? And were one to award a prize for poetic excellence,
Eckermann and the deserted woman would both win over Goethe." {Die
Traume der Dichter, p. 14.)
178                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
work, and not to what every artist knows as the real problem
—  the perfection of form, which makes this form "significant"
in the artistic sense. We cannot evaluate this perfection by
finding more and more obscure objects represented or sug-
gested by the form.
   Interest in represented objects and interest in the visual
or verbal structures that depict them are always getting
hopelessly entangled. Yet I believe "artistic meaning" belongs
to the sensuous construct as such; this alone is beautiful,
and contains all that contributes to its beauty.
   The most obvious approach to the formal aspect of art
would be, of course, through the study of pure design. But
in poetry pure design is non-existent, and in the plastic arts
it has played but a minor role until very recent times. It is

carried to considerable heights in textiles, and occurs as
decoration in conjunction with architecture and ceramics.
But the world's greatest artists have rarely worked in these
media; sculptures and paintings are their high achievements.
If we would really restrict ourselves to pure perceptible
forms, the plastic arts offer but a sparse field for research,
and not a central one.
   Music, on the other hand, is preeminently non-representa-
tive even in its classical production, its highest attainments.
It exhibits pure form not as an embellishment, but as its
very essence; we can take it in its flower           —
                                                  for instance,
German music from Bach            to   Beethoven   —and have      practi-
cally   nothing    but       structures before us: no scene,
                         tonal
no   object, no fact. That is a great aid to our chosen preoc-
cupation with form. There is no obvious, literal content in
our way. If the meaning of art belongs to the sensuous
percept itself, apart from what it ostensibly represents, then
such purely artistic meaning should be most accessible
through musical works.
  This is not to say that music is the highest, the most ex-
pressive, or the    most universal art. Sound is the easiest me-
dium    to use in a purely artistic way; but to work in the
safest medium is not at all the same thing as to achieve the
highest aim. Furthermore, we should take warning against
the fallacy of hasty generalization     —   of assuming that through
music we are studying all the arts, so that every insight into
the nature of music is immediately applicable to painting,
architecture, poetry, dance, and drama; and above all, that
propositions which do not have obvious analogues in all
these departments are not very valuable in their restricted
musical context. 9 A basic unity of purpose and even of
  » An artistic principle may be obvious in just one special field, and
prove to be generally applicable only after development in that field; for
                  ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                           179
general   method for all the arts is a very inviting hypothesis,
and may well be demonstrable in the end; but as a foregone
conclusion, a dogmatic premise, it is dangerous because it
discourages special theories and single-minded, technical
study. General theories should be constructed by generaliza-
tion from the principles of a special field, known and un-
derstood in full detail. Where no such systematic order exists
to serve as a pattern, a general theory is more likely to consist
of vague generalities than of valid generalizations.
   Therefore let us concern ourselves, at present, with the
significance of music alone.        A
                                    great deal of philosophical
thought has been bestowed on this subject, if not since Winkel-
mann and Herder, at least since Schopenhauer; and not only
from the general standpoint of the aesthetician, which those
early writers took, but from the more specialized one of the
musician and the musical critic. The history of musical aes-
thetics is an eventful one, as intellectual histories go, so it is
unavoidable that a good many theories have to be weighed
in considering it. In the course of all this reflection and
controversy, the problem of the nature and function of music
has shifted its center several times; in Kant's day it hinged
on the conception of the arts as cultural agencies, and con-
cerned the place of music among these contributions to in-
tellectual progress. On this basis the great worshiper of
reason naturally ranked it lowest of all art-forms. 10 The
Darwinians of later days sought the key to its importance-
in its origins; if it could be proved     —
                                        or at least, imagined
to have survival value, ^or even to be the residue of some
formerly useful instinct or device, its dignity was saved, even
if our interest in it now were only what William James took
it to be
          — "a mere incidental peculiarity of the nervous sys-
tem, with no teleological significance." al Helmholtz, Wundt,
Stumpf, and other psychologists to whom the existence and
persistence of music presented a problem, based their inquiries
on the assumption that music was a form of pleasurable sen-
sation, and tried to compound the value of musical composi-


instance, Edward Bullough's excellent notion of "psychical distance"
(of which more will be said later) would probably not have been recog-
nized as an important principle in music or ceramic art, but the peculiar
problems of drama required such a concept. Even if it had not proved
to be universally applicable, it would be valid in its original domain.
(See " 'Psychical Distance' as a Factor in Art and as an Aesthetic Princi-
ple," British Journal of Psychology,  V  (1912), part II, 87-118.)

   io See the excerpt from Kant's Kritik der Urteilskraft in F. M. Gatz's
source-book, Musik-Aesthetik (1929), p. 53.
   ii Principles of Psychology, 2 vols. (1890). See vol. II, p. 419. His
words refer directly to fear-reactions in high places, which, he says, in
this respect resemble "liability to sea-sickness, or love of music."
180                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
tions out of the "pleasure-elements" of their tonal constituents.
This gave rise to an aesthetic based on liking and disliking, a
hunt for a sensationist definition of beauty, and a conception
of art as the satisfaction of taste; this type of art theory,
which of course applies without distinction to all the arts, is
"aesthetic" in the most literal sense, and its exponents today
are rather proud of not overstepping the limits of the field so
defined. 12 But beyond a description of tested pleasure-displeas-
ure reactions to simple sounds or elementary sound-complexes,
and certain observations on people's tastes in musical selec-
tions,   this   approach has not taken         us;   it   seems   to   be an
essentially barren adventure.
   Another kind of reaction to music, however, is more strik-
ing,  and seems more significant: that is the emotional re-
sponse it is commonly supposed to evoke. The belief that
music arouses emotions goes back even to the Greek philoso-
phers. It led Plato to demand, for his ideal state, a strict
censorship of modes and tunes, lest his citizens be tempted
by weak or voluptuous airs to indulge in demoralizing emo-
tions. 13 The same principle is often invoked to explain the
use of music in tribal society, the lure of the African drum,
the clarion call and the "Pibroch" calling armies or clans
to battle, the world-old custom of lulling the baby to sleep
with slumber songs. The legend of the sirens is based on a
belief in the narcotic and toxic effect of music, as also the
story of Terpander's preventing civil war in Sparta, or of
the Danish King Eric, who committed murder as a result of
a harpist's deliberate experiment in mood-production. 14 De-
spite the fact that there  is, to my knowledge, not a single

authentic record of any specific change of disposition or in-
tention, or even the inhibition of a practical impulse in any
person by the agency of music, this belief in the physical
power of the art has come down to modern times. Music is
known, indeed, to affect pulse-rate and respiration, to facili-
tate or disturb concentration, to excite or relax the organism,
while the stimulus lasts; but beyond evoking impulses to sing,
tap, adjust one's step to musical rhythm, perhaps to stare,
hold one's breath or take a tense attitude, music does not
   12 Thus Clive Bell, having proposed the concept of "significant form"
as the keynote of art criticism, says: "At this point a query arises    .  :.   .



'Why are we so profoundly moved by forms related in a particular way?'
The question is extremely interesting, but irrelevant to aesthetics. In pure
aesthetics we have only to consider our emotion and its object."
   If questions about the relation between emotion and object are ir-
relevant, what is there to "consider" about these factors?
   13 Republic, bk. iii.
   I* These and other stories are cited by Irmgard Otto in an essay, "Von
sonderbahrer Wiirckung und Krafft der Musik," Die Musik,               XXIX
(1937), part II, 625-630.
                   ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                            181

ordinarily influence behavior. 15 Its somatic influences seem
to affect unmusical as well as musical persons (the selections
usually employed in experimentation would be more likely to
irritate than to soothe or inspire a musical person), and to
be, therefore, functions of sound rather than of music. 16 Ex-
periments made with vocal music are entirely unreliable,
since words and the pathos of the human voice are added to
the musical stimulus. On the whole, the behavior of concert
audiences after even the most thrilling performances makes
the traditional magical influence of music on human actions
very dubious. Its somatic effects are transient, and its moral
hangovers or uplifts seem to be negligible.
   Granting, however, that the effects do not long outlive their
causes, the proposition that music arouses emotions in the
listener does not seem, offhand, like a fantastic or mythical
assertion. In fact, the belief in the affective power of music
is respectable enough to have led some very factual-minded
modern psychologists to conduct tests for the emotional
effects of different compositions and collect the reported data.
They have compiled lists of possible "effects," such as:
           Sad                                   Rested
           Serious                               Amused
           Like dancing                          Sentimental
           Stirred, excited                      Longing
           Devotional                            Patriotic
            Gay, happy                            Irritated
The auditors of certain musical selections, which were usually
of the so-callecK'semi-popular" sort (e.g. MacDowelPs To a
Wild Rose, Sousa's Volunteer March), were given prepared
data-sheets and asked to check their musically stimulated
feelings with the rubrics there suggested. 17
   The results of such experiments 18 add very little to the
well-known fact that most people connect feelings with music,
  is For an exhaustive treatment of the physical and mental effects of
music, see the dissertation by Charles M. Disserens, The Influence of
Music on Behavior (1926). Dr. Disserens accepts much evidence that I
would question, yet offers no report of practical acts inspired by music,
or even permanent effects on temperament or disposition, such as were
claimed for it in the eighteenth century. (Cf., e.g., Reflections on Ancient
and Modern Musick, with Application to the Cure of Diseases (Anon.,
1749); or Albrecht's De Effectu Musices in Corpus Animatum.)
  is An often neglected distinction pointed out in Ernst Kurth's Musik-
psychologie, p. 152. Kurth observes that Stumph, working deliberately
with unmusical rather than musical persons, gave us a Tonpsychologie
but not a Musikpsychologie.
  1 7 See Esther Gatewood, "The Nature of Musical Enjoyment," in The
Effects of Music, edited by Max Schoen (1927).
  is These results were, of course, not spontaneous, since the question-
naire directed the subjects' expectations to a special kind of experience
which is popularly supposed to result from hearing music, and moreover
dictated a choice, which made it necessary to attribute some particular
182                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
and (unless they have thought about the precise nature of
that connection) believe they have the feelings while they are
under the influence of the music, especially if you ask them
which of several feelings the music is giving them. That quick,
lilting tunes are said to make one feel happy or "like dancing,"
hymns to make one solemn, and funeral marches sad, is
hardly surprising; nor that Love's Old Sweet Song was gen-
erally said to stir "tender memories." The whole inquiry
really took for granted what Charles Avison, a British mu-
sicologist and organist, said without experimental evidence in
1775: that "the force of sound in alarming the passions is
prodigious," and that music "does naturally raise a variety of
passions in the human breast, similar to the sounds which
are expressed; and thus, by the musician's art, ... we are
by turns elated with joy, or sunk in pleasing sorrow, rouzed
to courage, or quelled by grateful terrors, melted into pity,
tenderness, and love, or transported to the regions of bliss, in
an extacy of divine praise." 19
   The terms "pleasing sorrow" and "grateful terrors" present
something of a puzzle. If music really grieves or frightens
us, why do we listen to it? The modern experimenters are
not disturbed by this question, but Avison felt called upon to
meet it. The sorrows and terrors of music, he explained, are
not our own, but are sympathetically felt by us; "There are
certain sounds natural to joy, others to grief or despondency,
others to tenderness and love; and by hearing these, we nat-
urally sympathize with thosewho either enjoy or suffer." 20
  But if we are moved by sympathy, with whom are we
sympathizing? Whose feelings do we thus appreciate? The
obvious answer is: the musician's. He who produces the
music is pouring out the real feelings of his heart. Music is
his avenue of self-expression, he confesses his emotions to
                   —                 —
an audience, or in solitude just works them off to relieve
himself. In an age when most performers offered their own
compositions or even improvisations, this explanation of
music was quite natural. Rousseau, Marpurg, Mattheson, C.
Ph. E. Bach, were all convinced that (as Bach put it) "since
a musician cannot otherwise move people, but he be moved
himself, so he must necessarily be able to induce in himself

feeling wholly, or preeminently, to any given piece. Fleeting affects,
superseded by others, could not be checked off without creating a wrong
impression; only general states of feeling were supposed to result, and
were therefore dutifully reported.
  Essentially the same technique is employed by Kate Hevner; see her
"Expression in Music: Discussion of Experimental Studies and Theories,"
Psychological Review, XLII (1935), 2: 186-204, and "Experimental
Studies of the Elements of Expression in Music," American Journal of
Psychology, XLVIII (1936), 2: 246-268.
  19 An Essay on Musical Expression (1775), pp. 3-4.
   20 Loc cit. See also p. 5, n.
                                                                          ,
                  ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                            183
all    those affects which he would arouse in his auditors; he
conveys     his feelings to them, and thus most readily moves
them to sympathetic emotions." 21 The problem was some-
what complicated by the growing distinction between com-
posers and performers toward the end of the century; but
here the reciprocity of expression and impression came to the
rescue. The composer is, indeed, the original subject of the
emotions depicted, but the performer becomes at once his
confidant and his mouthpiece. He transmits the feelings of
the master to a sympathetic audience.
  In this form the doctrine has come           down to our day, and
is    widely accepted by musicians and philosophers alike. From
Rousseau to Kierkegaard and Croce among philosophers, from
Marpurg    to Hausegger and Riemann among music critics,
but above all among musicians themselves            —
                                               composers, con-
ductors, and performers      —
                           we find the belief very widely dis-
seminated that music is an emotional catharsis, that its essence
is self-expression. Beethoven, Schumann, Liszt, to mention
only the great, have left us testimonials to that effect. More-
over, it is the opinion of the average sentimental music-lover
that all moving and poignant music must translate some
personal experience, the longing or ecstasy or despair of the
artist's own vie amoureuse; and most musical amateurs will
accept without hesitation the statement of Henri Prunieres,
who says categorically that whatever feelings a composer may
convey, "we may rest assured that he will not express these
sentiments with authority unless he has experienced them* at
some given moiRent of his existence." 22 Most likely they will
even go so far as to agree that, in the case of a theme which
Beethoven used ten years after he had first jotted it down, "It
is probable that such a theme, translating an impression of
keenest sorrow, came to him during a day of suffering." 23
The self-expression theory, which classes music with "such ex-
pressions as 'oh-oh,' or at a higher level, lyrical verses," as
Carnap says, is the most popular doctrine of the significance
and function of music. 24 It explains in a very plausible way
  21 Versuch ueber die wahre Art, das Klavier zu spielen (1925, reprint
from 2nd ed.; 1st ed., part I, 1753, part II, 1762). See part I, p. 85. For
a detailed study of this early theory, see Wilhelm Caspari's dissertation,
Gegenstand und Wirkung der Tonkunst nach der Ansicht der Deutschen
im 18. Jahrhundert (1903). For extensive source-material, see Gatz,
  22 "Musical Symbolism," Musical Quarterly,      XIX (1933), 1: 18-28.
See p. 20.
  23 ibid., p. 21.
   24 Even our leading psychologists subscribe to this conviction: "To be
successful, the musician must carry his audience on a wave of emotion
often bordering on the point of ecstasy." This from Carl Seashore, who
prides himself on his strict investigation of facts, not "the rehashing of
semi-scientific knowledge under the name of philosophy in aesthetics"!
(See Pyschology of Music, 1938, pp. 174 and 377.)
184                     PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
the undeniable connection of music with feeling, and the
mystery of a work of art without ostensible subject-matter;
above all, it brings musical activity within the compass of
                          —
modern psychology behavioristic, dynamic, genetic, or what
not.
   Yet the belief that music is essentially a form of self-ex-
pression meets with paradox in very short order; philosophi-
cally it comes to a stop almost at its very beginning. For
the history of music has been a history of more and more
integrated, disciplined, and articulated forms, much like the
history of language, which waxes important only as it is
weaned from its ancient source in expressive cries, and be-
comes denotative and connotative rather than emotional.        We
have more need of, and respect for, so-called "pure music"
than ancient cultures seem to have had; 25 yet our counter-
points and harmonic involutions have nothing like the ex-
pressive abandon of the Indian "Ki-yi" and "How-how," the
wailing primitive dirge, the wild syncopated shouts of African
tribesmen. Sheer self-expression requires no artistic form.      A
lynching-party howling round the gallows-tree, a woman
wringing her hands over a sick child, a lover who has just
rescued his sweetheart in an accident and stands trembling,
sweating, and perhaps laughing or crying with emotion, is
giving vent to intense feelings; but such scenes are not occa-
sions for music, least of all for composing. Not even a theme,
"translating an impression of keenest sorrow," is apt to come
to a man, a woman, or a mob in a moment when passionate
self-expression is needed. The laws of emotional catharsis are
natural laws, not artistic. Verbal responses like "Ah!" "Oh-oh!"
are not creations, but speech-habits; even the expressive-
ness of oaths rests not on the fact that such words were in-
vented for psycho-cathartic purposes, but that they are taboo,
and the breaking of a taboo gives emotional release. Break-
ing a vase would do better still.
   Yet it may well be argued that in playing music we seek,
and often find, self-expression. Even Hanslick, to whom emo-
tive meanings in a composition were anathema, granted the
possibility of relieving one's feelings at the keyboard; 26 and
anyone who has a voice or an instrument can verify the
relief of musical outpourings, from his own experience. Surely,
at some time, he has been moved to vent his excitement in
song or rhapsody or furious tarantelle, and felt better for the
manic outburst; and, being "keyed up," he probably sang or
  25 Cf.Eduard Hanslick, Vom Musikalisch-Schonen (5th ed. 1876; 1st
                                     Entwurf einer neuen Aesthetik
ed. 1854), p. 103; also Ferruccio Busoni,
der Tonkunst (1907), p. 5.
  26 Op.   cit.,   pp. 78-79.
                ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                    185

played unusually well. He chose the piece because it seemed
to "express" his condition. It seemed to him, at least at the
time, that the piece was designed to speak his feelings, and
not impossibly he may believe forever after that these must
be the very feelings the composer intended to record in the
score.
  The great variety of interpretations which different players
or auditors will give to one and the same piece   —differences
even of such general feeling-contents as sad, angry, elated,
impatient — make such confidence in the author's intentions
appear somewhat naive. He could not possibly have been
feeling  all the different emotions his composition seems to
be able to express. The fact is, that we can use music to
work off our subjective experiences and restore our personal
balance, but this is not its primary function. Were it so, it
would be utterly impossible for an artist to announce a pro-
gram in advance, and expect to play it well; or even, having
announced it on the spot, to express himself successively in
allegro, adagio, presto, and allegretto, as the changing moods
of a single sonata are apt to dictate. Such mercurial passions
would be abnormal even in the notoriously capricious race
of musicians!
   If music has any significance, it is semantic, not sympto-
matic. Its "meaning" is evidently not that of a stimulus to
evoke emotions, nor that of a signal to announce them; if
it has an emotional content, it "has" it in the same sense^

that language "has" its conceptual content      symbolically. It
is not usually derived from affects nor intended for them;

but we may say, with certain reservations, that it is about
them. Music is not the cause or the cure of feelings, but their
logical expression; though even in this capacity it has its
special ways of functioning, that make it incommensurable
with language, and even with presentational symbols like
images, gestures, and rites.
   Many attempts have been made to treat music as a lan-
guage of emotions. None has been really satisfactory, though
some of them are both searching and well-directed. An ex-
traordinary amount of able thinking has been expended on
the philosophy of music, and the only stumbling-block which
has held up the progress of this central problem of "significant
form" has been, I think, a lack of understanding of the ways
in which logical structures may enter into various types of
"significance." Practically all the work has been done; the
anomalies and puzzles that remain, though very baffling, are
mainly due to logical misconceptions, or slightly naive as-
sumptions which only a logician could be expected to recog-
nize as such. Here we run into a difficulty inherent in the
186              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
scholarship of our time     — the obstacle of too much knowl-
edge, which forces us to accept the so-called "findings" of
specialists in other fields, "findings" that were not made with
reference to our searchings, and often leave the things that
would be most important for us, unfound. Riemann, for
instance, declared with perfect confidence that musical aes-
thetics may and must accept the laws of logic and the
doctrines of logicians as given. 27
   But it happens that just in musical aesthetics the vital
problem with which we are faced is one that involves the
entire logic of symbolism. It is a logical problem of art, and
no logician would be likely to search, in his own interest,
for the "findings" that are relevant to it. It concerns the
logical structure of a type of symbol that logicians do not
use, and would therefore not even stumble upon as an inter-
esting freak. In short, we are dealing with a philosophical
problem, requiring logical study, and involving music: for
to be able to define "musical meaning" adequately, pre-
cisely, but for an artistic, not a positivistic context and pur-
pose, is the touchstone of a really powerful philosophy of
symbolism.
   For the sake of orientation, let us now explicitly abandon
the problems of music as stimulus and music as emotive
symptom, since neither of these functions (though both un-
doubtedly exist) would suffice to account for the importance
we attach to it; and let us assume that its "significance" is in
some sense that of a symbol. The challenge to our theory,
then, is to determine in what sense this can be said; for it
is certainly not true in every sense. The question takes us
back to Chapter 3, to the logic of symbols and the various
possibilities of meaning that symbolic structures may con-
tain. Here we should find the conditions for a "language
of music" if such there be, or of "significant form" of any
Other sort than language.
   The assumption that music is a kind of language, not of
the here-and-now, but of genuine conceptual content, is
widely entertained, though perhaps not as universally as the
emotive-symptom theory. The best-known pioneer in this
field is Schopenhauer; and it has become something of an
accepted verdict that his attempt to interpret music as a
symbol of the irrational aspect of mental life, the Will, was
a good venture, though of course his conclusion, being "meta-
physical," was quite bad. However that may be, his novel
contribution to the present issue was certainly his treatment

  27 Hugo Riemann,   Die Elemente der musikalischen Aesthetik (1903),
p. 3.
                  ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                        187
of music as an impersonal, negotiable, real semantic, a sym-
bolism with a content of ideas, instead of an overt sign of
somebody's emotional condition. This principle was quickly
adopted by other thinkers, though there was considerable
debate as to what ideational content was embodied in the
language of tones. Indeed, one author lists no less than
sixteen interpretations, including "the expression of the Free-
dom of the Will" and "the expression of Conscience." 28
   The most obvious and naive reading of this "language" is
the onomatopoetic one, the recognition of natural sounds in
musical effects. This, as everybody knows, is the basis of
"program music," which deliberately imitates the clatter and
cries of the market place, hoof-beats, clanging hammers,
running brooks, nightingales and bells and the inevitable
cuckoo. Such "sound-painting" is by no means modern; it
goes back as far as the thirteenth century, when the cuckoo's
note was introduced as a theme in the musical setting of
"Sumer is acumen in." 29 An eighteenth-century critic says
disapprovingly, "Our intermezzi        .   are full of fantastic
                                           .   .



imitations and silly tricks. There one can hear clocks striking,
ducks jabbering, frogs quacking, and pretty soon one will be
able to hear fleas sneezing and grass growing." 30 But its
early uses were frankly tricks, like Bach's fugue on the letters
of his name, B-A-C-H (to a German, Bb-A-C-Bt|). Only with
the development of opera and oratorio, the orchestra was
called upon to furnish sounds appropriate to certain scenes.
In Haydn's Creation the prancing horses and sinuous worms
merely furnish musical figures with technical possibilities,"'
like the traditional cuckoos and cocks, but the waters over
the earth are certainly used with the serious intent of build-
ing up a thought with the sound-effect. In Bach's Passion Ac-
cording to St. Matthew the orchestra registers the rending
of the temple curtain in midst, of an unmistakable musical
storm. From this time onward, sound-painting increases until
the romantic symphony may require a whole outfit of wooden
rattles, cowbells, whistles, even sound-recordings and a wind-
machine. 31   A veritable code of "effects" grew up, helped by
the more and more detailed and indispensable program notes.
Finally, as   an eminent New York Times critic says, "Strauss,
   28 Colin McAlpin, Hermaia: A Study in Comparative Esthetics (1915).
See his table of contents.
  29 Cf. Richard Aldrich, Musical Discourse (1928), p. 25.
   30 J. A. Hiiller, "Abhandlung von der Nachahmung der Natur in der
Musik," in Marpurg's Historisch-kritische Beytrage zur Aufnahme der
Musik, 5 vols. (1754-1760). See vol. I, p. 532.
   si Respighi's The Pines of Rome features a phonograph record of a
nightingale's song; Strauss' Alpine Symphony calls for the "wind-ma-
chine."
188               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
in the  heyday of his programmatic frenzy, went so far as to
declare that a day would come when a composer could com-
pose the silverware on the table so that the listener could
distinguish the knives from the forks." 32
   But not all conceptions of musical semantic were thus
naive and literal. Side by side with the evolution of sound-
painting runs the development of "dramatic" music in a
                        —
more subjective sense music that is intended, and taken, to
be a language of feeling. Not silverware, nor even parades and
thunderstorms, are the objects of musical representation here,
but love and longing, hope and fear, the essence of tragedy
and comedy. This is not "self-expression"; it is exposition of
feelings which may be attributed to persons on the stage or
fictitious characters in a ballad. In pure instrumental music
without dramatic action, there may be a high emotional
import which is not referred to any subject, and the glib
assurance of some program writers that this is the composer's
protest against life, cry of despair, vision of his beloved, or
what not, is a perfectly unjustified fancy; for if music is really
a language of emotion, it expresses primarily the composer's
knowledge of human feeling, not how or when that knowledge
was acquired; as his conversation presumably expresses his
knowledge of more tangible things, and usually not his first
experience of them.
   This is the most persistent, plausible, and interesting doc-
trine of meaning in music, and has lent itself to considerable
development; on the theoretical side by Kretschmar, E. v.
Hartmann, more recently Schweitzer and Pirro, and on the
practical side by Schumann, Wagner, Liszt, Berlioz (who have
all left us theoretical statements as well), and many others.
From Wagner I take what may be the most explicit render-
ing of the principle:
   "What music expresses, is eternal, infinite and ideal; it
does not express the passion, love, or longing of such-and-
such an individual on such-and-such an occasion, but pas-
sion, love or longing in itself, and this it presents in that
unlimited variety of motivations, which is the exclusive and
particular characteristic of music, foreign and inexpressible
to any other language." 33
   Despite the romantic phraseology, this passage states quite
clearly that music is not self-expression, but formulation and
representation of emotions, moods, mental tensions and res-
olutions —  a "logical picture" of sentient, responsive life, a
source of insight, not a plea for sympathy. Feelings revealed
  32 Aldrich, op. cit., p. 15.
  33 Richard Wagner, "Ein glucklicher  Abend," reprinted by Gatz, in
Musik-Aesthetik, from the Gazette Musicale, nos. 56-58 (1841).
                  ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                      189
in music are essentially not "the passion, love or longing of
such-and-such an individual," inviting us to put ourselves in
that individual's place, but are presented directly to our under-
standing, that   we may grasp, realize, comprehend these feel-
ings, without pretending to have them or imputing them to
anyone else. Just as words can describe events we have not wit-
nessed, places and things we have not seen, so music can pre-
sent emotions and moods we have not felt, passions we did not
know before. Its subject-matter is the same as that of "self-
expression," and its symbols may even be borrowed, upon
occasion, from the realm of expressive symptoms; yet the
borrowed suggestive elements are formalized, and the subject-
matter "distanced" in an artistic perspective.
   The notion of "psychical distance" as the hall-mark of
every artistic "projection" of experience, which Edward
Bullough has developed, does not make the emotive con-
tents typical, general, impersonal, or "static"; but it makes
them conceivable, so that we can envisage and understand
them without verbal helps, and without the scaffolding of an
occasion wherein they figure (as all self-expression implies an
occasion, a cause  — true or imaginary   —
                                         for the subject's tem-
porary feelings). A composer not only indicates, but articulates
subtle complexes of feeling that language cannot even name,
let alone set forth; he knows the forms of emotion and can
handle them, "compose" them.        We do not "compose" our
exclamations and jitters.
   The actual opposition between the two emotive theories
of musical meaning    —  that of self-expression and that of>fc>gi-
cal expression-*^ best summed up by contrasting the passage
from C. Ph. E. Bach, already quoted on page 182, to the
effect that "a musician cannot otherwise move people, but
he be moved himself," and always "conveys his feelings to
them, and thus most readily moves them to sympathetic
emotion," with Busoni's statement:
   "Just as an artist, if he is to move his audience, must never
                   —
he moved himself lest he lose, at that moment, his mastery
                   —
over the material so the auditor who wants to get the full
operatic effect must never regard it as real, if his artistic
appreciation is not to be degraded to mere human sympa-
thy." 34
  This degradation is what Bullough would call a loss of
"psychical distance." It is, in fact, a confusion between a
symbol, which lets us conceive its object, and a sign, which
causes us to deal with what it means.
  "Distance ... is obtained by separating the object and

  34 Busoni, Entwurf einer neuen Aesthetik der Tonkunst, here quoted
from Gatz, op. cit., p. 498.
190                      PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
its  appeal from one's own self, by putting it out of gear
with practical needs and ends. But          . distance does not
                                                .   .




imply an impersonal, purely intellectually interested rela-
tion.    .  On the contrary, it describes a personal relation,
             .   .



often highly emotionally colored, but of a peculiar character.
Its peculiarity lies in that the personal character of the rela-
tion has been, so to speak, filtered. It has been cleared of
the practical, concrete nature of its appeal.    ." 35  .   .



   The content has been symbolized for us, and what it in-
vites is not emotional response, but insight. "Psychical Dis-
tance" is simply the experience of apprehending through a
symbol what was not articulated before. The content of art
is always real; the mode of its presentation, whereby it is at
once revealed and "distanced," may be a fiction. It may
also be music, or, as in the dance, motion. But if the content
be the life of feeling, impulse, passion, then the symbols
which reveal it will not be the sounds or actions that nor-
mally would express this life; not associated signs, but
symbolic forms must convey it to our understanding.
   Very few writers who assign significance of any sort to
music have kept uiese several kinds of meaning strictly apart.
Literal meanings         —
                      the renderings of birds and bells and
thunder and the Twentieth Century Limited by orchestral
instruments          —
               are usually mixed up in a vague way with
emotive meanings, which they are supposed to support, or
even to inspire by suggestion. And emotions, in turn, are
treated now as effects, now as causes, now as contents of
so-called "emotive music." Even in Wagner, who stated ex-
plicitly the abstractive, generalizing function of music in
depicting feelings, there is plenty of confusion. In describing
his own furor poeticus he presents himself as expressing his
personal sentiments and upheavals. In Oper und Drama he
says that operatic music must express the sentiments of the
speaker and actor ("des Redenden und Darstellenden," not
"des redend Dargestellten"). 36 Yet it is perfectly clear that
the "poetic intention" ("die dichterische Absicht") which is
the raison d'etre of the work is not to give the actors self-
expression, nor the audience an emotional orgy, but is to put
over, to make conceivable, a great insight into human passional
nature. And again, in the same work, he refers to the tragic
fate of      Beethoven as an inability to communicate his private
feelings, his sufferings, to the curious        but      unmoved listener
who could not understand him. 37
      So it was that, when Hanslick wrote his famous little book
Vom Musikalisch-Schonen, which attempted to blast the grow-
  35 Bullough, "Psychical Distance," p. 91.
  36 Here quoted from Gatz, op. cit., p. 166.           37 Ibid., p.   172.
                      ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                        191
ing romantic conception of a "language of music," he found
himself called upon to combat not only the use of onomato-
poeia, the hoofbeats of Wagner's riding Valkyries and the
thunder-peals that announce the wreck of the Flying Dutch-
man, but also the production, exhibition, or symbolic
representation of emotions     —
                             the moan and tremolo of the or-
chestra, the surging outbursts of Tristan and Isolde. Against
all these alleged "expressive functions" of music the great
purist mustered his arguments. Vehemently he declared that
music conveys no meanings whatever, that the content of
music is nothing but dynamic sound-patterns ("tonend bewegte
Formen"), 38 and that "the theme of a musical composition
is its proper content." 39 But especially the true Wagnerian
    —
aim the semantic use of music, the representation of emo-
tive life   —aroused    his opposition.
   "It    no mere fencing with words," he declares at the
         is

very outset, "to protest most emphatically against the notion
of 'representation,' because this notion has given rise to the
greatest errors of musical aesthetics. To 'represent' something
always involves the conception ( Vorstellung) of two separate,
distinct things, one of which must first be given, by a specific
                                                         40
act, an explicit relation of reference to the other."       Music,
in his estimation, can never be used in this degrading fashion.
   His statement of the conditions for representation can, of
course, be challenged in the light of a better knowledge
of symbolism. What he says applies generally to literal, espe-
cially to scientific, expression; but it is not true of some other
modes, which serve rather to formulate knowledge than to*
communicatees finished products. Yet there is justice in
his protest, too; for thexlaim of his adversaries to a language
of music is indeed a misleading one, which may well do
mischief among musicians and audiences alike.
   Those claims, just like Hanslick's counter-claims, invite
logical criticism. So, instead of wrangling over this or that
alleged "meaning," let us look at music from the purely
logical standpoint as a possible symbolic form of some sort.
As such it would have to have, first of all, formal character-
isticswhich were analogous to whatever it purported to sym-
                     if it represented anything, e.g. an event,
bolize; that is to say,
a passion, a dramatic action, it would have to exhibit a
logical form which that object could also take. Everything
we conceive is conceived in some form, though there are
alternative forms for every content; but the musical figure
which we recognize as such must be a figuration under which
we could apprehend the thing referred to.
  38 Hanslick,  Vom Musikalisch-Schonen, p. 45.
  39 Ibid., p. 136.                   40 ibid., introd., p.   viii.
192                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
  That musical structures logically resemble certain dynamic
patterns of human experience is a well-established fact. Even
Hanslick admitted as much, perhaps with less scientific back-
ing than our modern theorists can claim; for what in his day
was a psychological assumption for the sake of musical under-
standing, has become, in ours, a psychological doctrine aptly
illustrated by musical examples. Wolfgang Kohler, the great
pioneer of Gestalt psychology, remarks the usefulness of so-
called musical "dynamics" to describe the forms of mental
life. "Quite generally," he says, "the inner processes, whether
emotional or intellectual, show types of development which
may be given names, usually applied to musical events, such
as: crescendo and diminuendo, accelerando and ritardano."
He carries these convenient terms over into the description
of overt behavior, the reflection of inner life in physical
attitudes and gestures. "As these qualities occur in the world
of acoustical experiences, they are found in the visual world
too, and so they can express similar dynamical traits of inner
life in directly observable activity. ... To the increasing
inner tempo and dynamical level there corresponds a cre-
scendo and accelerando in visible movement. Of course, the
same inner development may express itself acoustically, as
in the accelerando and reforzando of speech.            Hesitation
                                                              .   .   .



and lack of inner determination become visible                  as        ...
ritardando of visible or audible behavior.        ." 41
                                                      .   .



   This is just the inverse of Jean D'Udine's description of
music, which treats it as a kind of gesture, a tonal projection
of the forms of feeling, more directly reflected in the mimic
"dance" of the orchestral conductor. "All the expressive
gesticulations of the conductor," says that provocative and
readable book, L'art et le geste, "is really a dance ... all
music is dancing.    .  All melody is a series of attitudes." 42
                         .   .



And again "Every feeling contributes, in effect, certain special
           :



gestures which reveal to us, bit by bit, the essential character-
istic of Life: movement.         All living creatures are con-
                                   .   .   .


stantly   consummating          own internal rhythm." This
                                 their
rhythm, the essence of life, is the steady background against
which we experience the special articulations produced by
feeling; "and even the most uneventful life exhibits some
such breaks in its rhythm, sources of joys and sorrows without
which we would be as inert as the pebbles of the highway." 43
And these rhythms are the prototypes of musical structures,
for all art is but a projection of them from one domain of
sense to another, a symbolic transformation. "Every artist is

 4i Kohler, Gestalt Psychology, pp. 248-249.
 42 Jean D'Udine, L'art et le geste (1910), p. xiv.
 43 ibid., p. 6.
                        ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                     193
a transformer; all         creation is but a transmutation." 44
                          artistic
   Just as Kohler uses the language of musical dynamics to
express psychological phenomena, on the basis of their for-
mal analogy, so D'Udine makes movement the prototype of
vital forms and thus reduces all the arts to "a kind of dance"
(this analogy with life-functions, both lower and higher, was
made long ago by Havelock Ellis in The Dance of Life); and
so the musicologist von Hoeslin likens dance, plastic art,
thought, and feeling to music by reason of that same analogy.
The fundamental relationships in music, he says, are tensions
and resolutions; and the patterns generated by these functions
are the patterns exemplified in all art, and also in all emotive
responses. Wherever sheer contrasts of ideas produce a re-
action, wherever experiences of pure form produce mental
tension, we have the essence of melody; and so he speaks of
Sprachmelodien in poetry and Gedankenmelodien in life. 45
More naturalistically inclined critics often mediate the com-
parison between the forms of music and those of feeling, by
assuming that music exhibits patterns of excitation occurring
in the nervous tissues, which are the physical sources of
emotion; 46 but it really all comes to the same thing. The
upshot of all these speculations and researches is, that there
are certain aspects of the so-called "inner life"
          —
mental which have formal properties similar to those of
                                                         —physical or
          —
music patterns of motion and rest, of tension and release,
of agreement and disagreement, preparation, fulfilment, ex-
citation, sudden change, etc.
   So the first requirement for a connotative relationship
between music ^nd subjective experience, a certain similarity
of logical form, is certainly satisfied. Furthermore, there is
no doubt that musical forms have certain properties to recom-
mend them for symbolic use: they are composed of many
separable items, easily produced, and easily combined in a
great variety of ways; in themselves they play no important
practical role which would overshadow their semantic func-
tion; they are readily distinguished, remembered, and re-
peated; and finally, they have a remarkable tendency to
modify each other's characters in combination, as words do,

  44 ibid., p.   xii.

  45 J.   K. v. Hoeslin, Die Melodie als gestaltender Ausdruck seelischen
Lebens (1920).
  46 Both    Kohler and Koffka subscribe to this notion of the "physio-
logical picture," of which we see, according to them, not some external
duplicate, but the actual outward aspects of a tot^l bodily state or
activity. The same standpoint was already defined by C. Beauquier in his
Philosophie de la musique in 1865, and by subsequent authors too numer-
ous to cite.
194                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
by all serving each as a context. 47 The purely structural re-
quirements for a symbolism are satisfied by the peculiar tonal
phenomenon we call "music."
   Yet it is not, logically speaking, a language, for it has no
vocabulary. To call the tones of a scale its "words," harmony
its "grammar," and thematic development its "syntax," is a
useless allegory, for tones lack the very thing that distin-
guishes a word from a mere vocable: fixed connotation, or
"dictionary meaning." Moreover, a tone has many aspects
that enter into the notion of musical significance, but not of
harmony. These aspects have been minutely and seriously
studied from a psychological standpoint, in ways that fairly
well exclude non-musical factors such as personal associa-
tions with tunes, instruments, styles (e.g. church music,
military music), or programmatic suggestions. In a remark-
ably able and careful work, 48 Dr. Kurt Huber has traced the
successive emergence of expressive factors in the apprehension
of the simplest possible tonal patterns         —
                                            bare pitch-patterns
of two to three tones, stripped of all contextual elements of
timbre, rhythm, volume, etc., by their uniform production
on an electrical instrument, in timed succession and equal
strength. The subjects were instructed to describe their ex-
periences in any terms they chose: by their qualities, relations,
meanings, emotional characters, somatic effects, associations,
suggestions, or what-not. They were asked to report any
images or memories evoked, or, failing such experiences,
simply to convey their impressions as best they could. This
form of experiment is certainly much more controlled and
decisive than the Schoen and Gatewood questionnaires on
the influence of musical selections; and the results of Huber's
experiments, which might be expected to be poorer, by reason
of the simplicity of the material and lack of specific instruc-
tions, are actually much more significant and more capable


   47 A. Gehring carried this principle of contextual function even beyond
the compass of the individual composition. "Unreined compositions," he
said, "will affect one another as inevitably as those which are related.
The whole realm of music may be regarded as a single huge composition,
in which every note that is written exerts its influence throughout the
whole domain of tones. To speak with Guyau, ... it changes the very
conditions of beauty.
   "This explains the different effects produced by the same composition
at different times. The harmonies which sound novel today will be
familiar in a few decades; the volume and richness of sound which
pleased our ancestors are inadequate today." (The Basis of Musical
Pleasure [1910], p. 34.)
   Gehring's observation bears out the similarity with language, where
every word that is used even in a narrow context contributes its mean-
ing, as there established, to the living and growing language.
   48 Oer Ausdruck musikalischer Elemental motive. Eine experimental"
psychologische Untersuchung (1923).
                      ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                        195
of systematic arrangement than the emotive-value                statistics.
They may be briefly summarized as   follows:

        ( 1 ) The lowest stage of tone-apprehension yields merely
     an impression of tone-color of the whole tonal complex, or
     of a difference between tone-colors of the separate tones.
        (2) Meanings conveyed by such a mere impression of
   tonal brightness always involve states or qualities or their
   changes, i.e. passive changes. Imagination of an event does
   not occur without an impression of tonal movement.
      (3) The most primitive factor in the perception of tonal
   movement is a sense of its direction. This, according to the
   author, "constitutes the point of departure of that psy-
 •
   chological symbolism of figures (psychische Gestaltsym-
   bolik) which we encounter in the tendency to relate musical
  motives to sentiments."
      (4) The apprehension of a width of tonal intervals is
  independent of this sense of direction; and "all spatial sym-
   bolism in the interpretation of motives has its roots in this
  impression of inter-tonal distance."
      (5) The idea of a musical step requires a joint percep-
  tion of tonal distance and direction. "We are not saying
   too much if we make all the higher psychical interpretation
   directly dependent on the grasping of interval-forms, or
   at least view them as mediately related to these."
      (6) Impressions of consonance, dissonance and related-
  ness (Zusammengehorigkeit) require the notion of a musi-
   cal step, or progression (simultaneous tones were not given;
  the inquiry rested on melodic elements).
      (7) Tones taken as, related may then be referred to a
   tonic, either chosen among them or "understood," i.e.
imaginatively supplied by the auditor         (this orientation
   is most    forcibly suggested by the perfect fourth, e.g.


                          which connotes almost irresistibly the setting:
Pw             fat    ,




       fe±==J=).
        (8) Reference to a tonic determines the feeling of modal-



     ity;   for instance,               J     connotes a different mod-
196                   PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY



                        fa3—
                        wm
   ality if taken as \rfi     \    J    J   -   from what it would as




                     2E-

      (9)       A subjective accent may simply fall upon the tone
   which    harmonically more important as the hearer has
                is

   organized the interval; it may, but need not, suggest a
   rhythmic structure.

   (10) Subjective rhythmatization,         when it occurs, is built
upon mental accentuation.
   Since such mental accentuation           may occur without any
actual emphasis (as in these experiments it necessarily did),
the problem of rhythm in music as we know it is immensely
complicated, and cannot be solved by mere reference to the
drum and footfall of dancing hordes. In fact, Huber distin-
guishes between such purely temporal measure, and "musical
rhythm," which latter results from the internal, tonal organ-
ization of the motif. 49
   The entire study shows effectively how many factors of
possible expressive virtue are involved in even the simplest
musical structure, how many things beside the acknowledged
materials of composition have crucial functions in conveying
a musical message. One may argue that voice-inflections enter
into the "expressiveness" of speech, too; but the fact is that
the verbal message may be understood apart from these.
They do not alter the content of a statement, which is
uniquely determined by vocabulary and syntax, but at most
they may affect one's reaction to the statement. Musical
semantic factors, however, have never been isolated; even
the efforts of Schweitzer 50 and Pirro 51 to trace the "emotional

  49 "So   it appears," he says, "upon this view (which is shared, inci-
dentally by   Ohmann) that musical rhythm, in contrast with the mere
temporal rhythm of measures, grows out of the inner Gestalt-Telations
of the motif itself." (Ibid., p. 179.) This conclusion corroborates by
scientific evidence the doctrines of Heinrich Schenker concerning meter
and rhythm, namely that rhythm is a function of tonal motion, not of
time-division; such motion depends as much on melodic and harmonic
tension and direction as on tempo. (See Schenker's Neue musikalische
Theorien und Phantasien, 3 vols. [1935], esp. vol III, Der freie Satz, ch.
xii, pp. 191-206.)
   so Albert Schweitzer, /. S. Bach, le musicien-poete (2nd ed. 1905).
   si Andre Pirro, L'esthetique de Jean-Sebastien Bach (1907).
                          ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                     197
vocabulary" of Bach by correlating musical figures with the
words he usually sets to them, interesting though they are,
show us certain associations in Bach's mind, perhaps also
accepted conventions of his day or his school, rather than
musical laws of expression. Such precise interpretations of
separate figures are inconclusive because, as Huber remarked
in his direct psychological study, "It is impossible to deter-
mine the absolute expressive value                of   separate   intervals
 (third,    fifth,   etc.)     because their absolute pitch affects the
brightness of their constituents and therewith their qualities
of contrast, apprehensibility, etc." 52 That there are tonal
figures derived from natural rhythms, that upward and down-
ward direction, pendular motion, etc., may be musically
"imitated," that melodic lines may suggest sobs, whimpers, or
yodelers, need not be reiterated here; such general classifi-
cations 53 do not give us a vocabulary of music; and even if
we accept the more ambitious dictionary of Schweitzer or
Pirro, what is usually called the "grammar" of music, i.e.
harmony, does not recognize such "words" as elements at
all.  The analogy between music and language breaks down
if   we carry it beyond the mere semantic function in general,
which they are supposed to share. 54 Logically, music has not
the characteristic properties of language              —
                                            separable terms
with fixed connotations, and syntactical rules for deriving
complex connotations without any loss to the constituent
elements. Apart from a few onomatopoetic themes that have
                               —
become conventional the cuckoo, the bugle-calls, and pos-
sibly the church-bell          —
                         music has no literal meaning.
   Yet it may b£ a presentational symbol, and present eirfotive
experience through global forms that are indivisible as the
elements of chiaroscuro. This view has indeed been sug-
gested. 55 But it seems peculiarly hard for our literal minds to
grasp the idea that anything can be known which cannot be
named. Therefore philosophers ^and critics have repeatedly
denied the musical symbolization of emotion on the ground
that, as Paul Moos puts it, "Pure instrumental music is unable
to render even the most ordinary feelings, such as love,
loyalty, or anger, unambiguously and distinctly, by its own
unaided powers." 56 Or Heinrich, in the same vein: "There
are many musical works of high artistic value, that completely


     52 Huber, Der Ausdruck musikalischer Elementarmotive, p. 182.
     53A  perfect example may be found in E. Sorantin's The Problem of
Musical Expression (1932).
     54 Cf. Siegfried F. Nadel, Der duale Sinn der Musik (1931), p. 78.
     55 Cf. Julius Bittner, "Die Grenzen des Komponierbaren," Der Merker,
II   (1910), part    I,   pp. 11-14.
     56 Paul Moos, Die Philosophie der Musik (1922), p. 297.
198                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
baffle us when we try to denote by one word the mood they
are  supposed to convey. This alone suffices to make the
conception of music as a sentimental art, or an art of ex-
pressing sentiments, quite untenable." 57 And A. Gehring,
pointing out that one cannot prove every musical phrase or
figure to mean some nameable feeling, memory, or idea,
declares, "Until this is done, we must deny that symboliza-
tion accounts for the essential charm of the art." 58
   But this is a fallacy, based on the assumptions that the
rubrics established by language are absolute, so that any
other semantic must make the same distinctions as discursive
thought, and individualize the same "things," "aspects,"
"events," and "emotions." What is here criticized as a weak-
ness, is really the strength of musical expressiveness: that
music articulates forms which language cannot            set   forth.
The classifications which language makes automatically pre-
clude many relations, and many of those resting-points of
thought which we call "terms.", It is just because music
has not the same terminology and pattern, that it lends
itself to the revelation of non-scientific concepts. To render
"the most ordinary feelings, such as love, loyalty or anger,
unambiguously and distinctly," would be merely to duplicate
what verbal appellations do well enough.
   I cannot agree, therefore, with Professor Urban's state-
ment: "It is true that there are other symbols than those of
language, namely, the symbols of art and mathematics, by
means of which meanings may be communicated. But these
symbols themselves require interpretation, and interpreta-
tion is only possible in terms of language." 59 His very com-
bination of art and mathematics seems to me to bespeak
a misunderstanding; for mathematics is discursive and literal,
a specialized and abbreviated language. It appeals essentially
to the eye, and is therefore most easily "done on paper," but




all   its   symbols have names; a complex     like   —  -r—
                                                      Cm n
                                                         '
                                                                may

always be verbally expressed as "the square root of a-p\us-b,
over c to the m-p\us-nth power." This is not a non-linguistic
symbolism; it is merely a highly technical jargon, and the
teaching of mathematics is its interpretation to the uninitiate.
  57 F. Heinrich, "Die Tonkunst in ihrem Verhaltnis zum Ausdruck und
zum Symbol," Zeitschrift fur Musikwissenschaft, VIII (1925-26), 66-
92. See p. 75.
  58 The Basis of Musical Pleasure, p. 90.
  59 W. M. Urban, Language and Reality, p. 55.
                                 ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                      199
But in art such interpretation is vicious, because art  certainly          —
music, and probably all art               —
                                 is formally and essentially un-

translatable; and   cannot agree that 'interpretation of poetry
                                  1


is the determination of what poetry says.             One of the
                                                               .   .   .



essential functions of the teaching of literature is its interpreta-
tion.    .   Now a character of such interpretation is that it
             .   .




is  always carried out in non-poetic terms or in less poetic
terms than the thing interpreted." '"' Evidently Professor Urban
would extend this sort of explanation even to music, for he
says elsewhere: "Even in such non-linguistic arts as music
or pure design, where the element of assertion is apparently
absent, it is, I should hold, only apparently so." 61
   In that case, of course, Moos and Heinrich and Gehring
are justified in denying "emotive" meanings to music on the
ground that no propositions about feelings can be assigned,
with any confidence, as the contents of its forms. But it
seems to me that truth rests rather with another statement of
Urban's, which is hard to reconcile with his prevailing, ex-
plicit views about the primacy and supremacy of language:
"The poet          does well to speak in figure, to keep to his
                     .   .   .



own symbolic form. For precisely in that symbolic form an
aspect of reality is given which cannot be adequately ex-
pressed otherwise. It is not true that whatever can be expressed
symbolically can be better expressed literally. For there is no
literal expression, but only another kind of symbol." 62
   For the musician, this other kind of symbol is not con-
stantly obscured by something that is said; wherefore musi-
cians have grasped its character and importance more clea/ly
than literary critics. If music is a symbolism, it is essentially
of this untranslatable form. That is the gist of Wagner's
description of the "orchestral language." Since this "language"
has no conventional words, it can never appeal to discursive
reason. But it expresses "just what is unspeakable in verbal
language, and what, viewed from our rationalistic (Verstan-
desmenschlichen) standpoint, may therefore be called simply
the Unspeakable." 63
   Because the forms of human feeling are much more con-
gruent with musical forms than with the forms of language,
music can reveal the nature of feelings with a detail and
truth that language cannot approach. This peculiar articu-

     60 Ibid., pp. 487^88.                    «i Ibid.,   pp. 478.
     62 Ibid., p. 500. Oddly
                          enough, this same passage concludes with the
Words: "But when all is said and done, it renmins true that poetry is
covert metaphysics, and it is only when its implications, critically inter-
preted and adequately expressed, become part of philosophy that an ade-
quate view of the world can be achieved." What is this critical and
adequate expression, if not literal interpretation?
  63 Oper und Drama. See Gat/, Musik-Aesthetik, p. 192.
200               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
lateness of music as a semantic of vital and emotional facts
was discovered nearly two centuries ago by one of the con-
tributors to Marpurg's famous Beytrdge zur Musik. This
writer (the same Huller who objected to ducks and sneezing
fleas in"modern music") says:
   "There are feelings  .  which are so constantly suppressed
                            .   .



by the tumult of our passions, that they can reveal themselves
but timidly, and are practically unknown to us.         .Note,
                                                            .   .



however, what response a certain kind of music evokes in
our hearts: we are attentive, it is charming; it does not aim
to arouse either sorrow or joy, pity or anger, and yet we
are moved by it. We are so imperceptibly, so gently moved,
that we do not know we are affected, or rather, that we can
can give no name to the affect.     .   .   .


   "Indeed, it is quite impossible to name every thing fascinat-
ing in music, and bring it under definite headings. Therefore
music has fulfilled its mission whenever our hearts are satis-
fied." 64
   Since the day when this was written, many musicologists
notably Vischer, Riemann, and Kurth             —
                                            have emphasized the
impossibility of interpreting the "language of feeling," al-
though they admit its function to be, somehow, a revelation
of emotions, moods, or subtle nameless affects. Liszt warned
specifically against the practice of expounding the emotive
content of a symphonic poem, "because in such case the words
tend to destroy the magic, to desecrate the feelings, and to
break the most delicate fabrics of the soul, which had taken
this form just because they were incapable of formulation in
words, images or ideas." 65
   But there are musicians for whom it is not enough to
recognize the ineffable character of musical significance; they
must remove their art from the realm of meaning altogether.
They cannot entertain the idea that music expresses anything
in any way. The oddest thing about this perfectly legitimate
problem of musical meaning is that it seems impossible for
people to discuss it with anything like detachment or candor.
It is almost like a religious issue; only that in matters of faith
the proponents of a doctrine are usually the vehement be-
lievers, the passionate defenders, whereas in this musicological
argument it is apt to be the non-believers, the scoffers and
critics, who are most emotional about it. Those who deny
that music is a language of feelings do not simply reject the
symbolistic theory as unconvincing or indemonstrable; they


  64 Huller, "Abhandlung von der Nachahmung der Natur in der Musik,"
pp. 515 and 523. Italics mine.
  65 Franz Liszt, "Berlioz und seine Harold-Symphonie," reprinted by
Gatz from Liszt's Gesammelte Schriften. See Gatz, op. cit., p. 127.
                    ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                           201
 are not content to say that they cannot find the alleged mean-
 ing in music, and therefore consider the hypothesis far-
fetched; no, they reject with horror the very attempt to
construe music as a semantic, they regard the imputation of
                —                         —
any meaning emotional or other as an insult to the Muse,
a degradation of the pure dynamic forms, an invidious heresy.
They seem to feel that if musical structures should really be
found to have significance, to relate to anything beyond
themselves, those structures would forthwith cease to be
musical. The dignity of music demands that it should be
autonomous; its existence should have no explanation. To
add "meaning" to its sensuous virtues is worse than to deny
it any virtue   —
                it is, somehow, to destroy its life.
                                                     66

   Yet the most vehement critics of the emotive-content theory
seem to have caught a germ from the doctrine they attacked:
in denying the very possibility of any content of music, they
have fallen into the way of thinking about it in terms of form
and content. Thery are suddenly faced with the dichotomy:
significant or meaningless.       And while they fiercely repudiate
the proposition that music is a semantic, they cannot assert
that it is meaningless. It is the problem, not the doctrine,
that has infected them. Consequently they try to eat their
cake and have it too, by a logical trick that is usually accepted
only among mathematicians          —
                                by a statement which has the
form of an answer to the question in hand, and really com-
mits them to nothing. Musical form, they reply, is its own
content; its means itself. This evasion was suggested by
Hanslick when he said, "The theme of a musical composition
is itsessential content." He knew that this was an evasion^ 67
but his successors have found it harder and harder to resist
the question of content, and the silly fiction of self-significance
has been raised to the dignity of a doctrine. 68 It is really
just a talisman against any and every assignment of specific
content to music; and as such it, will presently appear justi-
fied.
  66 The importance of this conflict was recognized by Dr. Wierling, who
says:  "The great reaction which Hanslick evoked with his book shows
by its harshness that here was no contest of opinions, but a conflict of
forces like that of dogma against heresy.  . The reaction against Hans-
                                               .   .



lick was that of persons attacked in their holiest convictions." (Das
Tonkunstwerk als autonome Gestalt und als Ausdruck der Personlich-
keit, pp. 24—25.) Exactly the same spirit was certainly evinced by
Hanslick himself, who repulsed what he considered not a mere error,
but a pernicious doctrine.
   67 See Hanslick, op. cit., p. 133: "In the art of music there is no
content opposed to form, because music has no form over and above
its content." This is an effectual repudiation of the form-and-content
dichotomy, a rejection of the problem, not of its answers.
   68 See, e.g., E. J. Dent, Terpander: or, the Music of the Future (1927),
p. 12; Carroll C. Pratt, The Meaning of Music (1931), p. 237; and F.
Heinrich, "Die Tonkunst in ihrem Verhaltnis zum Ausdruck und zum
Symbol," p. 67.
202               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
   Whenever people vehemently reject a proposition, they do
so not because it simply does not recommend itself, but
because it does, and yet its acceptance threatens to hamper
their thinking in some important way. If they are unable to
define the exact mischief it would do, they just call it "de-
grading," "materialistic," "pernicious," or any other bad
name. Their judgment may be fuzzy, but the intuition they
are trying to rationalize is right; to accept the opponent's
proposition as it stands, would lead to unhappy consequences.
   So it is with "significant form" in music: to tie any tonal
structure to a specific and speakable meaning would limit
musical imagination, and probably substitute a preoccupation
with feelings for a whole-hearted attention to music. "An
inward singing," says Hanslick, "and not an inward feeling,
prompts a gifted person to compose a musical piece." 69
Therefore it does not matter what feelings are afterward
attributed to it, or to him; his responsibility is only to articu-
late the "dynamic tonal form."
   It is a peculiar fact that some musical forms seem to bear
a  sad  and a happy interpretation equally well. At first sight
that looks paradoxical; but it really has perfectly good reasons,
which do not invalidate the notion of emotive significance,
but do bear out the right-mindedness of thinkers who recoil
from the admission of specific meanings. For what music
can actually reflect is only the morphology of feeling; and it
is quite plausible that some sad and some happy conditions
may have a very similar morphology. This insight has led some
philosophical musicologists to suppose that music, conveys
general forms of feeling, related to specific ones as algebraic
expressions are related to arithmetic; a doctrine put forward
by Moritz Hauptmann 70 and also by Moritz Carriere. 71
These two excellent thinkers saw in music what most aesthe-
ticians failed to see —its intellectual value, its close relation
to concepts, not by reason of its difficult academic "laws,"
but in virtue of its revelations. If it reveals the rationale of
feelings, the rhythm and pattern of their rise and decline
and intertwining, to our minds, then it is a force in our mental
life,   our awareness and understanding, and not only our
affective experience.
  Even Hanslick granted this logical analogy between music
and emotions; 72 but he did not realize how much he had
granted. Because he considered nothing but conventional
denotation as "meaning," he insisted that music could not
mean anything. Every mathematician knows how hard it is
  69 Op. cit., p. 75.  to Die Natur der Harmonik und Metrik (1853).
  7i Aesthetik, 2 vols. (1859).       72 Op. cit., p. 26.
                   ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                  203
to convince the naive beginner in algebra that its letters have
any meaning, if they are not given specific denotations: "Let
a = 5, let b= 10," etc. Presently the novice learns that it makes
no difference to the validity of the equation how the meanings
of terms have been assigned; then he understands the general-
ity  of the symbolism. It is only when he sees the balance of
the equation as a form in itself, apart from all its possible
arithmetical instances, that he grasps the abstraction, the real
concept expressed through the formula.
   Algebraic letters are pure symbols; we see numerical rela-
tionships not in them, but through them; they have the
highest "transparency" that language can attain. In liken-
ing music to such a symbolism, Hauptmann and Carriere
claimed for it that peculiar "significance" that belongs to
abstractions  —a general reference to the realm of reality from
which the form is abstracted, a reflection of the laws of that
realm, a "logical picture" into which all instances must fit,
yet not a "picture" of any actual instance.
   But this explanation of music as a high abstraction, and
musical experience as a purely logical revelation, does not
do justice to the unmistakably sensuous value of tone, the
vital nature of its effect, the sense of personal import which
we meet in a great composition every time it is repeated to us.
Its message is not an immutable abstraction, a bare, unam-
biguous, fixed concept, as a lesson in the higher mathematics
of feeling should be. It is always new, no matter how well
or how long we have known it, or it loses its meaning; it is
not transparent but irridescent. Its values crowd each other,
its   symbols are inexhaustible.                           ym
      The fact is, Uthink, that Hanslick, who admitted only the
formal similarity of music and emotive experience but de-
nied the legitimacy of any further interpretation, and those
authors who realized that formality, but took it for the nature
of musical meaning rather than of musical symbols, were
very close to a correct analysis. For music has all the earmarks
of a true symbolism, except one: the existence of an assigned
connotation. It is a form that is capable of connotation, and
the meanings to which it is amenable are articulations of
emotive, vital, sentient experiences. But its import is never
fixed. In music we work essentially with free forms, following
inherent psychological laws of "rightness," and take interest
in possible articulations suggested entirely by the musical
material. We are elaborating a symbolism of such vitality that
it harbors a principle of development in its own elementary

forms, as a really good symbolism is apt to do   —   as language
has "linguistic laws" whereby words naturally give rise to
cognates, sentence-structures to subordinate forms, indirect
204              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
discourse to subjunctive constructions "by attraction," noun-
inflections to inflectionsof their modifiers "by agreement."
No conscious intellectual intent determines vowel changes,
                                              —
inflections, or idioms; the force of what has been called
"linguistic feeling" or a "sense of words"       "the Spirit of
                             —
Language," as Vossler says develops the forms of speech.
To make up a language upon a preconception of what it is
to express never leads to a real language, because language
grows in meaning by a process of articulation, not in articulate
forms by a process of preconceived expression.
   What is true of language, is essential in music: music that
is invented while the composer's mind is fixed on what is
to be expressed is apt not to be music. It is a limited idiom,
like an artificial language, only even less successful; for
music at its highest, though clearly a symbolic form, is an
unconsummated symbol. Articulation is its life, but not asser-
tion; expressiveness, not expression. The actual function of
meaning, which calls for permanent contents, is not fulfilled;
for the assignment of one rather than another possible mean-
ing to each form is never explicitly made. Therefore music is
"Significant Form," in the peculiar sense of "significant"
which Mr. Bell and Mr. Fry maintain they can grasp, or feel,
but not define; such significance is implicit, but not con-
ventionally fixed.
   The fact that in music we have an unconsummated symbol,
a significant form without conventional significance, casts
some light on all the obscure conflicting judgments that the
rise of program music has evoked. The expression of an
idea in a symbolic mode may be successful or unsuccessful;
easy and adequate, or halting, askew, inexact. Ordinarily
we have no precise "logical picture" of affects at all; but
we refer to them, chiefly by the indirect method of describing
their causes or their effects. We say we feel "stunned," "left
out," "moved," or "like swearing," "like running away."       A
mood can be described only by the situation that might
give rise to it: there is the mood of "sunset and evening star,"
the mood of a village festival, or of a Vienna soiree. If, now,
a composer's musical idiom is not so rich and definite that
its tonal forms alone are perfectly coherent, significant, and
satisfying, it is the most natural thing in the world that he
should supplement them by the usual, non-musical ways of
expressing ideas of feeling to ourselves and others; by en-
visaging situations, objects, or events that hold a mood or
specify an emotion. He may use a mental picture merely
as a scaffolding to organize his otherwise musical conception.
Schumann tells of occasions when he or another composer
had envisaged a scene or a being so that the vision directly
                       ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                               205
inspired a coherent, well-wrought musical work.       Sometimes
                                                          7   '




the mere suggestion of what Huber calls a "sphere," e.g. "a
medieval realm," "a fairy world," "a heroic setting," effected
by one title-word such as "Scheherazade" or "Oberon," serves
to crystallize a shifting and drifting musical theme into artistic
form. Sometimes a composer sets himself an elaborate pro-
gram and follows it as he might a libretto or a choreographer's
book. It is true, and natural enough, that this latter practice
produces a less perfect musical expression than purely the-
matic thinking, for it is not single-minded; not everything
relevant is contained in the music; and there is nothing in
the work to force the composer's helpful fancies on the
listener. Nothing can constrain us to think of Till Eulen-
spiegel's escapades while listening to music.
   But similarly, nothing can prevent our falling back on
mental pictures, fantasies, memories, or having a Spharener-
lebnis of some sort, when we cannot directly make subjective
sense out of music in playing or hearing it. A program is
simply a crutch. It is a resort to the crude but familiar method
of holding feelings in the imagination by envisaging their
attendant circumstances. It does not mean that the listener
is unmusical, but merely that he is not musical enough to
think in entirely musical terms. He is like a person who
understands a foreign language, but thinks in his mother
tongue the minute an intellectual difficulty confronts him.
   To a person of limited musical sense, such ideation seems
the most valuable response to music, the "subjective content"
which the listener must supply. People of this persuasion
often grant that there may also be an appreciation of .pure
beautiful sounds, which "gives us pleasure"; but we can
understand the music better when it conveys a poetic con-
tent. 74 Goethe, for instance, who was not musical (despite his

  73 Robert Schumann on Berlioz' Symphonie Fantastique, reprinted by
Gatz from Gesammelte Schriften iiber* Musik und Musiker. See Gatz,
op.   cit.,   pp. 299-303.
         Prunieres (the same "interpreter" who tells us so categorically
  74 Henri
how Beethoven felt when he invented his themes) writes of Strauss's
programmatic works: "These works are endowed with a form sufficiently
beautiful in itself to afford the auditor lively pleasure, even should he
not perceive all the author's intentions. It must be remembered, however,
that his pleasure is doubled when he is capable of grasping, of gradually
discovering, the hidden symbols." ("Musical Symbolism," p. 20.)
   D. M. Ferguson, in an essay entitled "How can Music Express
Emotion?" claims that music, "being unable, as words and pictures can
do, to present to our attention the causes or external circumstances of
feeling (from which we largely infer the nature of the feeling itself),
begins in medias res, with the nervous disturbance itself and     .instead
                                                                      .   .

of representing the conditions which arouse emotion and demanding
that the observer observe therefrom the emotional meaning, music repre-
sents the emotional disturbance itself and demands that for its fullest
comprehension its hearers shall infer the cause." (Proceedings of the
206                       PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
interest in the art as a cultural product), tells how, in listening
to a new piano quartet, he could make no sense out of any
part save an allegro, which he could interpret as the Witches'
Sabbath on the Blockberg, "so that after all I found a con-
ception which could underlie this peculiar music." 75
   Where such interpretation is spontaneous, it is a perfectly
legitimate practice, common among musically limited per-
sons, and helpful; but it becomes pernicious when teachers
or critics or even composers initiate it, for then they make a
virtue out of walking with a crutch. It is really a denial of
the true nature of music, which is unconventionalized, un-
verbalized freedom of thought. That is why the opponents
of program-music and of hermeneutic are so vehement in
their protests;  they feel the complete misconception of the
artistic significance of tonal structures, and although they give
doubtful reasons for their objection, their reaction is perfectly
sound.
   The real power of music lies in the fact that it can be
"true" to the life of feeling in a way that language cannot;
for its significant forms have that ambivalence of content
which words cannot have. This is, I think, what Hans Mers-
mann meant, when he wrote: "The possibility of expressing
opposites simultaneously gives the most intricate reaches of
expressiveness to music as such, and carries it, in this respect,
far beyond the limits of the other arts." 76 Music is revealing,
where words are obscuring, because it can have not only a
content, but a transient play of contents. It can articulate
feelings without becoming wedded to them. The physical
character of a tone, which we describe as "sweet," or "rich,"
or "strident," and so forth, may suggest a momentary inter-
pretation, by a physical response. A key-change may convey
a new Weltgefiihl. The assignment of meanings is a shifting,
kaleidoscopic play, probably below the threshold of conscious-
ness, certainly outside the pale of discursive thinking. The
imagination that responds to music is personal and associa-
Music Teachers' National Association, 1925, pp. 20-32. See pp. 26-27.
Italics mine.)
  Another purveyor of interpretations, F. Nicholls, says (after classifying
"chords of fear" and "arpeggios of joy"): "It is now desired to illumi-
                                                                  —
nate a piece of pure music by reading into it in accordance with our
acquired knowledge of musical symbolism some more definite and   —
particular meaning.    The music is the higher or cosmic interpretation
                              .       .   .


of definite things.   .   .       .       An interpretation, nevertheless, is often very help-
ful;  and a 'parable,' so to speak, in words often, and quite justifiably,
adds to the enjoyment of the music." (The Language of Music, or, Musi-
cal Expression and Characterization, 1924, pp. 77-78.) Hereupon he
writes doggerel words to a Beethoven piano sonata.
   75 J. P. Eckermann, Gesprdche mil Goethe (ed. of 1912), p. 158.
   76 "Versuch einer musikalischen Wertaesthetik," Zeitschrift fur Musik-
wissenschaft, XVII (1935), 1: 33-^7.
                          ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                           207
tive and logical, tinged   with afTect, tinged with bodily rhythm,
tinged with dream, but concerned with a wealth of formula-
tions for its wealth of wordless knowledge, its whole knowl-
edge of emotional and organic experience, of vital impulse,
balance, conflict, the ways of living and dying and feeling.
Because no assignment of meaning is conventional, none is
permanent beyond the sound that p               vet the brief asso-
ciation was a flash of understanding. The lasting effect is,
like the first effect of speech on the development of the mind,
to make things conceivable rather than to store up proposi-
tions. Not communication but insight is the gift of music;
in very naive phrase, a knowledge of "how feelings go."
This    has          nothing   to      do with "Affektenlehre";   it   is   much
more     subtle,complex, protean, and much more important;
for its entire record is emotional satisfaction, intellectual
confidence, and musical understanding. "Thus music has ful-
filled its mission whenever our hearts are satisfied."
   It also gives substance to a theory that sounds very odd

outside some such context as this, a theory advanced by
Riemann, and more recently developed by Professor Carroll
Pratt, who (apparently quite independently) came to the
conclusion that music neither causes nor "works off" real
feelings, but produces some peculiar effects we mistake for
them. Music has its special, purely auditory characters, that
"intrinsically contain certain properties which, because of
their close resemblance to certain characteristics in the subjec-
tive realm, are frequently confused with emotions proper." 77
But "these auditory characters are not emotions at all. They
merely sound the way moods feel .... More often tharvaot
these formal characters of music go unnamed: they are simply
what the music is.       ." *  .   .
                                        7



   The notion that certain effects of music are so much like
feelings that we mistake them for the latter, though they are
really entirely different, may seem queer, unless one looks at
music as an "implicit" symbolism; then, however, the con-
fusion appears as something to be expected. For until sym-
bolic forms are consciously abstracted, they are regularly
confused with the things they symbolize. This is the same
principle that causes myths to be believed, and names de-

   77 Pratt,     The Meaning of Music, p. 191.
   78 Ibid.,     p. 203. Compare Hugo Riemann, Wie Horen Wir Musik?
(1888), pp. 22-23: "It is really not a question of expressing emotions at
all. for .   music only moves the soul in a way analogous to the way
             .   .



emotions move it, without pretending, however, in any way to arouse
them (wherefore it does not signify anything that entirely heterogeneous
affects have similar dynamic forms, and therefore may be expressed'
bv the same music, as has already been observed, quite rightly, by
Hanslick).       .   .
208                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
noting powers to be endowed with power, and sacraments
to be taken for efficacious acts; the principle set forth by
Cassirer, in a passage which I have quoted once before, 79
but cannot refrain from repeating here: "It is typical of the
first naive, unreflective manifestations of linguistic thinking
as well as the mythical consciousness, that its content is not
sharply divided into symbol and object, but both tend to
unite in a perfectly undifferentiated fusion." 80 This prin-
ciple marks the line between the "mythical consciousness"
and the "scientific consciousness," or between implicit and
explicit conception of reality. Music is our myth of the inner
life—  a young, vital, and meaningful myth, of recent inspira-
tion and still in its "vegetative" growth.
