g.     The Genesis of Artistic Import

The roots of music go far back in history, but in its begin-
nings it probably was not art. There seems to have been a
long pre-musical period, when organized sounds were used
for rhythmatization of work and ritual, for nervous excita-
tion, and perhaps for magical purposes. In this period the
elementary materials of music became established, tonal forms
which finally reached a stage of articulation that made them,
quite spontaneously, instinct with meaning. That is why Bii-
cher, in his famous book Arbeit und Rhythmus, 1 can actually
trace so many motifs back to sailors' cries, the long breaths
of corn-grinders, to threshers' flail-strokes and the measure
of bounding hammers in the smithy. All those mechanical
sounds and spontaneous utterances had to be long familiar
before their tonal quality could become abstracted for the
listening ear; they had to attain fixed forms before they could
become elements for musical imagination. Probably song of

   79 In The Practice of Philosophy, p. 178.
   so This identification of symbol and object in music is given remark-
able illustration by a passage from Gehring's The Basis of Musical
Pleasure, which reads: "If the sequence of thoughts which fills our mind
from minute to minute bears any close resemblance to melodic structure,
it is so subtle that nobody has yet been able to detect it. However, is it
necessary to trace an analogy? May not the mental phenomenon and the
musical counterpart here melt together? May not the melody be sub-
stituted for the important train of thought which it is supposed to mirror?
In the case of measure, force, and tempo, music duplicates or photo-
graphs the mind; in the case of melody, it coincides with it." (Page 98.)
   i Karl Bucher, Arbeit und Rhythmus
                                          (4th ed. 1908; first published in
1896).
             THE GENESIS OF ARTISTIC IMPORT                209
some kind, as well as drummed dance-rhythm, is older than
any musical interest. If indeed, as von Humboldt says, "Man
is a singing creature," then music is not necessarily given as
soon as there is song; then he may have sung his reveilles
and musters, his incantations and his dances, long before he
knew that vocal forms were beautiful and could be sung
without signifying anything. Group speaking is necessarily
chanting. The length of a sentence that can be spoken in one
breath is a natural verse-limit, as the hold on the end of a
choral verse indicates. Work rhythms, dance measures, choric
utterance, these are some of the influences that formed music
out of the sounds that are natural to man, that he utters at
work, or in festal excitement, or in imitation of the world's
      —
sounds the cuckoo's cry, the owl's hoot, the beat of hooves,
feet, drums, or hammers.
   All such noises are incipient "themes," musical models
which artistic imagination may seize upon to form tonal ideas.
But they do not themselves enter into music, as a rule; they
are transformed into characteristic motifs; intervals, rhythms,
melodies, all the actual ingredients of song are not supplied
but merely inspired by sounds heard in nature. The auditory
experiences which impress us are those which have musical
possibilities, which allow themselves to be varied and devel-
oped, expanded, altered, which can change their emotional
value through harmonic modifications. Ernst Kurth, in his
excellent Musikpsychologie, has made a searching study of
these proto-musical elements, which he calls Ursymbole; his
words are the best statement I can find of the way familiar
sounds are transformed into music, so I quote them bere:
   "In investigating the thematic roots of folksong, one soon
comes upon psychological roots as well; among all races
there appear certain recurrent, simple idioms that are really
nothing but ultimate symbols of their vital consciousness:
calls, chimes, cradle-rhythms, work-rhythms; dance-forms,
often intimately related to certain bodily movements and steps;
shouts, hunting-calls and military signals, highland themes
(Alphornweisen) and tallyhos (symbols of popular humor
persisting even in high artistic composition); also plenty of
borrowings from the national liturgy; in short, all sorts of
motifs in which an undercurrent of popular imagination
reveals itself.
   "Especially impressions from the first phases of childhood
leave their imprint here; hence the fondness for (hidden)
cradle-rhythms in folktunes, for certain beckoning calls, fur-
thermore for religious motifs and the many clear or merely
suggested bell sounds.  .   .   .



   "All these themes are easily detected in folksongs, either
210                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
frankly or obscurely present, sometimes clearly interpretable,
sometimes of indeterminate symbolic character. They are by
no means simply expressive of the momentary literal mean-
ing of the text, but rather may be said to emanate directly
(and sometimes even in defiance of the text) from musical
reflection and formulation in its own right.     .   .They can
                                                         .




hardly be discerned as separate motif-values in the general
easy flow of the tune; neither musically nor ideationally can
a folksong ever be schematically analyzed as a sheer synthesis
of such ultimate symbols." 2
   All these sounds which meet our alert and retentive ear
in the course of the day's work become fixed forms for our
minds, because they are heard over and over again in nature,
industry, or society; but they give rise to music because they
are intrinsically expressive. They have not only associative
value, but value as rhythms and intervals, exhibiting stress
and release, progression, rise or fall, motion, limit, rest. It
is in this musical capacity that they enter into art, not in
their original capacity of signs, self-expressions, religious
symbols, or parrot-like imitation of sounds.
   There is a widespread and familiar fallacy, known as the
"genetic fallacy," which arises from the historical method in
philosophy and criticism: the error of confusing the origin of
a thing with its import, of tracing the thing to its most primi-
tive form and then calling it "merely" this archaic phe-
nomenon. In a philosophy of symbolism this mistake is
particularly fatal, since all elementary symbolic forms have
their origin in something else than symbolistic interest. Signifi-
cance is always an adventitious value. Words were probably
ritualistic sounds before they were communicative devices;
that does not mean that language is now not "really" a means
of communication, but is "really" a mere residue of tribal
excitement. Musical materials, likewise, presumably had other
uses before they served music; that does not imply that music
is "really" not an intellectual achievement, and expression of
musical ideas, at all, but is in reality a mere invocation
of rain or game, or a rhythmic aid to dancers, or what not.
   But just as it is a mistake to reduce music to its origins,
so it is, I think, to elevate primitive emotional sounds, like
bird-songs or the sing-song speech of sentimental persons, to
the dignity of music. They are musical materials, but their
unconscious use is not art. This is true even of certain tunes.
"The Old Gray Mare" was made for marching, and is a real
aid to rhythmic tramping, but its musical function is quite
secondary.    Certain   spinning songs are musically just bad.

 2 Kurth,   Musikpsychologie,   p.   291.
                         THE GENESIS OF ARTISTIC IMPORT                               21   1




They have been developed                    in    order to carrj       the    words   oi   i
bailed,     and no one caret about the melody,                        rhe lame is true
of drummed                 dancc-rfn thins         interspersed       with shouts ^r
verses ooal      I         forms
                             casually in answer to practical
                                   arise
demands, just as architeetural. ceramic, and pictorial forms
do. and attain some decree of eonventional development
before an\ one sees them as artistie forms at all.
    he plastic arts find natural models everywhere. Nature
     I



is   tull   ol       individual, beautiful, characteristic forms, and any-
one molding               cla\ or marking with his finger in the sand
naturally recalls            some object           shapes that
                                                 to give sense to the
produce thernsetvei under                  his    hand.
                                                    to achieve
                                                          It   is   io easy
     [lie Unity in I design by making it represent something,

that even when we would experiment with pure forms we are
apt tO find ourselves interpreting the results as human figures,
    I, bowers, or familiar inanimate things. Geometric forms
require purely intellectual and original organization to recom-
mend themselves to the eye as sensible (/estalten, and must
be relatively simple to be handled by their inventor or be-
holders as beautiful forms. But natural objects, by virtue of
their practical significance, carry a certain guarantee of unity
and permanence, which lets us apprehend their forms, though
these forms would be much too difficult to grasp as mere visual
patterns without extraneous meaning. An artistically sensitive
mind sees significant form where such form presents itself.
The profusion of natural models undoubtedly is responsible
for the early development of plastic art.
    But there is a danger in that asset, too; for the purely
visual arts very easily become model-bound. Instead of m
merely providing artistic ideas, a model may dictate to
the artist; its practical functions, which served to organize the
conception of it as a form, may claim his attention to the
detriment of his abstractive vision. Its interest as an object
may conflict with its pictorial interest and confuse the pur-
pose of his work.
    For the average beholder judging an artistic work, this
confusion is inevitable. The first naive comment is always
apt to be that the picture is, or is not, quite accurate; next,
that the subject is or is not worthy of being represented; and
then, probably, that the work is "pleasant" or "unpleasant."
All three of these comments are based on standards which
have nothing to do with art; all three place a premium on
qualities which usually detract from "significant form." The
first demands that the artist should be primarily interested in

the object           —
               as a storekeeper might be. who was to judge it
for his stock. The second concerns the object, not in relation
to the picture           —
                   not its visual virtues or failings but in rela-      —
212                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
tion to everything else in the world but the picture. Its
practical, moral, or historical significance is the criterion of
value here. The third treats the picture in what is really an
"aesthetic" capacity, its power to excite or soothe our senses,
to effect either annoyance or repose, as the colors of a living-
room do; or, if the "pleasure" derives from the theme
of the picture (a pastoral landscape being "pleasant," a St
Sebastian full of arrows "unpleasant" art), it is expected to
stimulate the imagination in agreeable ways.
   But all these virtues may belong to mediocre pictures;
they are, in fact, usually exemplified in the landscapes, ma-
rines, and genre paintings that serve as covers for magazines
whenever the pretty-girl-portrait is not appropriate.   A
                                                        painter
of no insight, judgment, or imagination worth mentioning
might follow Goethe's suggestions for a picture, find a grace-
ful and perfect model to impersonate a noble character, and
depict it with skillful accuracy    "getreue Nachahmung der
Natur," as his mentor called it   —         chosen with fault-
                                      in colors
less taste; 3   and produce a picture that might hangin every
parlor, but mean exactly nothing to the sensibilities of any
real artist. All these factors may, indeed, be materials for
artistic conception; but they are not the conception itself,
they offer no criterion of excellence. A subject which has
emotional meaning for the artist may thereby rivet his atten-
tion and cause him to see its form with a discerning, active
eye, and to keep that form present in his excited imagination
until its highest reaches of significance are evident to him;
then he will have, and will paint, a deep and original con-
ception of it. That is why men long in love or in religious
fervor are inspired to produce great, convincing works of art.
Not the importance of the theme, nor the accuracy of its
depiction, nor the fantasies stirred in the beholder, make a
work of art significant, but the articulation of visual forms
which Hoeslin would call its "melody."
   If the origin of art had to wait on somebody's conception
of this inner meaning, and on his intention to express it, then
our poor addle-brained race would probably never have
produced the first artistic creation. We see significance in
things long before we know what we are seeing, and it takes
some other interest, practical or emotional or superstitious,
to make us produce an object which turns out to have expres-
sive virtue as well.    We cannot conceive significant form ex
nihilo; we can only find it,   and create something in its image;
but because a      man has seen the "significant form" of the

  3 See "Zu malende Gegenstande" and "Maximen und Reflexionen iiber
Kunst." In Werke (Cotta ed.), vol. XXXV.
             THE GENESIS OF ARTISTIC IMPORT                 213
thing he copies, he will copy it with that emphasis, not by
measure, but by the selective, interpretative power of his
               A
intelligent eye.   savage may have this insight; in fact, Bush-
men and Indians, Polynesians and Indonesians, seem to be
prone to it, sensitive to forms as the early Egyptians and the
nameless cave-dwellers of paleolithic ages were. Apparently
primitive mankind has a "vegetative" period of artistic ac-
tivity, as he has of linguistic and mythological and ritual
growth. A crude pre-Athenian peasant makes a Herm for
the protection of his home, and produces a statue of archaic
beauty; an Indian carves a totem-pole, and achieves a com-
position; he fashions a canoe or molds a water-jar, and creates
a lovely form. His model is the human body, the tree trunk,
the curled dry leaf floating, the shell or skull or cocoanut
from which he drinks. But as he imitates such models for
practical ends he sees more than the utilitarian import of
their shapes; he literally sees the reflection of human feeling,
the "dynamic" laws of life, power, and rhythm, in forms on
which his attention is focussed; he sees things he cannot
name, magical imports, Tightness of line and mass, his hands
unwittingly express and even overdraw what he sees, and the
product amazes and delights him and looks "beautiful." But
he does not "know," in discursive terms, what he is express-
ing, or why he deviates from the model to make the form
more "significant." When he emerges from his savage state
and takes discursive reason seriously he tries to copy more
accurately; and the ambition for naturalistic, literal represen-
tation, for rational standards of art, moral interpretations,
and so forth, confuse his intuition and endanger his vj$ual
apprehensions. «.
   It has often been remarked that music as we know it, i.e.
as an artistic medium, is of very recent date. William Wal-
lace was so impressed with the lateness of its evolution that
he attributed this sudden growth to the emergence of a new
faculty of hearing, a neurological development which man
was supposed to have just attained. In The Threshold of
Music, he asserted that the Greeks, and even our ancestors
of five or six hundred years ago, could not hear what we can;
they could not distinguish consonance from dissonance. He
points out some interesting facts in support of this theory,
notably that to the Greeks, as to the Chinese before them,
music was essentially an intellectual exercise. Instrumental
music was practiced only as a craft supplying one of the
physical pleasures of life, like catering or massage, and had
none of the prestige of the true arts; wherefore musical
instruments were few and crude, and the ingenious Greeks
who could cast all sorts of delicate sculptured forms in bronze
214                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
did not use that      same skill to make even the most obvious
improvements     in  the flute and the lyre. So he concludes
that ancient musicians simply had not the "inner ear" that
is normal, now-a-days, not only for gifted persons, but for
the average man, who quite naturally hears melodies in the
context of some harmonic structure. "While the Greeks had
reached the highest attainments in eye-training and mind-
training," he concludes, "as shown by their works of art, by
their dialectics and their poetry, the existing records of their
music go to prove that their sense of hearing lacked the
faculty of discerning the finer shades and subtleties of
sound." 4 Since the professional Greek rhapsodists prided
themselves on singing quarter-tones accurately on pitch, this
statement is certainly open to doubt. Yet it is indeed re-
markable that, although the organ existed throughout the
Middle Ages, no one discovered the possibilities of simul-
taneous tonal combinations; and also that the great classical
period of music is centuries later than that of the other
   —
arts   drama, sculpture, or painting. If we reject Wallace's
hypothesis, that "musical sense" evolved only with a recent
neurological development, we assume the burden of a better
explanation.
   This lies, I think, in the fact that music has very few
natural models. Bird songs, cries, whistles, traditional cattle-
calls, and metallic clangs are scant materials; even the intona-
tions of the human voice, whether purely emotional (as with
us), or semantic (like the Chinese speech-tones), are indefi-
nite, elusive, hard to hold in memory as precise forms. There
are hardly any given musical configurations in nature to sug-
gest organized tonal structures, and reveal themselves as
significant forms to a naive, sensitive, savage ear.
   The molds and scaffoldings in which music had to take
shape were all of extraneous character. Pictures have visual
models, drama has a direct prototype in action, poetry in
story; all may claim to be "copies," in the Platonic sense or
in the simple Aristotelian sense of "imitations." But music,
having no adequate models, had to rest on the indirect sup-
port of two non-musical aids      rhythm, and words.
   Rhythms are more fixed and stable, more definite than
intonations. That is probably why the rhythmic structure
is the first aspect of music to become formalized and precise.
Rhythm can be simultaneously expressed in many ways              —    in
shouts, steps, drum-beats, by voice, bodily motion, and in-
strumental noises. Words and acts and cries, whistles, rattles,
and tom-toms, may all be synchronized in one single rhythm;

  4 William Wallace, The Threshold of Music (1908), esp. pp. 35-42.
                  THE GENESIS OF ARTISTIC IMPORT                    215
no wonder the rhythmic figure is easily abstracted, when it is
rendered in such multiple modes! It is obviously one and
the same metric pattern, a general dynamic form, that may
be sung, danced, clapped, or drummed; this is the element
that can always be repeated, and therefore traditionally pre-
served. Naturally it offers us the first logical frame, the
skeletal structure of the embryonic art of music. 5
   The most obvious tonal material is, of course, the human
voice; and the spontaneous function of the voice is natural
utterance     —
            cry or speech. In adults, speech has become such
a dominant habit that even our purely emotional exclama-
tions tend to verbal forms like: "Alas!" "Ach!" "Tiens!"
And Biicher has shown how meaningless vocables carrying
out rhythms are gradually replaced by assonant words, with-
out any particular regard to meaning. Tennyson's farmer
heard his horse's hooves say: "Property, property, property,"
which made sense enough to his mind; but the fisherman who
hears the sails say: "Jerry and Josh, Jerry and Josh," or the
child who listens to the train's wheels repeating: "Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, Jerusalem," is simply yielding to the force of
linguistic habit. This sort of mental formulation seems to
underlie the construction of occupational songs, and prob-
ably of many festal songs. The adjustment of speech-im-
pulses to the demands of rhythmic tonal figure is the natural
source of all chanting, the beginning of vocal music. 6
   Since singing aloud requires some resonant, sustained vowel
sounds, one cannot help singing syllables, and their sug-
gestion of words makes the opportunity for poetic expression
too obvious to be missed. But as soon as the silly random
verbiage first efcctated by rhythmic figures and tonal de-
mands is imbued with poetic sense, a new source of artistry
has been created: for the poetic line becomes the choral
verse, which determines the elementary melodic form, the
musical phrase. Patterns of pitch follow patterns of word-
emphasis, and melodic lines begin and end with propositional
lines. This is the second extraneous "model" for musical
form.
   For a long age music was dependent on these two parents,
dance and song, and was not found without them. As ritual
dancing disappeared, and religion became more and more
bound to verbal expression, to prayer and liturgy, occupa-
tional       and secular   festive   music became wedded to dance
forms, sacred music to the chant; 7 so that Goethe, reviewing

  5Cf. R. Wallaschek, "On the Origin of Music," Mind, XVI (1891),
63: 375-386.
  6 Biicher, Arbeit und Rhythmus, p. 380.
  i Cf the observation of Kathi Meyer
         .                               "In antiquity, ritual was a cult
                                          :
216                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
the history of the art, and mistaking its guide-lines for its
intrinsic characteristics, was led to say: "The holiness of
sacred music, the jocund humor of folk-tunes, are the pivots
round which all true music revolves.             Worship or
                                                    .   .   .



dance." 8
   But the folksong is by no means restricted to jocose senti-
ments nor always based on dance-rhythms; it derives from
sacred sources as well as from secular excitements, and very
soon abstracts from both the first independent musical prod-
uct—  the "air." Old airs, like our modern hymn tunes, are
neither sad nor gay; any words in the proper metrical pattern
may be sung to them. Such melodies belong to no special
occasion, no special subject-matter, but are merely used for
the purpose of singing a variety of poems. Thus airs them-
selves often acquire names, after places, composers, saints,
as well as after their original words. Airs are national posses-
sions; they may convey ballads, or find their way into semi-
religious settings,solemn graduations, patriotic exercises and
the like, creep into revivalist meetings, and end up in the
most dignified hymnology. 9 If their rhythmic accent is light
and definite they are more apt to have a career on the village
green, the barn floor, the dance hall, sung to endless silly
words and played on fiddles or bagpipes without any words
at all. The dance seems to be their excuse for being; but
presently they are played or whistled on the street where no
one requires their rhythmic measure for any but musical
purposes. At this point music stands without its poetic or
terpsichorean scaffolding, a tonal dynamic form, an expres-
sive medium with a law and a life of its own.
   Because its models are non-musical, they are not as vital
to its mature artistic products as the models of pictures,
statues, plays, or poems are apt to be. Of course a certain
dance has left its stamp on all Mozart's minuets, and another
on Chopin's waltzes; yet the musical works called minuets
and waltzes do not represent those respective dances as pic-

act, a genuine sacrifice which was really carried out. Prayers and songs
were mere accompaniments and remained secondary matter, hence the
low development of these parts of the rite. Now, in the Christian service,
the actual sacrifice is no longer really performed, it is symbolized, tran-
scendentalized, spiritualized. The service is a parable. So prayers and
chants became the realities which had to be emphasized more and more;
they too served ultimately the process of spiritualization. If, in the past,
a symbol was needed for the cult, one could replace the act or even
the god by an image, in painting or sculpture. Now, with the concept-
ualizing of religion, one can spiritualize only the psychic processes, the
'anima.' That is effected by the word, or better yet in music." Bedeutung
und Wesen der Musik (1932), p. 47.
   8 Goethe, "Maximen und Reflexionen iiber Kunst."
   sCf. Biicher, Arbeit und Rhythmus, p. 401.
                THE GENESIS OF ARTISTIC IMPORT                           217
tures represent objects. They are abstracted forms reincar-
nated   in           we can take the music and forget the
             music, and
dance far more easily than we can take a painting and forget
what it portrays. The dance was only a framework; the air
has other contents, musical characteristics, and interests us
directly, not by its connotation of a "step" which we may not
even know.
   The same is true of words that have served to frame a tune.
The melody, heard by someone who does not hear or under-
stand the words, recommends itself as a tonal pattern on its
own merit, and makes perfectly good sense when it is played
instead of sung. Music dispenses easily with its models, be-
cause it could never really do them justice as a representative;
they are merely its foster-parents, and it was never their true
image anyway. This orphan estate belated its growth as an
art, and kept it long in a merely auxiliary, even a utilitarian
position; but it has the compensating virtue of making music
more independent of its natural models than any other art
when it does attain its selfhood. We perceive it as "significant
form," unhampered by any fixed,            literal   meaning, by any-
thing it represents. It is easier to grasp the artistic import
of music than of the older and more model-bound arts.
   This artistic import is what painters, sculptors, and poets
express through their depiction of objects or events. Its se-
mantic is the play of lines, masses, colors, textures in plastic
arts, or the play of images, the tension and release of ideas,
the speed and arrest, ring and rhyme of words in poetry
what Hoeslin           "Formenmelodie" and "Gedankenmelo-
                   calls
die."   Artistic            is what these media will convey;
                   expression
and I strongly stfspect, though I am not ready to assert it dog-
matically, that the import of artistic expression is broadly the
                                       —
same in all arts as it is in music the verbally ineffable, yet
not inexpressible law of vital experience, the pattern of
affective and sentient being. This is the "content" of what
we perceive as "beautiful form"; and this formal element is
the artist's "idea" which is conveyed by every great work. It
is this which so-called "abstract art" seeks to abstract by
defying the model or dispensing with it altogether; and which
music above all arts can reveal, unobscured by adventitious
literal meanings. That is presumably what Walter Pater meant
by his much-debated dictum, "All art aspires to the condition
of music." 10
  This does not mean, however, that music achieves the
aim of artistic expression more fully than other arts. An


   10 Walter Pater, The Renaissance. Studies in Art and Poetry   (   1908; 1st
Cd. 1873), p. 140.
218                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
ideal condition  is its asset, not a supreme attainment, and it
is this condition for which the other arts must strive, whereas
music finds it fulfilled from the first stage in which it may
be called an art at all. Its artistic mission is more visible
because it is not obscured by meanings belonging to the
represented object rather than to the form that is made in its
image. But the artistic import of a musical composition is not
therefore greater or more perfectly formulated than that of
a picture, a poem, or any other work that approaches per-
fection as closely after its kind.
   Whether the field of musical meanings, over which its un-
assigned symbols play      —the realm of sentient and emotional
            —
experience is ultimately the subject-matter of all art, is a
moot question. In a general way it probably is so; but within
this very great and uncharted domain there may well be
many special regions, to one or another of which the medium
of one art is more suited than that of another for its articulate
expression. It may well be, for instance, that our physical
orientation in the world       —
                               our intuitive awareness of mass
and motion, restraint and autonomy, and all characteristic
feeling that goes with it      —is the preeminent subject-matter
of the dance, or of sculpture, rather than (say) of poetry;
or that erotic emotions are most readily formulated in musical
terms. I do not know; but the possibility makes me hesitate
to say categorically, as many philosophers and critics have
said, 11 that the import of all the arts is the same, and only
the medium depends on the peculiar psychological or sensory
make-up of the artist, so that one man may fashion in clay
what another renders in harmonies or in colors, etc. The
medium in which we naturally conceive our ideas may restrict
them not only to certain forms but to certain fields, howbeit
they all lie within the verbally inaccessible field of vital
experience and qualitative thought.
   The basic unity of all the arts is sometimes argued from
the apparent beginning of all artistic ideas in the so-called
"aesthetic emotion" which is supposed to be their source and
therefore (by a slightly slipshod inference) their import. 12
  n Cf. S. T. Coleridge's essay, "On the Principles of Genial Criticism
Concerning the Fine Arts, More Especially those of Statuary and Paint-
ing," appended to Biographia Literaria, in the ed. of 1907; also D'Udine,
L'art et le geste, p. 70.
   12 Cf. Clive Bell: "The starting-point for all systems of aesthetics must
be the personal experience of a peculiar emotion.     .   . This emotion is
                                                              .



called the aesthetic emotion; and if we can discover some quality com-
mon to all and absent from none of the objects that provoke it, we
shall nave solved what I take to be the central problem of aesthetics."
(Art, p. 6.) Mr. Bell forgets the logical rule that such a discovery would
prove nothing, unless the quality in question were also peculiar to
aesthetic objects; any quality common to all objects whatever would ful-
fil the condition he states.                               #
            THE GENESIS OF ARTISTIC IMPORT                 219
Anyone who has worked in more than one medium probably
can testify to the sameness of the "aesthetic emotion" accom-
panying creation in the various arts. But I suspect that this
characteristic excitement, so closely wedded to original con-
ception and inner vision, is not the source, but the effect, of
artistic labor, the personal emotive experience of revelation,
insight, mental power, which an adventure in "implicit under-
standing" inspires. It has often been stated that it is the same
emotion which overtakes a mathematician as he constructs a
convincing and elegant proof; and this is the beatitude which
Spinoza, who knew it well, called "the intellectual love of
God." Something like it is begotten in appreciation of art, too,
though not nearly in the same measure as in producing; but
the fact that the difference is one of degree makes it plausible
that the emotion springs from the one activity which the artist
                                          —
and the beholder share in unequal parts the comprehension
of an unspoken idea. In the artist this activity must be sus-
tained, complete, and intense; his intellectual excitement is
often at fever pitch. The idea is his own, and if he loses his
command of it, confused by the material or distracted by
pressing irrelevancies, there is no symbol to hold it for him.
His mind is apt to be furiously active while an artistic con-
ception takes shape. To the beholder the work is offered as a
constant source of an insight he attains gradually, more or
less clearly, perhaps never in logical completeness; and al-
though his mental experience also wakens the characteristic
emotion, variously called "feeling of beauty," "aesthetic emo-
tion," and "aesthetic pleasure," he knows nothing like the
exhilaration and tense excitement of an artist before his pris-
tine marble or ^lay, his unmarked canvas or paper, as the
new work dawns in his bfain.
   Perhaps it is inevitable that this emotion which one really
has in producing or contemplating an artistic composition
should become confused with the, content of the work, since
that content is itself emotive. If there is feeling in the work,
and both artist and spectator experience a feeling, and more-
over the artist has more of a feeling than the spectator, would
it not take a very careful thinker to refrain from jumping to

the conclusion that the emotion embodied in the form is
felt by the artist before he begins his work, is "expressed"
in the process of creating as it might be in shouting or weep-
ing, and is sympathetically felt by the audience? Yet I be-
lieve the "aesthetic emotion" and the emotional content of
a work of art are two very different things; the "aesthetic emo-
tion" springs from an intellectual triumph, from overcoming
barriers of word-bound thought and achieving insight into
literally "unspeakable" realities; but the emotive content of
220              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
the work is apt to be something much deeper than any intel-
lectual experience, more essential, pre-rational, and vital,
something of the life-rhythms we share with all growing, hun-
gering, moving and fearing creatures: the ultimate realities
themselves, the central facts of our brief, sentient existence.
   "Aesthetic pleasure," then, is akin to (though not identi-
cal with) the satisfaction of discovering truth. It is the
characteristic reaction to a well-known, but usually ill-defined,
                                      —
phenomenon called "artistic truth" well-known to all art-
ists, creative or appreciative, but so ill-defined by most epis-
temologists that it has become their favorite aversion. Yet
truth is so intimately related to symbolism that if we recog-
nize two radically different types of sv*"hnli> ^vnr^^in^ we
should logically look for two distinct meanings of truth;
and if both symbolic modes are rational enough, both senses
of truth should be definable.
   Here it must be noted that the distinction between dis-
cursive and presentational symbols does not correspond to
the difference between literal and artistic meanings. Many
presentational symbols are merely proxy for discourse; geo-
metric relations may be rendered in algebraic terms    —clumsy
                                       —
terms perhaps, but quite equivalent and graphs are mere
abbreviated descriptions. They express facts for discursive
thinking, and their content can be verbalized, subjected to
the laws of vocabulary and syntax. Artistic symbols, on the
other hand, are untranslatable; their sense is bound to the
particular form which it has taken. It is always implicit, and
cannot be explicated by any interpretation. This is true
even of poetry, for though the material of poetry is verbal, its
import is not the literal assertion made in the words, but
the way the assertion is made, and this involves the sound, the
tempo, the aura of associations of the words, the long or short
sequences of ideas, the wealth or poverty of transient imagery
that contains them, the sudden arrest of fantasy by pure
fact, or of familiar fact by sudden fantasy, the suspense of
literal meaning by a sustained ambiguity resolved in a long-
awaited key-word, and the unifying, all-embracing artifice
of rhythm. (The tension which music achieves through dis-
sonance, and the reorientation in each new resolution to
harmony, find their equivalents in the suspensions and peri-
odic decisions of propositional sense in poetry. Literal sense,
not euphony, is the "harmonic structure" of poetry; word-
melody in literature is more akin to tone-color in music.)
   The poem as a whole is the bearer of artistic import, as a
painting or a drama is. We may isolate significant lines, as
we may isolate beauties in any work, but if their meaning
is not determined and supported by their context, the en-
                 THF GENESIS OF ARTISTIC IMPORT                      221
tire work, then that work is i failure despite tin- gem of
excellence it COOtaim    lh.it is win ProfesaOI I ban's re-   r



statement of T. S. Bliot'i cryptic lines:

          "And  I see the clamp souls of the housemaids
           Sprouting disconsolately at ires gates,"

namely:     That housemaids' souls are damp and sprout." and
his    demand tor a more adequate rendering of this issertkM]
bv wa\ oi philosophical interpretation, seems (0 me I funda-
mental misconception o\ poetic import         A "more adequate
rendering" would be more, not less, poetic; it would be a
better poem. "Artistic truth" does not belong to statements
in the poem or their obvious figurative meanings, but to its
figures and meanings us they are used, its statements us they
arc made, its framework of word-sound and sequence, rhythm
and recurrence and rhyme, color and image and the speed of
their passage    in short, to the poem as "significant form."
The material of poetry is discursive, but the product the          —
artistic phenomenon      —
                         is not; its significance is purely im-
plicit in the poem as a totality, as a form compounded of
sound and suggestion, statement and reticence, and no trans-
lation can reincarnate that. Poetry may be approximated in
other languages and give rise to surprisingly beautiful new
versions revealing new possibilities of its skeletal literal ideas
and rhetorical devices; but the product is new, like an orches-
tral scoring of an organ-fugue, a piano version of a string
quartet, or a photograph of a painting.
                          —
   An artistic symbol which may be a product of hmpan
craftsmanship,     w(on a purely personal level) something in
nature seen as "significant form"          —
                                       has more than discursive
or presentational meaning: its form as such, as a sensory
phenomenon, has what I have called "implict" meaning, like
rite and myth, but of a more catholic sort. It has what L. A.
Reid called "tertiary subject-matter," beyond the reach of
"primary imagination" (as Coleridge would say) and even
the "secondary imagination" that sees metaphorically. "Ter-
tiary subject-matter is subject-matter imaginatively experi-
enced in the work of art ...        something which cannot be
                                       ,



apprehended apart from the work, though theoretically dis-
tinguishable from its expressiveness." 14
   "Artistic truth," sc called, is the truth of a symbol to the

  U Urban, iMn^ua^e and Reality, see passage quoted p. 234, above. To
anyone who cannot grasp the poet's meaning and vision here, Professor
I   ill's "interpretation" certainly would make matters worse i.ither than
better.
    M "Beauty and Significance," p. 132.
222                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
forms of feeling     —
                    nameless forms, but recognizable when
they appear in sensuous replica. Such truth, being bound to
certain logical forms of expression, has logical peculiarities
that distinguish it from propositional truth: since presenta-
tional symbols have no negatives, there is no operation
whereby their truth-value is reversed, no contradiction. Hence
"the possibility of expressing opposites simultaneously," on
which Mersmann commented. Falsity here is a complicated
failing, not a function of negation. For this reason Professor
Reid calls it not falsity but inexpressiveness; and Urban, in
a moment undisturbed by epistemology, abandons not only
the term "falsity," but also "truth," and suggests that artistic
forms should rather be designated as adequate or inadequate
to the ideas they embody. 15 Perhaps he did not see that this
shift of terminology belies his doctrine that all art makes
assertions which must ultimately be paraphrased in language;
for assertions are true or false, and their adequacy has to
be taken for granted before we can judge them as assertions at
all. They are always debatable and may be tested for their
truth-values by the nature of their explicable consequences.
Art, on the other hand, has no consequences; it gives form
to something that is simply there, as the intuitive organizing
functions of sense give form to objects and spaces, color and
sound. It gives what Bertrand Russell calls "knowledge by
acquaintance" of affective experience, below the level of belief,
on the deeper level of insight and attitude. And to this mission
it is either adequate or inadequate, as images, the primitive
symbols of "things," are adequate or inadequate to give us a
conception of what things are "like." 16
   To understand the "idea" in a work of art is therefore more
like having a new experience than like entertaining a new
proposition; and to negotiate this knowledge by acquaintance
the work may be adequate in some degree. There are no de-
grees of literal truth, but artistic truth, which is all signifi-
cance, expressiveness, articulateness, has degrees; therefore
works of art may be good or bad, and each must be judged
on our experience of its revelations. Standards of art are
set by the expectations of people whom long conversance
                         —
with a certain mode music, painting, architecture, or what
    —
not has made both sensitive and exacting; there is no im-
mutable law of artistic adequacy, because significance is

  is Urban, op. cit. See pp. 439-442.
  is Lord Russell fails to appreciate,     I think, the logical, formulative
mission of sense, or else he evades it because it has kept company with
idealism. But to see in certain forms is not to create their contents,
though it is a source of that relativistic character of "data" which makes
them less final and absolute than his empiricism lets him admit.
               THE GENESIS OF ARTISTIC IMPORT                223
always for a mind as well as of a form. But a form, a
harmony, even a timbre, that is entirely unfamiliar is "mean-
ingless," naturally enough; for we must grasp a Gestalt quite
definitely before we can perceive an implicit meaning, or
even the promise of such a meaning, in it; and such definite
grasp requires a certain familiarity. Therefore the most original
contemporary music in any period always troubles people's
ears. The more pronounced its new idiom, the less they can
make of it, unless the impulse which drove the composer to
this creation is something of a common experience, of a yet
inarticulate Zeitgeist, which others, too, have felt. Then they,
like him, may be ready to experiment with new expressions,
and meet with an open mind what even the best of them can-
not really judge. Perhaps some very wonderful music is lost
because it is too extraordinary. It may even be lost to its
composer because he cannot really handle his forms, and
abandons them as unsuccessful. But intimate acquaintance
with all sorts of music does give some versatile minds a power
of grasping new sounds; people so inclined and trained will
have a "hunch," at least, that they are dealing with true
"significant form" though they still hear a good deal of it as
noise, and will contemplate it until they comprehend it,
for better or worse. It is an old story that Bach, Beethoven,
and Wagner were "hard to hear" in their own time. Many
people today, who can follow Rimsky-Korsakoff or Debussy
as easily as Schumann, cannot hear music in Hindemith or
Bartok; yet the more experienced probably know, by certain
signs, that   it   is   there.
   On the other hand,        artistic forms are exhaustible/ <oo.
Music that has*fulfilled its mission may be outgrown, so that
its style, its quality, its Whole conception, palls on a genera-

tion that is ardently expressing or seeking to express some-
thing else. 17 Only very catholic minds can see beauty in
many styles even without the aid pf historical fancy, of a con-
scious "self -projection" into other settings or ages. It is prob-
ably easiest in music, where typical forms are not further
bound down by literal references to things that have a tran-
sient and dated character.
   The worst enemy of artistic judgment is literal judgment,
which is so much more obvious, practical, and prompt that
it is apt to pass its verdict before the curious eye has even

taken in the entire form that meets it. Not blindness to
"significant form," but blindedness, due to the glaring evi-
dence of familiar things, makes us miss artistic, mythical, or
sacred import. This is probably the source of the very old

  17 Cf. Hanslick,      Vom Musikalisch-Schonen, p. 57.
224                    PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
and widespread doctrine that the so-called "material world"
is a curtain between humanity and a higher, purer, more
satisfying Truth       —
                 a "Veil of Maya," or Bergson's false, "spa-
tialized" Reality.
   Is   it   conceivable that mysticism   is   a   mark of inadequate
art?  That might account for the fact that all very great
artistic conceptions leave something of mysticism with the
beholder; and mysticism as a metaphysic would then be the
despair of implicit knowledge, as skepticism is the despair
of discursive reason.
   To us whose intelligence is bound up with language,
whose achievements are physical comforts, machines, medi-
cines, great cities, and the means of their destruction, theory
of knowledge means theory of communication, generaliza-
tion, proof, in short:   critique of science. But the limits of
language are not the last limits of experience, and things
inaccessible to language may have their own forms of con-
ception, that is to say, their own symbolic devices. Such non-
discursive forms, charged with logical possibilities of meaning,
underlie the significance of music; and their recognition
broadens our epistemology to the point of including not
only the semantics of science, but a serious philosophy of art
