io.       The Fabric of Meaning

All thinking begins with seeing; not necessarily through
the eye, but with some basic formulations of sense perception,
in the peculiar idiom of sight, hearing, or touch, normally
of all the senses together. For all thinking is conceptual, and
conception begins with the comprehension of Gestalt.
  The first product of intellectual seeing is literal knowledge,
the abstracted conception of things, to which those things
themselves stand in the relation of instances. So-called "com-
mon sense" does not carry this literal formulation of its ideas
of things, acts, persons, etc., very far in the way of elabora-
tion. Common-sense knowledge is prompt, categorical, and
inexact. A mind that is very sensitive to forms as such and
is aware of them beyond the common-sense requirements for
recognition, memory, and classification of things, is apt to
use  its images metaphorically, to exploit their possible sig-
nificance for the conception of remote or intangible ideas;
that is to say, if our interest in Gestalten goes beyond their
common-sense meanings it is apt to run us into their dynamic,
                     THE FABRIC OF MEANING                          225
mythical, or artistic meanings.   To some people this happens
very easily; in savage society, at least in certain stages of
development, it seems to be actually the rule, so that second-
ary imports of forms     —
                         plastic, verbal, or behavioral forms
often eclipse what Coleridge called the "primary imagination"
of them. Sense-data and experiences, in other words, are
essentially meaningful structures, and their primary, second-
ary, or even more recondite meanings may become crossed in
our impression of them, to the detriment of one value or an-
other. 1 But our first awareness of presented forms usually
serves to label them according to their kinds, and add them
to the general stock of our "knowledge by acquaintance."
   It is fortunate that our first understanding of forms is
normally a literal comprehension of them as typical things
or such-and-such events; for this interpretation is the basis
of intelligent behavior, of daily, hourly, and momentary
adjustment to our nearest surroundings. It is non-discursive,
spontaneous abstraction from the stream of sense-experience,
elementary sense-knowledge, which may be called practical
vision. This is the meeting-point of thought, which is sym-
bolic, with animal behavior, which rests on sign-perception;
for the edifice which we build out of literal conceptions, the
products of practical vision, is our systematic spatio-temporal
world. The same items that are signs to our animal reflexes
are contents for certain symbols of this conceptual system.
If we have a literal conception of a house, we cannot merely
think of a house, but know one when we see it; for a sensory
sign stimulating practical action also answers to the image
                                                           y*
with which we think.
   This dual operation of^ a datum as sign and symbol to-
gether is the key to realistic thinking: the envisagement of
fact. Here, in practical vision, which makes symbols for
thought out of signs for behavior, we have the roots of
practical intelligence. It is more^ than specialized reaction
and more than free imagination; it is conception anchored in
reality.
   "Fact" is not a simple notion. It is that which we conceive
to be the source and context of signs to which we react
successfully; this is a somewhat vague definition, but when
all is said, "fact" is a somewhat vague term. When logicians
try to define it, it becomes a hypostatized proposition; 2 there

           Fry has said in this connection: "Biologically speaking, art
     i Roger
is a blasphemy. We     were given our eyes to see things, not to look at
them." (Vision and Design, p. 47.)
  2 As it certainly is, in the writings of Moore, Stebbing, Ramsey, Wis-
dom, and other British philosophers. Cf. L. S. Stebbing, "Substances,
Events, and Facts," The Journal of Philosophy, XXIX (1932), 12: 309-
322; F. P. Ramsey and G. E. Moore, 'Symposium: Facts and Proposi-
226                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
are positive and negative, specific and general, universal and
particular facts; 3 Professor Lewis even speaks of actual and
unreal facts. 4 On the other hand, when pyschologists or their
philosophical cousins, the pragmatists, offer a definition, fact
becomes hardly distinguishable from the animalian sign-
response. The best attempt I have seen at a definition of
"fact," in relation to what might be called "stark reality" on
the one hand, and language, or literal formulation, on the
other, is made by Karl Britton in his recent book, Commu-
nication.
   "A fact," says Britton, "is essentially abstract but there.
    what is an object of attention, of discriminating aware-
It is
                      ... A fact is that in events to which
ness, in present events.
we make a learned and discriminating response determined
in part by the understanding of statements. .    .                  .



   "A fact is that which determines assent or dissent, without
inference and in accordance with the rules.                 .           .   .



   "The formal rules of language determine the structure of
propositions and show in a general way the sort of thing
that a proposition is.      .   But the fact which shows the
                                .   .



proposition to be true, is that in events to which I make
a response that has the same structure as the proposition p.
Can I then learn about the general structural character of
facts from the formal laws of language? Yes, but not about
the general structural character of events.         .   .       .


   "To the same events an infinite variety of responses is
possible: he who understands 'p' makes only certain responses
and not others. It is this that introduces limitation, structure;
events as such have no structure.       .   .   .



   "It follows that it is only for thinking minds that there
is structure in nature. ...         A
                                world without minds is a world
without structure, without relations and qualities, without
facts." 5
   This excerpted passage shows at once the logician's con-
viction that the form of fact is the form of proposition, and
the behaviorist's desire to dispense with concepts and speak
only in terms of "response." So the form of a fact becomes
the form of a specific human response to a specific event.
This response, I take it, is his conceiving of the event (though

tions," Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, suppl. vol.
                                                          VII (1927),
153-206; John Wisdom, "Time, Fact, and Substance," ibid., N.S. XXIX
(1928-29), 67 94.
  3 Cf. Hugh Miller, "The Dimensions of Particular Fact," The Journal
of Philosophy, XXXVI (1939), 7: 181-188.
  4 C. I. Lewis, "Facts, Systems, and the Unity of the World," The
Journal of Philosophy, XX (1923), 6: 141-151. See p. 142.
  s Karl Britton, Communication: A Philosophical Study of Language
(1939), pp. 204-206.
                   THE FABRIC OF MEANING                     227
I should regard his conceiving as only a component of the
"response," which probably has other aspects not deter-
mining the fact at all). At any rate, allowing for special
wordings required by operationalism, behaviorism, etc., we
probably agree on the main tenet that a fact is an intellec-
tually formulated event, whether the formulation be per-
formed by a process of sheer vision, verbal interpretation, or
practical response. Afact is an event as we see it, or would
see it if it occurred for us. It is something to which a propo-
sition is applicable; and a proposition that is not applicable
to any event or events is false. We    can construct propositions
that apply to all events; these are necessary propositions, or,
in Wittgenstein's phrase, "tautologies." Some propositions
apply directly, some indirectly, to events; hence our specific
and general, universal and particular, positive and negative
facts. Only "unreal facts" seem to me to be pure hyposta-
tizations of propositional content, and defy the purpose of
the concept "fact," which is to recognize the link between
symbolic process and signific response, between imagination
and sensory experience.
   In a naive stage of thought, facts are taken for granted;
matters of fact are met in practical fashion as they become
obvious. If it requires further facts to explain a given state
of affairs, such further facts are simply assumed. Imagination
supplies them, philosophical interest sanctions them, and the
popular mind accepts them on quite other grounds than
empirical evidence. This pre-scientific type of thought, sys-
tematic enough in its logical demonstrations, but unconcerned
about any detailed agreement with sense-experience, has r5e*en
described and commented pn as often as the history of philoso-
phy has been written: how Plato ascribed circular orbits to
the planets because of the excellence of circular motion, but
Kepler plotted those orbits from observation and found them
to be elliptical; how the schoolmen argued about the speed
of falling bodies until Galileo, that enfant terrible of learning,
dropped his weights from the leaning tower, and so forth.
And everybody knows how these and other demonstrations
undermined and finally demolished scholasticism, and gave
birth to science; for, as Francis Bacon said, all it required
was "that men should put their notions by, and attend solely
to facts."
   Now if men had really "put their notions by," and merely
paid attention to facts, they would have returned to the con-
dition of Hobie Baker the cat, whose mentality Mr. Stuart
Chase covets so wistfully. Religion, superstition, fantastic
Biblical world-history, were not demolished by "discoveries";
they were outgrown by the European mind. Again the in-
228               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
dividual life shows in microcosm the pattern of human evolu-
tion: the tendency of intellectual growth, in persons as in
races, from dreamlike fantasy to realistic thinking. Many
of the facts that contradicted theology had been known for
ages; many discoveries required no telescope, no test-tube,
no expedition round the world, and would have been just
as possible physically hundreds of years before. But so long
as the great Christian vision filled men's eyes, and systems
of ethical symbols or great artistic ventures absorbed their
minds, such facts as that wood floats on water and stones
sink, living bodies have a uniform temperature and others
vary with the weather, were just meaningless. Surely sailors
had always known that ships showed their topsails over the
horizon before they hove into full view. Surely the number
of known animal species, had any hunter or farmer bothered
to count them up, would always have made it obvious that
the measurements of the ark could not have accommodated
them by two and two, with food-supplies for eight or nine
months. But nobody had chosen to take stock of these num-
bers while reading the measurements. For mythological pur-
poses, the ark was "very big," the animals "very many," and
theirLebensraum was God's problem.
   Not in better information, but in a   natural tendency of
maturing thought toward realism, lay the doom of the dog-
matic age. When logical acumen reaches a certain height,
and the imaginative power has been disciplined into real
skill and ingenuity, then the normal growth of men's interest
in facts reveals a new challenge to philosophical thinking
the intellectual challenge of "contingent" things. The most
insistent facts have always been respected in practice, or we
would not be here. But a society that has its mind fixed on
religious symbols deals with facts in a purely practical spirit
and disposes of them as fast as they arise. To take philosophi-
cal interest in their concomitant variations, their sequences,
their uniformities, demands a change of outlook. 6 It sets
up a new aim for constructive thought: not only to form a
system out of traditional premises, but to construct a logically
coherent cosmology such that its premises shall imply certain
propositions exemplified by observable facts. When this chal-
lenge is felt (it need not be consciously recognized), its im-
mediate effect is a new interest in facts, not as distracting
interruptions to pure thought, but as its very sources and
terminals, the fixed points on which theories and inventions
must hinge.
  The power      that   comes with    scientific   knowledge could
  6 The importance of this change has been pointed out and discussed
by A. N. Whitehead, in Science and the Modern World (1926), chap. L
                    THE FABRIC OF MEANING                            229
become apparent only after science had attained a consider-
able growth. Practical gain, dominion over nature, were
therefore not its early motives; its motives were intellectual,
they lay in the restless desire of an ever-imaginative mind
to exploit the possibilities of the factual world as a field for
constructive thought. 7 Just as a person addicted to cross-
word puzzles becomes a maniac for new words, so the pio-
neers of science were avid for facts that could conceivably be
used in their business. Looking, measuring, analyzing things,
became something like sports in their own right. But great
scientists were never distracted by the fact-finding rage; they
knew from the first what they were doing. Their task was
always to relate facts to each other, either as different cases
of the same general fact, or as successive transformations of
an initial fact according to some systematic principle, or (at
an elementary stage of conception) as more and more ex-
emplifications of "contingent laws," or generally observed
uniformities.
   The interest in facts led to their progressive discovery, to
the invention of aids and implements of discovery, and so
to an unprecedented acquaintance with the world. But it
was far less the information men acquired that undid their re-
ligious beliefs than the change of heart which prompted such
research. The desire to construct a world-picture out of
facts superseded the older ambition to weave a fabric of
"values," in which things and events were interpreted as
manifestations of good and evil, related to powers, wills,
minds, but not essentially to each other; their own laws
having been given short shrift as mere "contingencies,"
which might e^en be expected             to yield,   upon   occasion^,* to
higher principles, with the result known as "miracle." No
matter how much the old order thundered against new facts,
declaring them not so, unknowable, uncertain, dangerous
half-truths, or what-not, the new facts were not its real de-
stroyers, but the new eyes that saw them.
   We have inherited the realistic outlook and its intellectual
ideal, science. We have inherited a naive faith in the sub-
stantiality and ultimacy of facts, and are convinced that

   7 In this opinion, too, I find myself supported by the judgment of
Professor Whitehead, who said in one of his published lectures: "Science
has been developed under the impulse of speculative Reason, the desire
for explanatory knowledge. Its reaction on technology did not commence
until after the invention of the improved steam engine in the year 1769.
Even then, the nineteenth century was well advanced before this reaction
became one of the dominating facts.  .   . There was nothing systematic
                                             .



and dominating in the interplay between science and technical procedure.
The one great exception was the foundation of the Greenwich Observa-
tory for the improvement of navigation." (The Function of Reason,
1929, pp. 38-39.)
230                    PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
human life, to have any value, must be not only casually and
opportunely adapted to their exigencies (as even the most
other-worldly lives have been), but must be intellectually
filled with an appreciation of "things as they are." Facts are
our very measure of value. They are the framework of our
lives;thinking that leads to the discovery of observable fact
takes us "down to reality"; Wittgenstein has really caught
and recorded the modern man's intellectual attitude, in his
metaphysical aphorisms: 8
   "The world is everything that is the case." (1)
   "The totality of atomic facts is the world." (2.04)
   "The world divides into facts." (1.2)
   Our world "divides into facts" because we so divide it.
Facts are our guarantees of truth. Every generation hankers
for "truth," and whatever will guarantee the truth of propo-
sitions to its satisfaction, is its zero-point of theory where
thought comes to rest in "knowledge." To us it seems utterly
unimaginable that anyone could really resist a demonstratio
                                                  —
ad occulos and hold his deepest convictions those which
                          —
command his actions on any other basis. Yet people have
acted with lordly disregard of "appearances," and do so yet
Christian Scientists flatly deny the reality of visible facts that
are unpleasant, and act on their disbelief. Not only idealists,
but even their great antagonist William James held it possible
that, from the intellectual vantage-point of "higher beings'
than men, our evils might prove to be illusions. 9 The ancient
Greeks had such a respect for pure reason that they could
seriously accept, on its logical merits, a doctrine of reality
which was never exemplified in fact at all, but flatly contra-
dicted by experience; Parmenides could declare all events
to be illusory because change was not possible under the
premises of his systematic thought. Such heroic independence
from sense-evidence is not often found, and of course the most
hard-bitten Eleatic could not act on this faith until he was
ready to die in it (which, ex hypothesi, could not happen).
But all these doctrines show how in different stages of thought
people demand different kinds of security for their convic-
tions.
   We  find sense-evidence a very gratifying conclusion to
the process of thought. Our standards of rationality are the
                                   —
same as Euclid's or Aristotle's generality, consistency, co-
herence, systematic inclusion of all possible cases, economy
                                   —
and elegance in demonstration but our ideal of science

  8 Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus.
  9 See   "Is     Worth Living?" in The Will to Believe, and Other
                Life
Essays in Popular Philosophy (1905), p. 58.
                     THE FABRIC OF MEANING                           231
makes one further demand: the demand of what has been
called "maximal interpretability." This means that as many
propositions as possible shall be applicable to observable fact.
The systems of thought that seem to us to represent "knowl-
edge" are those which were designed as hypotheses, i.e. de-
signed with reference to experience and intended to meet
certain tests: at definite points their implications must yield
propositions which express discoverable facts. If and only
if these crucial propositions do correspond to facts, a hypothe-

sis is ranked as "truth," its premises as "natural laws."
   I will not enlarge on the assumptions, methods, standards,
and aims of science, because that has been done a dozen times
over, since Henri Poincare's La Science et I'hypothese; 10 even
the part played by symbolism in science has been exhaustively
and, I think, well treated by mathematicians and philosophers
from Charles Peirce to the Vienna Circle. The upshot of
it all is that the so-called "empirical spirit" has taken posses-
sion of our scholarship and speculation as well as our common
sense, so that in pure theory as well as in business and politics
the last appeal is always to that peculiar hybrid of concept and
percept, the "given fact." 11
  The realistic turn of mind which marks our civilization,
and   is probably a sign of our coming-of-age as a race, is
further manifested in our rigorous standards of historical fact.
This is not at all the same thing as scientific fact; nor is
historical truth judged by the same criteria as the truth of
scientific propositions. For to science, as Lord Russell once
remarked in an academic seminar, 12 "A miracle would nqtjbe
important if it happened only once, or even very rarely";
but in history the point is to find out what did happen just
once, what were the specific facts about a specific occasion.
Science never cares about historic instances as such: its "given
facts" are always noted as illustrations, and occurrences which
do not illustrate anything are not "scientific." If miracles oc-
       —
curred events which could not be explained, but also could
                                                            —
not be repeated or expected to repeat themselves we could
discount them as "inexactnesses" in our general picture of na-
ture. But to a historian a miracle, though there were but one
in the world, would be of great importance if it had conse-
quences which ultimately involved many people. If there
were any indubitable record of it which clearly established
it as a miracle, history would simply accept it; but science


  10 Published in 1903.
  ii Karl Schmidt has discussed the scientific versus the naive conception
of fact, in his article, "The Existential Status of Facts and Laws in
Physics," The Monist, XLIII (i^J), i.\ 161 i,2.
  12 Held at Harvard University in the autumn of 1940.
232              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
would either exclude the fact, or would have to be entirely
rewritten. Now if this miracle were really unique, or so
rare as to be practically unique, the disadvantages of re-
writing science would make it advisable to put a "scientific
fiction," such as for instance an unfounded denial of the
alleged "fact," in place of its record.
    Science is an intellectual scheme for handling facts, a vast
and relatively stable context in which whole classes of facts
may be understood. But it is not the most decisive expression
of realistic thinking: that is the new "historical sense." Not
our better knowledge of what are the facts of history there —
is no judging that —    but the passion for running down evi-
dence, all the evidence, the unbiassed, objective evidence for
specifically dated and located events, without distortion, hy-
pothesis, or interpretation—   the faith in the attainability and
value of pure fact is that surest symptom; the ideal of truth
which made the whole past generation of historians believe
that in archives as such there was salvation.
    Now this ideal may be as extravagant as Carl Becker es-
teemed it, when he wrote: "Hoping to find something with-
out looking for it, expecting to obtain final answers to life's
riddle by resolutely refusing to ask questions  —   it was surely

the most romantic species of realism yet invented, the oddest
attempt ever made to get something for nothing!" 13 But it
does sum up the attitude of that mighty and rather terrible
person, the Modern Man, toward the world: the complete
submission to what he conceives as "hard, cold fact." To
exchange fictions, faiths, and "constructed systems" for facts
is his supreme value; hence his periodic outburst of "de-
bunking" traditions, religious or legendary; his satisfaction
with stark realism in literature, his suspicion and impatience
of poetry; and perhaps, on the naive uncritical level of the
                                           —
 average mentality, the passion for news news of any sort,
if only it purports to be so; which, paradoxically enough,
 makes us peculiarly easy victims to propaganda. Where a
former age would have judged persuasive oratory largely on
 its origins in God or Devil, i.e. in the right or the wrong
 camp, we profess to judge it on the merit of alleged facts, and
fall to the party that can muster the most spectacular "cases."
    The better minds of our age hold a heroic pride in being
unafraid of truth, in wanting to face it and being able to
 "take it." William James, whose feeling was really rooted
deeply in the old order of traditional "values," and bound
to religious myths of Providence, progress, and the pilgrim

  13 "Everyman His Own Historian," American    Historical   Review.
XXXVII (1932), 2: 221-236. See p. 233.
                      THE FABRIC OF MEANING                    233
soul, nevertheless had to cast his lot for the new ideal. His
famous distinction between "tender-minded" and "tough-
minded" philosophers and his praise of the latter, the truer
breed, mark his confession of the new faith, despite his occa-
sional nostalgic pleas for a "will to believe," for "life's ideals."
The same sense of heroism, not to say heroics, rings in almost
every paragraph of Bertrand Russell's early essay,         A Free
Man's Worship; 14 save that this thrilling disillusionment, this
nobler worship of "hard fact," is never spoiled by any flirtation
with the old gods. James' generation (at least its best souls,
of whom he was one) could take the new standard of truth;
Russell's generation can take it and like it. As for the chil-
dren of the present age, they know no other measure, for
fact-finding has become their common sense. Their uncon-
scious orientation is empirical, circumstantial, and historical.
   It is the historical mind, rather than the scientific (in the
physicist's sense), that destroyed the mythical orientation of
European culture; the historian, not the mathematician, in-
troduced the "higher criticism," the standard of actual fact.
It is he who is the real apostle of the realistic age. Science
builds its structure of hypothetical "elements" and laws of
their behavior, touching on reality at crucial points, and if
all those propositions which ought to correspond to observ-
able events can be "cashed in" for the proper sense-experi-
ences, the hypotheses that frame them stand acknowledged.
But the historian does not locate known facts in a hypotheti-
cal, general pattern of processes; his aim is to link fact to
fact, one unique knowable event to another individual one
that begot it. l^pt space and time, but a geographical rtface
and a date, B.C. or A.D.^ anchor his propositions to reality.
Science has become deeply tinged with empiricism, and yet
its ideal is one of universality, formalism, permanence      —the
very ideal that presided over its long life since the days of
Euclid and Archimedes. The fact that it has shared the
intellectual growth of the modern world is rather a mark
of the continuity of human thought, the power of rationality
to cope gradually with phase after phase of experience, than
a novel departure. Science is almost as old as European cul-
ture; but history (not contemporaneous chronicle and gene-
alogy, but epochal, long-range history) is only a few hundred
years old; it is peculiarly a product of the realistic phase, the
adult stage of judgment.
   In a recent book entitled History and Science, Dr. Hugh
Miller proposes to carry the ideal of complete factual knowl-
edge even into the camp of the mathematical sciences. He

  14 In Mysticism   and Logic (1918).
234              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
regards the factual standard of knowledge in the light of a
new generative idea; physical science, if perfected, should
describe a system of reality in which each event would be
uniquely determined, and the pattern of the physical world
would appear as an evolution, fitting exactly the actual course
of natural history. "The doctrine of evolution," he says, "is
sometimes called a 'theory of evolution,' as if it were just one
more theoretical hypothesis, and not a reorientation of all
theoretical knowledge toward historical fact." 15 Here is the
realistic ideal with a vengeance!
                                                         —
   Underlying these great intellectual structures science, his-
tory, and the hybrid we call "natural history"           —
                                                  is the domi-

nant principle that rules our individual minds, the implicit
belief in causation. On this belief we base our personal hopes
and fears, our plans and techniques of action. It really rules
our minds, for it inspires what I have called our "practical
vision"— the carving out of general concepts in such a way
that temporal events shall answer to a certain number of
our images, which therefore function both as symbols of
thought and as signs for behavior. The tendency to demand
ever more signs to replace symbols at certain terminals of
thought, more symbols to direct one to expect new signs,
makes our lives more and more factual, intellectually stren-
uous, wedded to the march of mundane events, and beset
by disconcerting surprises. Our increasing command of causal
laws makes for more and more complicated activities; we have
put many stages of artifice and device, of manufacture and
alteration, between ourselves and the rest of nature. The
ordinary city-dweller knows nothing of the earth's produc-
tivity; he does not know the sunrise and rarely notices when
the sun sets; ask him in what phase the moon is, or when the
tide in the harbor is high, or even how high the average
tide runs,and likely as not he cannot answer you. Seed-time
and harvest are nothing to him. If he has never witnessed an
earthquake, a great flood, or a hurricane, he probably does
not feel the power of nature as a reality surrounding his life
at all. His realities are the motors that run elevators, subway
trains, and cars, the steady feed of water and gas through the
mains and of electricity over the wires, the crates of food-
stuff that arrive by night and are spread for his inspection
before his day begins, the concrete and brick, bright steel and
dingy woodwork that take the place of earth and waterside and
sheltering roof for him. His "house" is an apartment in the
great man-made city; so far as he is concerned, it has only an
interior, no exterior of its own. It could not collapse, let in

  is Hugh Miller, History   and Science (1939), p. 30.
                    THE FABRIC OF MEANING                     235
rain, or blow away. If it leaks the fault is with a pipe or with
the people upstairs, not with heaven.
   Nature, as man has always known it, he knows no more.
Since he has learned to esteem signs above symbols, to sup-
press his emotional reactions in favor of practical ones and
make use of nature instead of holding so much of it sacred,
he has altered the face, if not the heart, of reality. His parks
are "landscaped," and fitted into his world of pavements and
walls; his pleasure resorts are "developments" in which a
wild field looks unformed, unreal; even his animals (dogs
and cats are all he knows as creatures, horses are parts of
milk-wagons) are fantastic "breeds" made by his tampering.
No wonder, then, that he thinks of human power as the
highest power, and of nature as so much "raw material"!
But human power is knowledge, he knows that; the knowledge
of natural facts and the scientific laws of their transformation.
   With his new outlook on the world, of course the old
symbolism of human values has collapsed. The sun is too
interesting as an object, a source of transformable energies,
to be interpreted as a god, a hero, or a symbol of passion;
since we know that it is really the ultimate source of what
we call "power," transformable energy measurable by units,
we take a realistic, not a mystical, attitude toward it; its image
is no longer "distanced" in a perspective of non-discursive
thought; our literal concepts have caught up with it. As for
the moon, it is too rarely seen to be a real presence to us,
and fits too well into the cosmological scheme governed by
science to arouse wonder. We read about its beauties, mpre
often than we actually see them unchallenged by neon-lights
or blinking bulbs. The ^arth, laid bare in building-lots or
parks, does not put forth unplanted life, as it always did for
the savage; only our farmers    — a small portion of mankind
—                                                        —
   know "Mother Earth" any longer; only our sailors a still
smaller portion —  know the might of a raging sea. To most
people, the ancient, obvious symbols of nature have become
literary figures, and to many these very figures look silly.
Their significance has been dissolved by a more mature,
literal-minded conception of reality, the "practical vision"
that sees sun and moon and earth, land and sea, growth and
destruction, in terms of natural law and historical fact.
   The modern mind is an incredible complex of impressions
and transformations; and its product is a fabric of meanings
that would make the most elaborate dream of the most ambi-
tious tapestry-weaver look like a mat. The warp of that fabric
consists of what we call "data," the signs to which experience
has conditioned us to attend, and upon which we act often
236                     PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
without any conscious ideation. The woof is symbolism. Out
of signs and symbols we weave our tissue of "reality."
   Signs themselves may be very complicated and form intri-
cate chains; many signs are nameless, and linked into con-
tinuous situations, to which we react not with a single deed,
but with a steady, intelligent behavior. Driving an automo-
bile is an example of such a chain of reactions to signs. It is
not a habitual act, though every individual response in it is
a reaction to a certain sort of sign, facilitated by practice.
The only single habit involved in the whole process is the
habit of constantly obeying signs. A moment of yielding to
habitual motions, as in distraction or stupor, is likely to
wreck the car. We can drive without thinking, but never
without watching.
   Our response to a sign becomes, in its turn, a sign of a
new situation; the meaning of the first sign, having been
"cashed in," has become a context for the next sign. This
gives us that continuity of actual experience which makes
it the sturdy warp of reality, through which we draw the

connecting and transforming woof-threads of conception.
   As in an elaborate tapestry one often cannot tell how the
fibers are involved with each other, so any namable item of
reality may stem from a signific experience and enter into
the role of a symbol, or a symbolic element, e.g. a word,
uttered on an occasion, may act momentarily as a sign. Lan-
guage is symbolical, but in communication it does more than
express conceptions; it describes, but it also points. Whenever
we    talk   in    present tense, saying: "Here is
                  the                               —   ," "Over

there  is—   ,""Look out," "I thank you," etc.,   we  signify the
realities to which our propositions apply. This signific function
of language has become incorporated in its very structure; for
in every proposition there is at least one word   —   the verb
which has the double function of combining the elements
named into one propositional form, and asserting the proposi-
tion,  i.e. referring the form to something in reality. It is be-

cause of this implicit function of assertion, involved in the
very meaning of a true verb, that every proposition is true or
false.  A  symbol that merely expresses a concept, e.g. an image
or a name, is neither true nor false, though it is significant.
   Sign and symbol are knotted together in the production of
those fixed realities that we call "facts," as I think this whole
study of semantic has shown. But between the facts run the
threads of unrecorded reality, momentarily recognized, wher-
ever they come to the surface, in our tacit adaptation to
signs; and the bright, twisted threads of symbolic envisage-
                                  —
ment, imagination, thought memory and reconstructed
                        THE FABRIC OF MEANING                                     237
memory, belief beyond experience, dream, make-believe, hypo-
thesis, philosophy      —
                    the whole creative process of ideation,
metaphor, and abstraction that makes human life an adventure
in understanding.
   It is the woof-thread that creates the pattern of a fabric,
howbeit the warp may be used here and there to vary it, too.
The meanings which are capable of indefinite growth are
symbolic meanings: connotations, not significations. There
are two fundamental types of symbolism, discursive and
presentational; but the types of meaning are far more numer-
ous, and do not necessarily correspond to one or the other
symbolic type, though in a general way literal meaning be-
longs to words and artistic meaning to images invoked by
words and     to presentational symbols. But such a rule is a
crude, simplified, and very inexact statement. Maps, photo-
graphs, and diagrams are presentational symbols with purely
literal significance; a poem has essentially artistic significance,
though a great factor in its complex, global form is discursive
statement. The sense of a word may hover between literal
and figurative meaning, as expressions that were originally
frank metaphors "fade" to a general and ultimately literal
meaning. For instance, our newspapers overwork such figura-
tive expressions as: "Candidate Raps Opponent," "Mayor
Flays Council," "Scores New Dealers at Meeting." These
words were originally strong metaphors; but we have learned
to read them as mere synonyms for "scolds." 16 We still know
them as figurative expressions, but they are rapidly acquiring
a dual meaning, e.g. "To flay: (1) to remove the skin; (2) to
criticize   harshly.^
   Every word has a history, and has probably passed through
stages where its most important significance lay in associa-
tions it no longer has, uses now obsolete, doubles entendres
we would not understand. Even the English of Shakespeare
has changed its color since it was written, and is lucid only
to the historian who knows its setting. Sometimes a word of
general import becomes a "technical term" and is practically
lost to its former place in the language; sometimes a pre-
eminent denotation narrows it again to a proper name (as
for instance "Olympos," literally a high mountain, became

  16 American English is full of such transient figures, passing swiftly
from one literal meaning to nother, by the twin bri ges of literary device
and popular slang. Perhaps the new country, the new race springing
from a medley of nationalities, the new culture in its rapid growth, cause
this instability of language, the tendency to extravagant metaphorical ex-
pression and the wilii gness of people to interpret and accept quite
extreme figures of speech. Certainly no European language               —  not even the
highly idiomatic French     —   is   as rich    in slang,   in   fashions, in informal
expressive jargon, as our   American           dialect.
238                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
the   name of a certain mountain; and "Adam," first "man,"
then by abstraction, "Man," is to us the name of a certain
man). And through all the metamorphoses of its meaning,
such a word carries a certain trace of every meaning it has
ever had, like an overtone, and every association it has ac-
quired, like an aura, so that in living language practically
no word is a purely conventional counter, but always a symbol
with a "metaphysical pathos," as Professor Lovejoy has called
it.  Its meaning depends partly on social convention, and
partly on its history, its past company, even on the "natural
symbolism" or suggestiveness of its sound.
    The intellect which understands, reshapes, and employs
linguistic symbols, and at the same time tempers its activities
to the exigencies of ever-passing, signific experience, really
works with a minimum of actual perception or formal judg-
ment. As Roger Fry has put it, "The needs of our actual life
are so imperative, that the sense of vision becomes highly
specialized in their service. With an admirable economy we
see only so much as is needful for our purposes; but this is
in fact very little, just enough to recognize and identify each
object or person; that done, they go into our mental catalogue
and are no more really seen. In actual life the normal person
really only reads the labels as it were on the objects around
him and troubles no further. Almost all the things which are
useful in any way put on more or less this cap of invisi-
bility." 17
          Signs and discursive symbols are the stock-in-trade
of conscious intelligent adjustment, and they are telescoped
into such small cues of perception and denotation that we are
tempted to believe our thought moves without images or
words. The tiniest black spot of a certain shiny quality tells
us that the cat is under the sofa with just its tail-tip showing.
The word "cat," or a momentary, fragmentary image may
be all that comes into our mind in recognition. Yet if some-
one asks us later: "Where's the cat?" we do not hesitate to
answer: "I saw him under the sofa." By such signals we steer
our course through the world of sense, and by one-word con-
tacts we throw whole systems of judgment, belief, memory,
and expectation into action.
   Yet all these familiar signs and abbreviated symbols have
to be supported by a vast intellectual structure in order to
function so smoothly that we are almost unware of them; and
this structure is composed of their full articulate forms and all
their implicit relationships, which may be exhumed from the
stock of our buried knowledge at any time. Because they do
fit so neatly into the frame of our ultimate world-picture, we

can think with them and do not have to think about them;
  I? Fry,   Vision and Design, pp. 24-25.
                   THE FABRIC OF MEANING                      239
but our full apprehension of them is really only suppressed.
They wear a "cap of invisibility" when, like good servants,
they perform their tasks for our convenience without being
evident in themselves. Yet all our signs and symbols were
gathered from sensuous and emotional experience and bear
the marks of their origin —   perhaps a remote historical origin.
Though we ordinarily see things only with the economy of
practical vision, we can look at them instead of through them,
and then their suppressed forms and their unusual meanings
emerge for us. It is just because there is a fund of possible
meanings in every familiar form, that the picture of reality
holds together for us, that we believe in the ultimate causal
connection of all physical nature and the ultimate coherence
of moral demands.     A   form that is both sign and symbol ties
action and insight together for us; it plays a part in a momen-
tary situation and also in the "science" we constantly, if tacitly,
assume.  A    fine sunset demonstrates the earth's rotation with
relation to the sun, marks a "time of day," signifies that
dinner is ready or should be so, suggests continued fair
weather, and also is sublime, peaceful, and beautiful. The
chances are that most observers will take all its significations
for granted and attend to its aesthetic significance only. Yet
its reality in "nature" is a factor of that significance; were the
display a product of screen and camera, it would lack its
vague, traditional, religious meaning, and affect one very dif-
ferently. It might be beautiful but not sublime. The interplay
of beauty and reality, of spectacular color in empty air, lends
it that cosmic importance which permeates our very vision

of it.
                  —
   Many symbols not only words, but other forms may be  —
said to be "charged" with meanings. They have many sym-
bolic and signific functions, and these functions have been
integrated into a complex so that they are all apt to be sym-
pathetically invoked with any chosen one. The cross is such
a "charged" symbol: the actual instrument of Christ's death,
hence a symbol of suffering; first laid on his shoulders, an
actual burden, as well as an actual product of human handi-
work, and on both grounds a symbol of his accepted moral
burden; also an ancient symbol of the four zodiac points, with
a cosmic connotation; a "natural" symbol of cross-roads (we
still use it on our highways as a warning before an inter-

section), and therefore of decision, crisis, choice; also of being
crossed, i.e. of frustration, adversity, fate; and finally, to the
artistic eye a cross is the figure of a man. All these and many
other meanines lie ^or^ant in that simple, familiar, signifi-
cant shape. No wonder that it is a magical form! It is charged
with meanings, all human and emotional and vaguely cos-
240              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
mic, so that they have become integrated into a connotation
of the whole religious drama  —  sin, suffering, and redemption.
Yet undoubtedly the cross owes much of its value to the fact
that it has the physical attributes of a good symbol: it is
easily made —   drawn on paper, set up in wood or stone,
fashioned of precious substance as an amulet, even traced
recognizably with a finger, in a ritual gesture. It is so obvious
a symbolic device that despite its holy connotations we do
not refrain from using it in purely mundane, discursive capa-
cities, as the sign of "plus," or in tilted position as "times,"
or as a marker on ballot sheets and many other kinds of
record.
   There are many "charged" symbols in our thought, though
few that play as many popular roles as the cross.      A   ship is
                  —
another example the image of precarious security in all-
surrounding danger, of progress toward a goal, of adventure
between two points of rest, with the near, if dormant, conno-
tation of safe imprisonment in the hold, as in the womb.
Not improbably the similar form of a primitive boat and of
the moon in its last quarter has served in past ages to re-
inforce such mythological values.
   The fact that very few of our words are purely technical,
and few of our images purely utilitarian, gives our lives a
background of closely woven multiple meanings against which
all conscious experiences and interpretations are measured.
Every object that emerges into the focus of attention has
meaning beyond the "fact" in which it figures. It serves by
turns, and sometimes even at once, for insight and theory
and behavior, in non-discursive knowledge and discursive
reason, in wishful fancy, or as a sign eliciting conditioned-
reflex action. But that means that we respond to every new
datum with a complex of mental functions. Our perception
organizes it, giving it an individual definite Gestalt. Non-
discursive intelligence, reading emotive import into the con-
crete form, meets it with purely sensitive appreciation; and
even more promptly, the language-habit causes us to assimi-
late it to some literal concept and give it a place in discursive
thought. Here is a crossing of two activities: for discursive
symbolism is always general, and requires application to the
concrete datum, whereas non-discursive symbolism is specific,
is the "given" itself, and invites us to read the more general
meaning out of the case. Hence the exciting back-and-forth
of real mental life, of living by symbols. We play on words,
explore their connotations, evoke or evade their associations;
we identify signs with our symbols and construct the "intelli-
gible world"; we dream our needs and fantasms and construct
the "inner world" of unapplied symbols. We impress each
                    THE FABRIC OF MEANING                   241
other, too, and build a social structure, a world of right and
wrong, of demands and sanctions.
   Because our moral life is negotiated so largely by symbols,
it is more oppressive than the morality of animals. Beasts

have their moral relations, too; they control each other's ac-
tions jealously or permit them patiently, as a dog permits her
puppies to bite and worry her, but growls at another dog
that trespasses on her premises. But animals react only to the
deed that is done or is actually imminent; they use force only
to frustrate or avenge an act; whereas we control each other's
merely incipient behavior with fantasies of force. We employ
sanctions, threaten vague penalties, and try to forestall of-
fenses by merely exhibiting the symbols of their consequences.
That is why man is more cruel than any beast. We make our
punishments effective as mere connotations, and to do so we
have to make them disproportionately harsh. Misdemeanors
that merit no more than a serious rebuke or a half-hour in
jail have to carry a penalty of a month's imprisonment if the
very thought of the punishment is to prevent them. Then, be-
cause symbols have to have reference to fact if they are to
remain forceful at all, wherever the threat has not served as
a deterrent it has to be fulfilled. And more than that; the
power of symbols enables us not only to limit each other's
actions, but to command them; not only to restrain one an-
other, but to constrain. That makes the weaker not merely the
timid respecter of the strong, but his servant. It gives us duty,
conscription, and slavery. The story of man's martyrdom is
a sequel to the story of his intelligence, his power of symboli-
cal envisagement.
   For good or evil, man. has this power of envisagement,
which puts on him a burden that purely alert, realistic crea-
tures do not bear —the burden of understanding. He lives not
only in a place, but in Space; not only at a time, but in His-
tory. So he must conceive a world and a law of the world, a
pattern of life, and a way of meeting death. All these things
he knows, and he has to make some adaptation to their
reality.
   Now, he can adapt himself somehow to anything his imagi-
nation can cope with; but he cannot deal with Chaos. Because
his characteristic function and highest asset is conception, his
greatest fright is to meet what he cannot construe   — the "un-
canny," as it is popularly called. It need not be a new object;
we do meet new things, and "understand" them promptly, if
tentatively, by the nearest analogy, when our minds are func-
tioning freely; but under mental stress even perfectly familiar
things may become suddenly disorganized, and give us the hor-
rors. Therefore our most important assets are always the
242                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
symbols of our general orientation in nature, on the earth, in
society, and in what we are doing: the symbols of our Welt-
anschauung and Lebensanschauung. Consequently, in primi-
tive society, a daily ritual is incorporated in   common activities,
in     eating,washing, firemaking, etc., as well as in pure
ceremonial; because the need of reasserting the tribal morale
and recognizing its cosmic conditions is constantly felt. In
Christian Europe the Church brought men daily (in some
orders even hourly) to their knees, to enact if not to con-
template their assent to the ultimate concepts.
   In modern society such exercises are all but lost. Every
person finds his Holy of Holies where he may: in Scientific
Truth, Evolution, the State, Democracy, Kultur, or some
metaphysical word like "the All" or "the Spiritual." Human
life in our age is so changed and diversified that people cannot
share a few, historic, "charged" symbols that have about the
same wealth of meaning for everybody. This loss of old uni-
versal symbols endangers our safe unconscious orientation.
The new forms of our new order have not yet acquired that
rich, confused, historic accretion of meanings that makes
many familiar things "charged" symbols to which we seem to
respond instinctively. For some future generation, an aero-
plane may be a more powerful symbol than a ship; its poetic
possibilities are perhaps even more obvious; but to us it is
too new, it does not sum up our past in guarantee of the
present. One can see this in the conscious symbol it presents
to Marcel Proust, in La Prisonniere, as "one of these frankly
material vehicles to explore the Infinite." Poetic simile, not
spontaneous metaphor, is its status as yet; it is not a repository
of experience, as nature-symbols and social symbols are. And
virtually all the realities of our modern life are thus new,
their material aspects are predominant, practical insight still
has to cope with them instead of taking them for granted.
Therefore our intelligence is keen but precarious; it lacks
metaphysical myth, regime, and ritual expression.
   There are relatively few people today who are born to an
environment which gives them spiritual support. Only per-
sons of some imagination and effective intelligence can pic-
ture such an environment and deliberately seek it. They are the
few who feel drawn to some realm of reality that contains
their ultimate life-symbols and dictates activities which may
acquire ritual value. Men who follow the sea have often a
deep love for that hard life, which no catalogue of its practical
virtues can account for. But in their dangerous calling they
feel    secure; in their comfortless quarters they are at ease.
Waters and        heaven and storm and harbor, somehow
                 ships,
contain the symbols through which they see meaning and
                   THE FABRIC OF MEANING                              243
sense in the world, a "justification," as we call it, of trouble,
a unified conception of life whereby it can be rationally lived.
Any man who loves his calling loves it for more than its use;
he loves it because it seems to have "meaning."          A   scholar
who will defy the world in order to write or speak what he
knows as "scientific truth," the Greek philosopher who chose
to die rather than protest against Athens, the feminists to
whom woman-suffrage was a "cause" for which they accepted
ridicule as well as punishment, show how entirely realistic
performances may point beyond themselves, and acquire the
value of super-personal acts, like rites. They are the forms
of devotion that have replaced genuflexions, sacrifices, and
solemn dances.
  A   mind that is oriented, no matter by what conscious or
unconscious symbols, in material and social realities, can
function freely and confidently even under great pressure of
circumstance and in the face of hard problems. Its life is a
smooth and skillful shuttling to and fro between sign-functions
and symbolic functions, a steady interweaving of sensory
interpretations, linguistic responses, inferences, memories,
imaginative prevision, factual knowledge, and tacit apprecia-
tions. Dreams can possess it at night and work off the heaviest
load of self-expressive needs, and evaporate before the light
of day; its further self-expressions being woven intelligently
into the nexus of practical behavior. Ritual comes to it as a
natural response to the "holiness" or importance of real oc-
casions. In such a mind, doubts of the "meaning of life" are
not apt to arise, for reality itself is intrinsically "meaningful":
it incorporates the symbols of Life and Death, Sin and Salva-

tion. For a balanced active intelligence, reality is historical
fact and significant form, the all-inclusive realm of science,
myth, art, and comfortable common sense.
   Opportunity to carry on our natural, impulsive, intelligent
life, to realize plans, express ideas in action or in symbolic
formulation, see and hear and interpret all things that we
encounter, without fear of confusion, adjust our interests and
expressions to each other, is the "freedom" for which humanity
strives. This, and not some specific right that society may grant
or deny, is the "liberty" that goes necessarily with "life" and
"pursuit of happiness." Professor Whitehead expressed this
view precisely, when he said:
   "The concept of freedom has been narrowed to the picture
of contemplative people shocking their generation.       This
                                                          .   .   .



is a thorough mistake. The massive habits of physical nature,
its iron laws, determine the scene for the sufferings of men.
Birth and death, cold and hunger, separation, disease, the
general impracticability of purpose, all bring their quota to
 244               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
imprison the souls of women and men. Our experiences do
not keep step with our hopes.        .  The essence of freedom
                                         .   .



is the practicability of purpose. Mankind has chiefly suffered

from the frustration of its prevalent purposes, even such as
belong to the very definition of its species." 18
   Any miscarriage of the symbolic process is an abrogation
of our human freedom: the constraint imposed by a foreign
language, or a lapse of one's own linguistic ability such as
Sir Henry Head has described as loss of abstract concepts, 19
or pathological repression that causes all sorts of distorted
personal symbols to encroach on literal thought and empirical
judgment, or lack of logical power, knowledge, food for
thought, or imagination to envisage our problems clearly and
negotiably. All such obstacles may block the free functioning
of mind. But the most disastrous hindrance is disorientation,
the failure or destruction of life-symbols and loss or repression
of votive acts. A life that does not incorporate some degree
of ritual, of gesture and attitude, has no mental anchorage.
It is prosaic to the point of total indifference, purely casual,
devoid of that structure of intellect and feeling which we call
"personality."
   Therefore interference with acts that have ritual value
 (conscious or unconscious) is always felt as the most intoler-
able injury one man, or group of men, can do to another.
Freedom of conscience is the basis of all personal freedom.
                                                 —
To constrain a man against his principles make a pacifist
bear arms, a patriot insult his flag, a pagan receive baptism
is to endanger his attitude toward the world, his personal

strength and single-mindedness. No matter how fantastic may
be the dogmas he holds sacred, how much his living rites
conflict with the will or convenience of society, it is never a
light matter to demand their violation. Men fight passionately
against being forced to do lip-service, because the enactment
of a rite is always, in some measure, assent to its meaning;
so that the very expression of an alien mythology, incompatible
with one's own vision of "fact" or "truth," works to the
corruption of that vision. It is a breach of personality. To be
obliged to confess, teach, or acclaim falsehood is always felt
as an insult exceeding even ridicule and abuse. Common in-
sult is a blow at one's ego; but constraint of conscience strikes
at one's ego and super-ego, one's whole world, humanity, and
purpose. It takes a strong mind to keep its orientation without
overt symbols, acts, assertions, and social corroborations; to

  is From A. N. Whitehead, Adventures of Ideas (1933), p. 84. (Italics
mine.) By permission of The Macmillan Company, publishers.
  19 See "Disorders of Symbolic Thinking and Expression," British
Journal of Psychology, XI (1920-21, part II, 179-193.
                  THE FABRIC OF MEANING                     245
maintain it in the face of the confounding pattern of enacted
heresy is more than average mentality can do.
   We have to adapt our peculiarly human mental functions
—  our symbolific functions —  to given limitations, exactly as
we must adapt all our biological activities. The mind, like all
other organs, can draw its sustenance only from the surround-
ing world; our metaphysical symbols must spring from reality.
Such adaptation always requires time, habit, tradition, and
intimate knowledge of a way of life. If, now, the field of our
unconscious symbolic orientation is suddenly plowed up by
tremendous changes in the external world and in the social
order, we lose our hold, our convictions, and therewith our
effectual purposes. In modern civilization there are two great
threats to mental security: the new mode of living, which has
made the old nature-symbols alien to our minds, and the new
mode of working, which makes personal activity meaningless,
inacceptable to the hungry imagination. Most men never see
the goods they produce, but stand by a traveling belt and turn
a million identical passing screws or close a million identical
passing wrappers in a succession of hours, days, years. This
sort of activity is too poor, too empty, for even the most in-
genious mind to invest it with symbolic content. Work is no
longer a sphere of ritual; and so the nearest and surest source
of mental satisfaction has dried up. At the same time, the
displacement of the permanent homestead by the modern
rented tenement  —                         —
                      now here, now there has cut another
anchor-line of the human mind. Most people have no home
that is a symbol of their childhood, not even a definite memory
of one place to serve that purpose. Many no longer kno#*the
language that was once their mother-tongue. All old symbols
are gone, and thousands of average lives offer no new mater-
ials to a creative imagination. This, rather than physical want,
is the starvation that threatens the modern worker, the tyranny

of the machine. The withdrawals of all natural means for ex-
pressing the unity of personal life is a major cause of the
distraction, irreligion, and unrest that mark the proletariat of
all countries. Technical progress is putting man's freedom of
mind in jeopardy.
   In such a time people are excited about any general con-
victions or ide?ls they may have. Numberless hybrid religions
spring up, mysteries, causes, ideologies, all passionately em-
braced and b dly argued.   A    vague longing for the old tribal
unity makes nationalism look like salvation, and arouses the
most fantastic bursts of chauvinism and self-righteousness;
the wildest anthropological and historical legends; the dep-
recation and distortion of learning; and in place of ortho-
dox sermons, that systematic purveying of loose, half-baked
246                    PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
ideas which our generation knows as "propaganda." There
are committees and ministries of propaganda in our world,
as there were evangelical missions and watch-and-ward so-
cieties in the world of our fathers. No wonder that philoso-
phers looking at        this     pandemonium        of self-assertion,   self-
justification,   and    social    and  fantasy, view it as a
                                        political
reaction against the Age of Reason. After centuries of science
and progress, they conclude, the pendulum swings the other
way: the irrational forces of our animal nature must hold their
Witches' Sabbath.
  A   philosophy that knows only deductive or inductive logic
as reason, and classes all other human functions as "emotive,"
irrational, and animalian, can see only regression to a pre-
logical state in the present passionate and unscientific ideolo-
gies. All it can show us as the approach to Parnassus is the
way of factual data, hypothesis, trial, judgment, and general-
ization. All other things our minds do are dismissed as irrele-
vant to intellectual progress; they are residues, emotional
disturbances, or throwbacks to animal estate.
   But a theory of mind whose keynote is the symbolific func-
tion, whose problem is the morphology of significance, is not
obliged to draw that bifurcating line between science and
folly. It can see these ructions and upheavals of the modern
mind not as lapses of rational interest, caused by animal im-
pulse, but as the exact contrary          —
                                    as a new phase of savage-
dom, indeed, but inspired by the rational need of envisagement
and understanding. The springs of European thought have run
   —
dry those deep springs of imagination that furnish the basic
concepts for a whole intellectual order, the first discernments,
the generative ideas of our Weltanschauung. New conceptual
forms are crowding them out, but are themselves in the mythi-
cal phase, the "implicit" stage of symbolic formulation. We
cannot analyze the contents of those vast symbols Race,            —
Unity, Manifest Destiny, Humanity             —
                                        over which we fight so
ruthlessly; if we could, it would mean that they were already
furnishing discursive terms, clear issues, and we would all be
busy philosophizing instead of waging holy wars. We would
have the new world that humanity is dreaming of, and would
be eagerly building the edifice of knowledge out of new in-
sights. It is the same, efficient, work-a-day business of free
      —
minds discursive reasoning about well-conceived problems
that is disturbed or actually suspended in this apparent age of
unreason; but the force which governs that age is still the
force of mind, the impulse toward symbolic formulation, ex-
pression, and understanding of experience.
                                               —
   The continual pursuit of meanings wider, clearer, more
negotiable, more articulate meanings           —
                                         is philosophy. It per-
                   THE FABRIC OF MEANING                      247
meates all mental life: sometimes in the conscious form of
metaphysical thought, sometimes in the free, confident ma-
nipulation of established ideas to derive their more precise,
detailed implications, and sometimes    —   in the greatest crea-
tive periods—  in the form of passionate mythical, ritual, and
devotional expression. In primitive society such expression
meets with little or no obstacle; for the first dawn of mental-
ity has nothing to regret. Only as one culture supersedes an-
other, every new insight is bought with the life of an older
certainty. The confusion of form and content which char-
acterizes our worship of life-symbols works to the frustration
of well-ordered discursive reason, men act inappropriately,
blindly, and viciously; but what they are thus wildly and
mistakenly trying to do is human, intellectual, and necessary.
Standards of science and ethics must condemn it, for its overt
form is rife with error; traditional philosophy must despair of
it because it cannot meet any epistemological criterion; but

in a wider philosophy of symbolism it finds a measure of
understanding. If there is any virtue in the theory of what I
have called "symbolic transformation," then this theory should
elucidate not only the achievements of that function, but also
its miscarriages, its limitations, and its by-products of illusion
and error. Freedom of thought cannot be reborn without
throes; language, art, morality, and science have all given us
pain as well as power. For, as Professor Whitehead has
frankly and humbly declared: "Error is the price we pay for
progress."
