ACKNOWLEDGMENTS



If any of us can claim to see the world from a new vantage point it is because, as Isaac Newton once remarked, we are standing on the shoulders of giants. This is beyond question in my case, since each of the many threads that form the fabric of the theory presented in this book trace their origin to the life works of some of the greatest minds in history. But much more than this, it is often the case that it takes the convergence of like minds stubbornly questioning even the least dubious of our collective assumptions to shed the blinders that limit a particular conceptual paradigm. This is also true here. Few of the novel ideas explored here emerged from my personal reflections fully formed, and few even exhibited the rough-hewn form described in this book. These embryonic ideas were lucky to have been nourished by the truly dedicated and unselfish labors of a handful of brilliant, insightful, and questioning colleagues, who gathered in my living room, week after week, year after year, to question the assumptions, brainstorm about the right term for a new idea, or just struggle to grasp a concept that at every turn seemed to slip through our grasp. We were dubbed “Terry and the Pirates” (after the title of a postwar comic strip) because of our intense intellectual camaraderie and paradigm-challenging enterprise. This continuous thread of conversation has persisted over the course of nearly a decade and has helped to turn what was once nearly inconceivable into something merely counterintuitive.

The original Pirates include (in alphabetical order) Tyrone Cashman, Jamie Haag, Julie Hui, Eduardo Kohn, Jay Ogilvy, and Jeremy Sherman, with Ursula Goodenough and Michael Silberstein playing the role of periodic drop-ins from across the country. Most recently Alok Srivastava, Hajime Yamauchi, Drew Halley, and Dillon Niederhut have joined, as Jamie and Eduardo moved away to careers elsewhere in the country. Most have read through major portions of this manuscript and have offered useful comments and editorial feedback. Portions of the chapter on “Self” were re-edited from a paper co-written with Jay Ogilvy and Jamie Haag, and fragments of a number of chapters were influenced by papers co-authored either with Tyrone Cashman or with Jeremy Sherman. The close involvement of these many colleagues was demonstrated also in the long days that Ty Cashman, Jeremey Sherman, Julie Hui, and Hajime Yamauchi spent with me struggling through more than 700 pages of copy-editing queries and doing the necessary error checking that led to the final manuscript. Without the collective intelligence and work of this extended mind and body, it is difficult for me to imagine how these ideas would ever have seen the light of day, at least in a semi-readable form. In addition, I owe considerable thanks to the many colleagues around the country who have read bits of the manuscript and have offered their wise counsel. Ursula Goodenough, Michael Silberstein, Ambrose Nahas, and Don Favereau, in particular, read through early versions of various parts and provided extensive editorial feedback. Also my editor on The Symbolic Species, Hilary Hinzman, did extensive editorial work on the first four chapters, which therefore will be the most readable. These efforts have helped to greatly improve the presentation by cleaning up some of the oversights and confusions, and simplifying my sometimes tortured prose. Indeed, I have received far more editorial feedback than I have been able to take advantage of, given time and space.

So, it is only by the great good fortune of being in the right place and time in the history of ideas—heir to countless works of genius—and surrounded by a loyal band of fellow travelers that these ideas can be shared in a form that is even barely comprehensible. This loyal band of “Pirates” has been critical, supportive, patient, and insistent in just the right mix to make it happen. The book is a testament to the marvelous synergy of these many converging contributions, which have made this effort both a most exciting journey and a source of enduring friendships. Thank you all.

Finally, and most important, has been the constant unfaltering encouragement of my wife and best friend, Ella Ray, who has understood more than anyone else the limitations of my easily distracted mind and how to help me focus on the challenge of putting these ideas on paper, month after month, year after year.

Berkeley, September 2010
