1



(W)HOLES



Thirty spokes converge at the wheel’s hub, to a hole that allows it to turn.

Clay is shaped into a vessel, to enclose an emptiness that can be filled.

Doors and windows are cut into walls, to provide access to their protection.

Though we can only work with what is there, use comes from what is not there.

—LAO TSU1





A STONE’S THROW



A beach stone may be moved from place to place through the action of waves, currents, and tides. Or it may be moved thanks to the arm muscles of a boy trying to skip it over the surface of the water. In either case, physical forces acting on the mass of the stone cause it to move. Of course the waves that move beach stones owe their own movement to the winds that perturb them, the winds arise from convection processes induced by the energy of sunlight, and so on, in an endless series of forces affecting forces back through time. As for a child’s muscle movements, they too can be analyzed in terms of forces affecting forces back through time. But where should that account be focused? With the oxidative metabolism of glucose and glycogen that provides the energy to contract muscles and move the arm that launches the otherwise inert stone? With the carbohydrates eaten a few hours earlier? Or with the sunlight that nourished the plants from which that food was made? One could even consider things at a more microscopic scale, such as the molecular processes causing the contraction of the child’s muscles: for example, the energy imparted by adenosine triphosphate (ATP) molecules that causes the actin and myosin molecules in each muscle fiber to slide against one another and contract that fiber; the shifts in ionic potential propagated down millions of nerve fibers that cause acetylcholine release at neuromuscular synapses and initiate this chemical process; and the patterns of neuronal firing in the cerebral cortex that organize and initiate the propagation of these signals. We might even need to include the evolutionary history that gave rise to the hands and arms and brains capable of such interactions. Even so, the full causal history of this process leaves out what is arguably the most important fact.

What about the role of the child’s mental conception of what this stone might look like skipped over the waves, his knowledge of how one should hold and throw it to achieve this intriguing result, or his fascination with the sight of a stone resisting its natural tendency to sink in water—if only for a few seconds? These certainly involve the physical-chemical mechanisms of the child’s brain; but mental experience and agency are not exactly neural firing patterns, nor brain states. Neither are they phenomena occurring outside the child’s brain, and clearly not other physical objects or events in any obvious sense. These neural activities are in some way about stone-skipping, and are crucial to the initiation of this activity. But they are not in themselves either past or future stones dancing across the water; they are more like the words on this page. Both these words and the mental images in the boy’s mind provide access to something these things are not. They are both representations of something not-quite-realized and not-quite-actual. And yet these bits of virtual reality—the contents of these representations—surely are as critical to events that will likely follow as the energy that will be expended. Something critical will be missing from the explanation of the skipped stone’s subsequent improbable trajectory if this absential feature is ignored.

Something very different from a stone’s shifting position under the influence of the waves has become involved in a child’s throwing it—something far more indirect, even if no less physical. Indeed, within a few minutes, this same boy might cause a dozen stones to dance across the surface of the water along this one stretch of beach. In contrast, prior to the evolution of humans, the probability that any stone on any beach on Earth might exhibit this behavior was astronomically minute. This difference exemplifies a wide chasm separating the domains in which two almost diametrically opposed modes of causality rule—two worlds that are nevertheless united in the hurtling of this small spinning projectile.

This exemplifies only one among billions of unprecedented and inconceivably large improbabilities associated with the presence of our species. We could just as easily have made the same point by describing a modern technological artifact, like the computer that I type on to write these sentences. This device was fashioned from materials gathered from all parts of the globe, each made unnaturally pure, and combined with other precisely purified and shaped materials in just the right way so that it could control the flow of electrons from region to region within its vast maze of metallic channels. No non-cognitive spontaneous physical process anywhere in the universe could have produced such a vastly improbable combination of materials, much less millions of nearly identical replicas in just a few short years of one another. These sorts of commonplace human examples typify the radical discontinuity separating the physics of the spontaneously probable from the deviant probabilities that organisms and minds introduce into the world.

Detailed knowledge about the general organization of the body and nervous system of the child would be usefully predictive of only the final few seconds of events as the child caught sight of an appropriately shaped stone. In comparison, knowing about the causal organization of the human body in only a very superficial way, but also knowing that a year before, during another walk on another beach, someone showed this child how to skip a stone, would confer far greater predictive power than would knowing a thousand times more physiological details. None of the incredibly many details about physical and physiological history would be as helpful as this bit of comparatively imprecise and very general information about an event that occurred months earlier and miles away. In many ways, this one past event on a different beach with a different stone in which the child may only have been an observer is even less physically linked to this present event than is the stone’s periodic tumbling in the waves during the centuries that it lay on this beach. The shift from this incalculably minuscule probability to near certainty, despite ignoring an astronomically vast amount of physical data and only learning of a few nebulous macro details of human interaction, captures the essence of a very personal riddle.

The boy’s idea that it might be possible to treat this stone like another that he’d once seen skipped is far more relevant to the organization of these causal probabilities than what he ate for breakfast, or how the stone came to be deposited in this place on this beach. Even though the force imparted to the stone is largely derived from the energy released from the chemical bonds in digested food, and its location at that spot is entirely due to the energetics of geology, wind, and waves, these facts are almost irrelevant. The predictive value of shifting attention to very general types of events, macroscopic global similarities, predictions of possible thought processes, and so forth, offers a critical hint that we are employing a very different and in some ways orthogonal logic of causality when we consider this mental analysis of the event rather than its physics. Indeed, this difference makes the two analyses appear counterintuitively incompatible. The thought is about a possibility, and a possibility is something that doesn’t yet exist and may never exist. It is as though a possible future is somehow influencing the present.

The discontinuity of causality implicit in human action parallels a related discontinuity between living and non-living processes. Ultimately, both involve what amounts to a reversal of causal logic: order developing from disorder, the lack of a state of affairs bringing itself into existence, and a potential tending to realize itself. We describe this in general terms as “ends determining means.” But compared to the way things work in the non-living, non-thinking world, it is as though a fundamental phase change has occurred in the dynamical fabric of the world. Crossing the border from machines to minds, or from chemical reactions to life, is leaving one universe of possibilities to enter another.

Ultimately, we need an account of these properties that does not make it absurd that they exist, or that we exist, with the phenomenology we have. Our brains evolved as one product of a 3-billion-year incremental elaboration of an explicitly end-directed process called life. Like the idle thoughts of the boy strolling along the beach, this process has no counterpart in the inorganic world. It would be absurd to argue that these differences are illusory. Whatever else we can say about life and mind, they have radically reorganized the causal fabric of events taking place on the surface of the Earth. Of course, life and mind are linked. The sentience that we experience as consciousness has its precursors in the adaptive processes of life in general. They are two extreme ends of a single thread of evolution. So it’s not just mind that requires us to come to a scientific understanding of end-directed forms of causality; it’s life itself.





WHAT’S MISSING?



This missing explanation exposes a large and gaping hole in our understanding of the world. It has been there for millennia. For most of this time it was merely a mysterious distraction. But as our scientific and technological powers have grown to the point that we are unwittingly interfering with the metabolism of our entire planet, our inability to fill in this explanatory hole has become more and more problematic.

In recent centuries, scientists’ ceaseless probing into the secrets of nature has triumphed over mystery upon mystery. In just the past century, scientists have harnessed the power of the stars to produce electric power or to destroy whole cities. They have identified and catalogued the details of the molecular basis for biological inheritance. And they have designed machines that in fractions of a second can perform calculations that would have taken thousands of people thousands of years to complete. Yet this success has also unwittingly undercut the motivation that has been its driving force: faith in the intrinsic value for humankind that such knowledge would provide. Not only have some of the most elegant discoveries been turned to horrific uses, but applying our most sophisticated scientific tools to the analysis of human life and mind has apparently demoted rather than ennobled the human spirit. It’s not just that we have failed to uncover the twists of physics and chemistry that set us apart from the non-living world. Our scientific theories have failed to explain what matters most to us: the place of meaning, purpose, and value in the physical world.

Our scientific theories haven’t exactly failed. Rather, they have carefully excluded these phenomena from consideration, and treated them as irrelevant. This is because the content of a thought, the goal of an action, or the conscious appreciation of an experience all share a troublesome feature that appears to make them unsuited for scientific study. They aren’t exactly anything physical, even though they depend on the material processes going on in brains.

Ask yourself: What does it mean to be reading these words? To provide an adequate answer, it is unnecessary to include information about the histories of the billions of atoms constituting the paper and ink or electronic book in front of you. A Laplacian demon2 might know the origins of these atoms in ancient, burned-out stars and the individual trajectories that eventually caused them to end up as you see them, but this complete physical knowledge wouldn’t provide any clue to their meaning. Of course, these physical details and vastly many more are a critical part of the story, but even this complete physical description wouldn’t include the most crucial causal fact of the matter.

You are reading these words because of something that they and you are not: the ideas they convey. Whatever else we can say about these ideas, it is clear that they are not the stuff that you and this book are made of.

The problem is this: Such concepts as information, function, purpose, meaning, intention, significance, consciousness, and value are intrinsically defined by their fundamental incompleteness. They exist only in relation to something that they are not. Thus, the information provided by this book is not the paper and ink or electronic medium that conveys it, the cleaning function of soap is not merely its chemical interaction with water and oils, the regulatory function of a stop sign is not the wood, metal, and paint that it is composed of or even its distinctive shape, and the aesthetic value of a sculpture is not constituted by the chemistry of the marble, its weight, or its color. The “something” that each of these is not is precisely what matters most. But notice the paradox in this English turn of phrase. To “matter” is to be substantial, to resist modification, to be beyond creation or destruction—and yet what matters about an idea or purpose is dependent on something that is not substantial in any obvious sense.

So, what is shared in common between all these phenomena? In a word, nothing—or rather, something not present. In the last chapter, I introduced the somewhat clumsy term absential to refer to the essential absent feature of each of these kinds of phenomena. This doesn’t quite tell the whole story, however, because as should already be obvious from the examples just discussed, the role that absence plays in these varied phenomena is different in each case. And it’s not just something missing, but an orientation toward or existence conditional upon this something-not-there.

The most characteristic and developed exemplar of an absential relationship is purpose. Historically, the concept of purpose has been a persistent source of controversy for both philosophers and scientists. The philosophical term for the study of purposive phenomena is teleology, literally, the logic of end-directedness. The term has its roots in ancient Greek. Curiously, there are two different ancient Greek roots that get transcribed into English as tele, and each is relevant in its own way. The first, τελε (and also τελοσ or “end”), is the one from which teleology derives. It can variously mean completion, end, goal, or purpose. So that teleology refers to the study of purposeful phenomena. The second τηλε (roughly translated as “afar”) forms the familiar prefix of such English terms as telescope, telephone, television, telemetry, and telepathy, all of which imply relationship to something occurring at a distance or despite a physical discontinuity.

Though the concept of teleology specifically derives from this first derivation of tele, by coincidence of transliteration (and possibly by some deeper etymological sound symbolism) the concept of separateness and physical displacement indicated by the second is also relevant. We recognize teleological phenomena by their development toward something they are not, but which they are implicitly determined with respect to. Without this intrinsic incompleteness, they would merely be objects or events. It is the end for the sake of which they exist—the possible state of things that they bring closer to existing—that characterizes them. Teleology also involves such relationships as representation, meaning, and relevance. A purpose is something represented. The missing something that characterizes each of these semiotic relationships can simply be physically or temporally dissociated from that which is present, or it can be more metaphorically distant in the sense of being abstract, potential, or only hypothetically existent. In these phenomena there is no disposition to bring the missing something into existence, only a marking of the essential relationship of what is present to something not present.

In an important sense, purpose is more complex than other absential relationships because we find all other forms of absential relationship implicit in the concept of purpose. It is most commonly associated with a psychological state of acting or intending to act so as to potentially bring about the realization of a mentally represented goal. This not only involves an orientation toward a currently non-existing state of affairs, it assumes an explicit representation of that end, with respect to which actions may be organized. Also, the various actions and processes typically employed to achieve that goal function for the sake of it. Finally, the success or failure to achieve that goal has value because it is in some way relevant to the agency for the sake of which it is pursued. And all these features are contributors to the sentience of simple organisms and the conscious experience of thinking beings like ourselves.

Because it is complex, the concept of mental purpose can be progressively decomposed, revealing weaker forms of this consequence-organized relationship that do not assume intrinsic mentality. Thus the concepts of function, information, and value have counterparts in living processes, which do not entail psychological states, and from which these more developed forms likely derive. The function of a designed mechanism or a biological organ is also constructed or organized (respectively) with respect to the end of promoting the production of some as-yet-unrealized state of things.

With respect to artifacts crafted by human users, there is no ambiguity. We recognize that an artifact or mechanical device is designed and constructed for a purpose. In other words, achieving this type of outcome guides the selection and modification of its physical characteristics. A bowl should be shaped to prevent its contents from draining onto the surface it sits on, and a nail should be made of a material that is more rigid than the material it needs to penetrate. The function that guides a tool’s construction as well as its use is located extrinsically, and so a tool derives its end-directed features parasitically, from the teleology of the designer or user. It is not intrinsic.

In contrast, the function of a biological organ is not parasitic on any extrinsic teleology in the same sense.3 An organ like the heart or a molecule like hemoglobin inherits its function via involvement in organism survival and reproduction. Unlike a mentally conceived purpose, a biological function lacks an explicit representation of the end with respect to which it operates. Nevertheless, it exists because of the consequences it tends to produce. Indeed, this is the essence of a natural selection explanation for certain of the properties that an organ exhibits.

Two similarly homonymous terms with different but related meanings are also associated with purpose, representation, and value. In common usage, the word “intention” typically refers to the predisposition of a person to act with respect to achieving a particular goal, as in intending to skip a stone across the water. Being intentional is in this sense essentially synonymous with being purposeful, and having an intention is having a purpose. In philosophical circles, however, the term intention is used differently and more technically. It is defined as the property of being about something. Ideas and beliefs are, in this sense, intentional phenomena. The etymology of the term admits to both uses, since its literal meaning is something like “inclined toward,” as in tending or leaning toward something. Again, the common attribute is an involvement with respect to something extrinsic and absent: for example, a content, meaning, or ideal type. So both of these terminological juxtapositions suggest a deeper commonality amongst these different modes of intrinsic incompleteness.

Unfortunately, because it is not just mentality that exhibits intrinsic incompleteness and other-dependence, the terms teleology and intentionality (in both forms) are burdened with numerous mentalistic connotations. To include the more primitive biological counterparts to these mental relationships, such as function and adaptation, or the sort of information characteristic of genetic inheritance, we need a more inclusive terminology. I will argue that these more basic forms (or grades) of intrinsic incompleteness, characteristic of even the simplest organisms, are the evolutionary precursors of mentalistic relationships in an evolutionary sense. Organ functions exist for the sake of maintaining the life of the plant or animal. While this is not purpose in any usual sense, neither is it merely a chemical-mechanical relationship. Though subjective awareness is different from the simple functional responsiveness of organisms in general, both life and mind have crossed a threshold to a realm where more than just what is materially present matters.

Currently, we lack a single term in the English language (or others that I know of) that captures this more generic sense of existing with-respect-to, for-the-sake-of, or in-order-to-generate something that is absent that also includes function at one extreme and value at the other. The recognition that there is a common core property characterizing how each of these involves a necessary linkage with, and inclination toward, something absent argues for finding a term to refer to it. To avoid repeatedly listing these attributes, we need to introduce a more generic term for all such phenomena, irrespective of whether they are associated with minds or merely features of life.

To address this need, I propose that we use the term ententional as a generic adjective to describe all phenomena that are intrinsically incomplete in the sense of being in relationship to, constituted by, or organized to achieve something non-intrinsic. By combining the prefix en- (for “in” or “within”) with the adjectival form meaning something like “inclined toward,” I hope to signal this deep and typically ignored commonality that exists in all the various phenomena that include within them a fundamental relationship to something absent.

Ententional phenomena include functions that have satisfaction conditions, adaptations that have environmental correlates, thoughts that have contents, purposes that have goals, subjective experiences that have a self/other perspective, and values that have a self that benefits or is harmed. Although functions, adaptations, thoughts, purposes, subjective experiences, and values each have distinct attributes that distinguish them, they all also have an orientation to a specific constitutive absence, a particular and precise missing something that is their critical defining attribute. When talking about cognitive and semiotic topics (sign processes), I will, however, continue to use the colloquial terminology of teleology, purpose, meaning, intention, interpretation, and sentience. And when talking about living processes that do not involve any obvious mental features, I will likewise continue to use the standard terminology of function, information, receptor, regulation, and adaptation. But when referring to all such phenomena in general, I will use entention to characterize their internal relationship to a telos—an end, or otherwise displaced and thus non-present something, or possible something.

As an analysis of the concept of teleology demonstrates, different ententional phenomena depend on, and are interrelated with, one another in an asymmetrical and hierarchical way. For example, purposive behaviors depend on represented ends, representations depend on information relationships, information depends on functional organization, and biological functions are organized with respect to their value in promoting survival, well-being, and an organism’s reproductive potential. This hierarchic dependence becomes clear when we consider some of the simplest ententional processes, such as functional relationships in living organisms. Thus, although we may be able to specify in considerable detail the physical chemical relationships constituting a particular molecular interaction, like the function of hemoglobin to bind free oxygen, none of these facts of chemistry provides the key news that hemoglobin molecules have these properties because of something that is both quite general and quite distinct from hemoglobin chemistry: the evolution of myriad molecular processes within living cells that are dependent on electrons captured from oxygen for energy, and the fact that they can’t get it by direct diffusion in large bodies. Explaining exactly how the simplest ententional phenomena arise, and how the more complex forms evolve from these simpler forms, is a major challenge of this book.

Scholars who study intentional phenomena generally tend to consider them as processes and relationships that can be characterized irrespective of any physical objects, material changes, or motive forces. But this is exactly what poses a fundamental problem for the natural sciences. Scientific explanation requires that in order to have causal consequences, something must be susceptible of being involved in material and energetic interactions with other physical objects and forces. Accepting this view confronts us with the challenge of explaining how these absential features of ententional phenomena could possibly make a difference in the world. And yet assuming that mentalistic terms like purpose and intention merely provide descriptive glosses for constellations of material events does not resolve the problem. Arguing that the causal efficacy of mental content is illusory is equally pointless, given the fact that we are surrounded by the physical consequences of people’s ideas and purposes.

Consider money. A dollar buys a cup of coffee no matter whether it takes the form of a paper bill, coins, an electronic debit on a bank account, or an interest-bearing charge on a credit card. A dollar has no essential specific physical substrate, but appears to be something of a higher order, autonomous from any particular physical realization. Since the unifying absential aspect of this economic process is only a similar type of outcome, and not any specific intrinsic attribute, one might be inclined to doubt that there is any common factor involved. Is the exchange of a paper dollar and a dollar’s worth of coins really an equivalent action in some sense, or is it simply that we ignore the causal details in describing it? Obviously, there is a difference in many of the component physical activities involved, even though the end product—receiving a cup of coffee—may be superficially similar irrespective of these other details. But does having a common type of end have some kind of independent role to play in the causal process over and above all the specific physical events in between? More troublesome yet is the fact that this end is itself not any specific physical configuration or event, but rather a general type of outcome in which the vast majority of specific physical details are interchangeable.

Philosophers often describe independence from any specific material details as “multiple realizability.” All ententional phenomena, such as a biological adaptation like flight, a mental experience like pain, an abstract convention like a grammatical function, a value assessment like a benefit, and so on, are multiply realizable. They can all be embodied in highly diverse kinds of physical-chemical processes and substrates.

Consideration of the not-quite-specific nature of the missing something that defines functions, intentions, and purposes will force us to address another conundrum that has worried philosophers since the time of the Greeks: the problem of the reality of generals. A “general,” in this sense of the word, is a type of thing rather than a specific object or event. Plato’s ideal forms were generals, as is the notion of “life” or the concept of “a dollar.” The causal status of general types has been debated by philosophers for millennia, and is often described as the Realism/Nominalism debate.4 It centers on the issue of whether types of phenomena or merely their specific individual exemplars are the source of causal influence. Ententional phenomena force the issue for this reason. And this further explains why they are problematic for the natural sciences. A representation may be about some specific thing but also about some general property, the same function may be realized by different mechanisms, and a purpose like skipping a stone may be diversely realized. So, accepting the possibility that ententional phenomena are causally important in the world appears to require that types of things have real physical consequences independent of any specific embodiment.

This requirement is well exemplified by the function of hemoglobin. This function is multiply realizable. Thus biologists were not too surprised to discover that there are other phyla of organisms that use an entirely different bloodborne molecule to capture and distribute oxygen. Clams and insects have evolved an independent molecular trick for capturing and delivering oxygen to their tissues. Instead of hemoglobin, they have evolved hemocyanins—so named for the blue-green color of their blood that results from the use of copper instead of iron in the blood protein that handles oxygen transfer. This is not considered biologically unusual because it is assumed that the detailed mechanism is unimportant so long as certain general physical attributes that are essential to the function are realized. The function would also be achieved if medical scientists devised an artificial hemoglobin substitute for use when blood transfusions were unavailable. Science fiction writers have regularly speculated that extraterrestrial life forms might also have blue or green blood. Perhaps this is behind the now colloquial reference to alien beings as “little green men.” Indeed, copper-based blood was explicitly cited in the Star Trek TV series and movies as a characteristic of the Vulcan race, though the colorful characterization of alien beings appears to be much older than this.5

The idea that something can have real causal efficacy in the world independent of the specific components that constitute it is the defining claim of the metaphysical theory called “functionalism.” Multiple realizability is one of its defining features. A common example used to illustrate this approach comes from computer science. Computer software comprises a set of instructions that are used to organize the circuits of the machine to shuttle signals around in a specific way that achieves some end, like adding numbers. To the extent that the same software produces the same effects on different computer hardware, we can say that the result is functionally equivalent, despite the entirely separate physical embodiment. Computational multiple realizability has been a crucial (though not always reliable) factor in composing this text on the different computers that I have used.6

It is the interchangeability of consequences that warrants classifying these processes as the same type of phenomenon despite the diversity of possible ways to achieve these consequences. But potential consequences are also generals, as well as being merely virtual (and thus absent) possibilities. Functions and purposes are only the same with respect to a type of outcome, not a specific fully described physical state. In contrast, mechanical conceptions of causality lead from specific antecedent physical conditions to specific consequent physical conditions.

Probably the most successful theory to be based on general consequences rather than specific physical chemical details is Darwin’s theory of natural selection. For example, an adaptation like the oxygen-delivery capability of blood may be embodied in each successful organism by a specific set of hemoglobin molecules produced in that body, but individuals with evolved variants of hemoglobin molecules that don’t produce any difference in oxygen binding are not distinguished from normal hemoglobin by natural selection. Thus, this adaptation is a general type, not anything physically particular.





DENYING THE MAGIC



Although we navigate our day-to-day existence in the domain of absential relationships as much as in the domain of food, weather, houses, roads, and other animals and plants, whenever scientists, philosophers, or theologians attempt to explain how these domains fit together, the result inevitably seems either magical or absurd. Ententional causality appears like a sort of magic, at least from a purely physical-chemical point of view, because it assumes the immediate influence of something that is not present. Scientists have tacitly entered into a polite agreement to ignore ententional properties and ban the use of them for scientific explanation. If asked, most would deny that the idea of ententional causality makes any sense at all. Like children at a magic show, maybe we’ve simply been fooled into accepting this trick by the greatest of all magicians, Mother Nature.

In this spirit, the widely read evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins’ River Out of Eden challenges us to shed childish beliefs about meaning and purpose in the universe. In his view, “The universe we observe has precisely the properties we should expect if there is, at bottom, no design, no purpose, no evil and no good, nothing but blind pitiless indifference.”7 And the Nobel Prize–winning physicist Steven Weinberg’s The First Three Minutes ( . . . of the universe!) similarly observes that “the more the universe seems comprehensible, the more it also seems pointless.”8

These statements are concerned with the universe as a whole, and the laws of the unfolding of cosmic events. It is not clear from this that either of the two scientists would follow such implications out to the logical conclusion, that our own experience of meaning, purpose, and conscious agency is likewise illusory. But the Nobel laureate and co-discoverer of the structure and function of DNA Francis Crick’s The Astonishing Hypothesis asserts: “You, your joys and your sorrows, your memories and your ambitions, your sense of personal identity and free will, are in fact no more than the behavior of a vast assembly of nerve cells and their associated molecules . . .” (emphasis added).9

These three scientists are certain that human conscious experience and agency are not magical or in any sense otherworldly. And as Crick suggests, it is taken for granted that they will ultimately be explained in terms of the same sorts of substances and processes as are found in the rest of the living and non-living world. However, as he struggles to explain in his book, the processes that constitute conscious experience are unusually complicated in their physical organization and difficult to study. Nevertheless, he says, they are just everyday physics and chemistry. And yet he hints at a slightly subtler version of this claim by arguing that these conscious experiences are the emergent consequences of these processes.

Exactly what is meant by emergence turns out to be subtly entangled with the problem of making sense of ententional phenomena. It is often invoked as a sort of stand-in for whatever is the special relationship that explains the difference between ententional and non-ententional physical phenomena that a complete theory of the world must ultimately provide. Addressing this challenge will occupy a good portion of this book. By invoking the concept of emergence, Crick is signaling that there is something special about conscious processes that distinguishes them from other physical processes. In the end, he finishes up telling us that this special quality is its complexity.

The difference between Crick’s enterprise and that of this book is signaled by the words I have italicized in the above quote. With the phrase “no more than,” Crick at the same time denies a mystical explanation and claims that these phenomena are completely understandable in terms of contemporary physics and chemistry.

As our sciences and technologies have grown ever more sophisticated, and as we have come to recognize the reliability of the tools they have provided, the fact that ententional phenomena appear invisible to these powerful methods leads inexorably to the possibility that such phenomena may involve nothing special after all. Of course, conscious experience is not magical, and I agree that the laws of physics and chemistry are not changed as they play constitutive roles in mental representation and conscious experience. I also agree with Dawkins and Weinberg that the part of the universe that our current physics and chemistry unambiguously describes is indeed devoid of function, meaning, and value. But denying that mind is magic does not explain the sleight-of-hand that appears to be magic with respect to the rest of the non-living universe. Something quite different happens with organisms and brains than with erupting volcanoes, turbulent rivers, or exploding stars.

As a scientist who has spent much of his career exploring the organization of brains and peering through microscopes at neurons, I am convinced that by studying such physical details we gain a better understanding of how this magnificent organ functions. At least as we understand them now, however, knowing many of the physical details of brains has not made it easier to explain how a pattern of neural activity can be about something that it is not. When the discussion turns to the interior experience of conscious awareness, the explanatory hole gapes even wider. Are we forever forced to use parallel non-translatable forms of explanation to discuss the sorts of phenomena that make up experience on the one hand and the physical processes that correlate with them on the other? Or will we, as some think, eventually be able to dispense with mentalistic talk altogether, at least in scientific circles, and finally get over the illusion that there is “someone home”? Are these the only choices?

This last question suggests that there is a deeper and more corrosive aspect to this impossible forced choice. It is a nightmarish thought, appropriate for The Twilight Zone, to imagine that everyone around you, every friend or loved one, has been replaced with robots or zombies, whose actions merely simulate the behavior of those persons. In such a world, there is no one to care and no one to care for, no reason for kindness, no one with whom to share the experience of beauty, sorrow, or discovery, and perhaps no value beyond one’s own pleasures and pains. The nightmare implicitly becomes even more horrific, however, because in such a world even your own existence is a lie. It’s hard enough to accept that your body is a chemical machine, or that the world as it appears to your senses is only the stuff that dreams are made on. But it is quite absurd to believe that your feelings, thoughts, and experiences, even in such a dreamworld, are also unreal. To whom or to what is each of us an illusion?

Conscious experience—that most commonplace phenomenon of everyday waking life—is the quintessence of an ententional phenomenon. It is intrinsically perspectival, representational, consequence-oriented, and normative. The possibility that it is illusory, that there really isn’t anyone home, is just too absurd and devastating to contemplate. As the American philosopher and cognitive scientist Jerry Fodor puts it:



[I]f it isn’t literally true that my wanting is causally responsible for my reaching, and my itching is causally responsible for my scratching, and my believing is causally responsible for my saying . . . if none of that is literally true, then practically everything I believe about anything is false and it’s the end of the world.10





In comparison, believing that conscious experience and other ententional phenomena are more like magic may seem at least more palatable, if not more plausible, than believing that such phenomena don’t really exist at all. So it shouldn’t surprise us that just when our scientific prowess appears on the verge of Godlike capacities to extend life, create new species, leave the Earth, manufacture new elements, and create machines able to perform tasks that once only people could perform, ancient fundamentalisms have swept across the globe in a rising tide of denial and defiance. Humanism is no sanctuary, if to be human is only to be a chemical computer running evolutionary programs. To navigate in a world without value is to be without rudder or destination, and yet without science, we navigate blind. To many, apparently, blindness is preferable.





TELOS EX MACHINA



The most sophisticated early recognition of a distinction between these very different modes of causality can be traced all the way back to Aristotle. In fact, he considered the problem even more complicated than I have summarized here. He distinguished four distinct modes of causality: material, efficient, formal, and final cause. In carpentry, for example, material cause is what determines the structural stability of a house, efficient cause is the carpenter’s modifications of materials to create this structure, formal cause is the plan followed in this construction process, and final cause is the aim of the process, that is, producing a space protected from the elements. A final cause is that “for the sake of which” something is done. His classic example of a final cause is a man walking for his health. Health isn’t a specific state, but a general condition defined by contrast to the many ways one can be unhealthy.

For Aristotle, these were different and complementary ways of understanding how and why change occurs. There has been an erosion of this plural understanding of causality since Aristotle that, although an important contribution to the unity of knowledge, has also contributed to our present intellectual (and spiritual) dilemma. Ententional processes and relationships can best be classed as expressions of final causality in Aristotle’s terms. Their absential character is determined by the end toward which they tend, or the represented concept for the sake of which they were created. But with this erosion of the plurality of causal concepts, a place for a form of causal influence derived from something absent was no longer acceptable.

It was at the beginning of the Renaissance that the coherence of the concept of final causality came into question. Seminal thinkers like Francis Bacon, René Descartes, Baruch Spinoza, and others progressively chipped away at any role that final causality might play in physical processes. Bacon argued that teleological explanations were effectively redundant and thus superfluous additions to physical explanations of things. Descartes considered animate processes in animal bodies to be completely understandable in mechanical (i.e., efficient) terms, while mental processes composed a separate extensionless domain. Spinoza questioned the literal sense of final causality, since it was nonsensical to think of future states producing present states.

In their own ways, these thinkers each recognized that appealing to mental contents as physical causes accomplishes little more than pointing to an unopened black box. Positing motivations or purposes for actions still requires a physical account of their implementation. And inside that black box? Well, a further appeal to purposive agency only leads to vicious regress. Accordingly, it was held, purpose and meaning are intrinsically incomplete notions. They require replacement with something more substantial. A purpose, conceived as the “pull” of some future possibility, must be illusory, lacking the materiality to affect anything. Renaissance thinkers abandoned old forms of explanation, such as “nature abhors a vacuum” for the power of vacuums, or “being a substance lighter than water” for the buoyancy of materials, by progressively restricting the conception of causal influence to the immediate pushes and pulls of physical interaction. This heritage of modern science has guided a relentless effort to replace these black boxes and their end-directed explanations of function, design, or purposive action with mechanistic accounts. That effort has yielded astounding success.

Perhaps the greatest triumph of this enterprise came with the elucidation of the process of natural selection. It showed, in principle, that through accidentally produced variations, competition for resources, and selective reproduction or preservation of lineages, even something as complicated as a living organism with its apparent purposiveness and fittedness to local conditions could have evolved. Where the natural theology of William Paley in the early 1800s had concluded that observing functional organization, complexity, and perfection of design in an object (e.g., a watch) implied the operation of prior intelligence to fashion it, Charles Darwin and subsequent researchers could now demonstrate ways that living organization of even greater sophistication could be the result of preserved chance variation. So prior design and end-directedness became unnecessary assumptions even in the realm of life. From this perspective, organisms were mechanisms like watches, but their adaptive organization was conceived as arising serendipitously by matching accidentally formed mechanisms with conditions favoring their persistence.

The metaphor of the world as an immense machine full of smaller machines is, however, deeply infected with the special assumptions associated with human artifact design. When Richard Dawkins caricatures evolution as a Blind Watchmaker,11 he still characterizes organisms as machines, and machines are assembled to do something for some end by some external process. Though we typically think of organisms as analogous to engineered artifacts performing some designed task, this analogy can set up quite misleading expectations. Design of engineered artifacts is a function of imposed order that derives from outside. The integration of parts in a machine results from the careful selection of materials, shaping of parts, and systematic assembly, all of which occur with respect to an anticipated set of physical behaviors and ends to be achieved. Although living processes have components that are at least as precisely integrated in their function as any man-made machine, little else makes them like anything engineered. Whole organisms do not result from bringing together disparate parts but by their parts’ differentiating from one another. Organisms are not built or assembled; they grow by the multiplication of cells, a process of division and differentiation from prior, less differentiated precursors. Both in development and in phylogeny, wholes precede parts, integration is intrinsic, and design occurs spontaneously. The machine metaphor is a misleading oversimplification.

The tacit importation of a human artifact view of the world, with its implicit design logic, into a materialist metaphysics that restricts the introduction of anything like final causal relationships, creates the logical necessity of a telos ex machina universe, where design and purpose can only be imposed from the outside. In such a world, we appear as accidental robots blindly running randomly generated programs. But there is an implicit contradiction in this conception, though it is not due to the exclusion of absential properties as much as to the limitations of the machine metaphor. Machines are simplifications of the causal world. Abstractly conceived, a machine is finite, and all its features and future states are fully describable. They are essentially closed off from all physical variations except those that are consistent with a given externally determined function. Thus the whole notion of machine causality is predicated on a conception of causality that both excludes teleology from consideration and yet assumes it as the basis for distinguishing machines from generic mechanical interactions. The machine metaphor of the world implicitly begs for a watchmaker, even as it denies his or her existence.





EX NIHILO NIHIL FIT



The famous Latin pronouncement from the Roman philosopher-poet Lucretius—roughly translated as “From nothing, nothing comes”—is the precursor to the first law of thermodynamics, which states that energy (recognized as matter-energy after Einstein) can neither be created nor destroyed. Modern science has tested the conservation assumption expressed in this classic proposition to quite precise values. It is implicit in the conservation laws of physics as a cosmic bookkeeping rule. All of modern physics and chemistry stands on its reliable foundation.12 It’s also just common sense. Magic is trickery. Things don’t simply vanish or appear from nowhere. It takes something to make something. And so on.

The ex nihilo postulate can also be interpreted to mean that existing structures, patterns, and forces are just shuffled versions of others that came before; nothing added, nothing removed. In a cosmic sense it assumes that the universe is closed, and it could also be taken to be a causal closure principle, which is to say that the basic causal laws of the universe also form a closed system—all changes come from within. This suggests that both materially and dynamically, absolute novelty is a fiction, and the causal properties present on Earth now are no more than shuffled versions of causal properties that have persisted since the Big Bang. With respect to the paradox of teleology, it can be taken as excluding the possibility that absential properties were ever fundamentally novel additions to the everyday physical-chemical causality that applies to rocks, flames, or star formation.

Yet this idea seems to lead to confusing consequences when we consider the nature of the sorts of processes and relationships that involve purposes, goals, meanings, values, and the like. It can hardly be doubted that there was a time when these phenomena were not in evidence on the surface of the Earth, although they are everywhere in evidence at present. Certainly, none were present when the Earth’s surface was still hot enough to boil water, and many may only have arisen since the evolution of hominids. They probably didn’t just drop in from elsewhere, though if they did, their origin would need to be explained there. Wherever and whenever they arose, however, they were unprecedented and “new,” even if they are now mundanely common in our current experience. Before this, potential consequences did not play any role in what could happen. Now they do.

Doesn’t such a claim violate the causal closure principle? If there truly is no antecedent set of conditions that has the production of this effect as a rule-governed consequence, then aren’t we invoking an almost mystical claim about the appearance of a causal principle from nowhere? Actually, there is an even worse problem. It’s not just the unprecedented appearance on the prehistoric Earth of these ententional phenomena that seems to violate the ex nihilo principle, it’s the very nature of these phenomena themselves.

Since all ententional phenomena are intrinsically organized with respect to some property or state of affairs that does not currently exist, it is unclear from this simple materialistic perspective how these absent features could have causal influence. So from this perspective, although we describe function as a process that exists in order to produce an otherwise unlikely state of affairs, it would seem more appropriate to simply describe it as the causal antecedent to that end. Likewise, a representation is interpreted to be related to some displaced object or abstract property, which might not even exist, and so although the physical process of interpretation itself may have physical consequences, the represented content should be causally irrelevant. Finally, since purposes are determined with respect to some currently absent but conceivably achievable outcome, even if that potential is never realized, this end also appears causally irrelevant. These phenomena not only appear to arise without antecedents, they appear to be defined with respect to something nonexistent. It seems that we must explain the uncaused appearance of phenomena whose causal powers derive from something nonexistent! It should be no surprise that this most familiar and commonplace feature of our existence poses a conundrum for science.

The question of how nonexistent states can play a role in the physical goings-on of the world is hardly new. As Descartes pointed out four centuries ago, physical phenomena are extended in space and time and thus can directly affect other physical phenomena. But each of these various ententional phenomena is determined with respect to something that is without local extension and in many cases can be entirely nonexistent. Shouldn’t this render these absential phenomena unreal and physically irrelevant? If the referential content of ideas has no extension in the physical world, how can it make a physical difference? For Descartes, this problem sundered the mental from the physical world, mind from body, and forced him to seek an account that would bridge the gap. Since he first articulated this problem for philosophy, it has remained a major impediment to precisely articulating a natural science account of ententional phenomena of all kinds.

As a result, scientific theories typically assume that concepts like information, representation, and function are merely shorthand proxies for otherwise well understood, but unfortunately long, clumsy, and arduous mechanistic accounts; that is, accounts involving only the extended physical properties of things. As we will soon discover when we dig a bit deeper, efforts to provide these accounts can quickly become circular or require the introduction of simpler and more primitive ententional relationships, but fail to reduce out the critical absential quality. Attempts to explain away these phenomena just become progressively more cryptic, as ever more subtly camouflaged ententional phenomena get introduced to remedy our inability to provide a thoroughly physical account. So, although naturalistic explanations can’t countenance absential properties, they can’t quite do without them either, unless we altogether abandon the effort to include the special sciences (e.g., psychology, sociology, economics) within the natural sciences. This incompatibility is particularly troublesome for the sciences that stand in between physics and psychology: biology and the neurosciences.

For some philosophers of mind, the difficulty of avoiding this dilemma leads them to argue that an ententional principle is an unanalyzably primitive attribute of all physical phenomena: a basic universal property of things like mass or electric charge. This evades the challenge of finding a reductionistic account for consciousness, but in its place it introduces a no less troubling problem. Making mind as ubiquitous as space and time is no more of an answer to this dilemma than was Aristotle’s concept of final causality. If everything is ententional in some respect, then we are nevertheless required to specify why the absential properties of life and mind are so distinctive from the properties exhibited in the non-living world. We still need to draw a line and explain how it is crossed. Is experience a feature of the interactions of elementary particles? Is there a special form of absential property that only appears with the origins of life, or only with the origins of cognition, or perhaps only with the emergence of language and human minds? Wherever we place the threshold distinguishing ententional phenomena from the rest of natural processes, we need an account of what is involved in crossing that threshold. We don’t escape this requirement by assuming that ententional properties are just universal givens. We merely shift the locus of the problem.

This is evident when we consider theories that are willing to ascribe absential properties even to fundamental physical processes. In this vein, a number of theorists have argued that absential properties must be numbered among the fundamental building blocks of the universe: often identified with the concept of information. In these theories, all physical processes involve a change in information. We will return to reanalyze the concept of information in subsequent chapters, and will discover that it is more complicated than is commonly recognized, but even without being explicit about exactly what information is, we can see that accepting this assumption does not help to resolve the dilemma. First of all, modern theories that for example argue that information is a critical feature of every quantum-level event are employing a special technical definition of information which explicitly excludes the ententional quality that defines our usual notion. Information in this technical sense is a measure of difference and order, irrespective of any referential function. So, although on the surface this appears to suggest that mind is implicit in the most basic processes of physics, on closer inspection it is a conception of mind devoid of any hint of meaning, experience, or even function.

But even if we were to accept the proposition that all physical processes are also information processes in a fuller sense, it would not eliminate the need to explain the difference between the causality that distinguishes flames and waterfalls from organisms and ideas. Nor does it resolve the mystery of how mental experience and end-directed behavior arose from the inorganic chemistry of the early Earth. It doesn’t even explain why DNA molecules, alone among the wide range of complex polymers, have come to convey the information of heredity from generation to generation. All these should be sentient if this were true. What needs explaining is not how brains are like the weather, but how and why they are so different, despite the fact that both are highly complex physical processes. Only brains are organized with respect to the vast absential world of possible future events and abstract properties. Weather is organized only with respect to the immediate physical conditions. And although neural processes are also chemical processes, there are critical organizational differences distinguishing the chemistry occurring in brains from the chemistry occurring anywhere in the inorganic world. It is this difference that makes subjective experience possible. So, even if all physical processes involve some tiny hint of protomentality, we would still need an account that explains why two equally complex physical processes can differ so radically in this respect. Even if this were true, complex ententional phenomena like conscious experiences still wouldn’t be explainable as a quantitative effect of some basic property of matter.

The response usually given to this criticism is that these systems differ in their organization. Indeed, I think that this is the appropriate kind of answer. But it blunts the point of the initial assumption. If the reason that human brains are a unique, intense, and persistent locus of absential properties (compared to rivers) is because they are differently organized, then organization is effectively doing all the work of explaining this fact, and the postulated Ur-mentality at the base of things—whatever else it explains—contributes nothing in addition. We still must ask, what difference in the organization of these phenomena constitutes the absential properties of the one that are not manifest in the other?

It’s one thing to argue that we should avoid invoking teleology in our scientific explanations, but quite another to argue that the scientific worldview excludes the possibility of true teleology. And there is something particularly paradoxical to the claim that we have misrepresented our own merely mechanistic minds by describing them in mentalistic terms. Indeed, if this is an error, what sort of entity are we that we could make this error? I think that there is something disingenuous to the claim that teleological explanations are merely heuristics serving the purpose of standing in for those special mechanistic phenomena that are simply too complex in their organization for us to describe easily. Alternatively, to accept teleological explanations at face value, or to assume that they are primitive irreducible elements of the physical world, is tantamount to ceasing scientific inquiry prematurely and ceding explanation to magic and miracles. Both extremes deny us the possibility of an explanation. Left with these alternatives, we will neither expose nature’s sleight-of-hand nor explain how the trick is done. Either way we find ourselves lacking an approach that offers a satisfactory solution to this very personal riddle.





WHEN LESS IS MORE



The secret to performing magic is to get the audience to pay attention to features of the performance that distract them from the important happenings. Continuing this metaphor we can ask, have we missed something that is right before our eyes? Have our own cognitive biases misdirected us with regard to where we train our scientific instruments? Though the full story involves many subtle and challenging conceptual twists and turns, we can at least begin with a hint concerning where we should be turning our attention, even if stating it so baldly may initially seem to make little sense. The core insight that guides this book can be grasped by taking the Taoist metaphor quoted at the beginning of this chapter seriously. We simply need to pay attention to the holes. As rhetorically ironic as this sounds, the thesis of this book is that the answer to the age-old riddle of teleology is not provided in terms of “nothing but . . .” or “something more . . .” but rather “something less . . .” This is the essence of what I am calling absentialism.

The roots of the problem derive from an ancient debate about the reality (i.e., physical causal efficacy) of general types (the more general analogues of Platonic forms). As part of our heritage from Enlightenment science, we tend to assume that something is only real and efficacious if it involves specific material objects and energies. But while ententional phenomena are often particular in their embodiment, their causal consequences irreducibly depend on some general type of outcome or class of object. For example, the function of flight can be quite variably achieved by different means, the same idea can be expressed in different words and media, and the same end can oftentimes be achieved by very different means. Being a type of thing, however, is presumed to have no additional causal relevance over and above the specific details of its physical constitution in a specific place and time. Unrealized ends cannot be specific in every detail, because they do not yet exist, and represented things are as likely to be imaginary as real and are typically only represented with respect to a tiny fraction of their full detail. So for the content of a thought, the function of a device, or the value of a service performed, any physical influence they might have appears to depend upon unreal causes.

The fundamental shift in perspective that will lead to a way to make sense of these seemingly incompatible domains of reality can be expressed in a simple inversion of a common aphorism. Almost every text written about the way that complex systems like organisms come to exhibit end-directed organization has echoed the refrain that there must be something more that is involved than merely the basic physics and chemistry. In contrast, and not simply to be enigmatic, I will try to explain instead how the whole is less than the sum of its parts. To this we might add: and less than the interrelationships its parts can potentially realize.

My counterintuitive hypothesis is that whenever we recognize that a system exhibits ententional properties, it is not because of something added to the physical processes involved, but rather quite literally because it depends on the physical fact of something specifically missing from that object or process. Commonsense English, for example, uses the metaphor of physical containment, as in the content of a thought, or transportation, as in a sign vehicle, to speak of the presumed basis for ententional phenomena. Yet contrary to what such metaphors presuppose, the content of a thought or sign, the goal of an action, or the design purpose of something with function is not physically present. While it may seem empirically reasonable to ignore the content and simply look to the physical features of the sign vehicle or the associated neurological event to discover the link to the physical consequences of an idea, this hardly accords with our experience, which adamantly ascribes causality to what is represented rather than merely what does the representing.

In the chapters that follow, we will see that this simple inversion of perspective to pay attention to what is missing resolves a series of dilemmas assumed to have fatal consequences for theories of ententional phenomena in all their many forms. A counterintuitive figure/background reversal, focusing on what is absent rather than present, offers a means to repair some of the serious inadequacies in our conceptions of matter, order, life, work, information, representation, and even consciousness and conceptions of value.

Showing how these apparently contradictory views can be reconciled requires that we rethink some very basic tacit assumptions about the nature of physical processes and relationships. It requires reframing the way we think about the physical world in thoroughly dynamical, that is to say, process, terms, and recasting our notions of causality in terms of something like the geometry of this dynamics, instead of thinking in terms of material objects in motion affected by contact and fields of force.

The current paradigm in the natural sciences conceives of causal properties on the analogy of some ultimate stuff, or as the closed and finite set of possible interactions between all the ultimate objects or particles of the universe. As we will see, this neat division of reality into objects and their interaction relationships, though intuitively reasonable from the perspective of human actions, is quite problematic. Curiously, however, modern physics has all but abandoned this billiard ball notion of causality in favor of a view of quantum processes, associated with something like waves of probability rather than discretely localizable stuff. Failure to overcome the view of the world as stuff rather than process has led us to think of ententional phenomena as involving something added to normal physical processes. From this assumption it is only a small step to a dualistic conception of the contents of thoughts or the goals of functions as somehow non-physical stuff, leaving us with unexplainable physical consequences.

What we will discover is that ententional processes have a distinctive and characteristic dynamical circularity, and that their causal power is not located in any ultimate stuff but in this dynamical organization itself. Our ultimate scientific challenge is to precisely characterize this geometry of dynamical forms which leads from thermodynamic processes to living and mental processes, and to explain their dependency relationships with respect to one another. It is a quest to naturalize teleology and its kin, and thereby demonstrate that we are the legitimate heirs of the physical universe. To do this, we must answer one persistent question. How can something not there be the cause of anything? Making sense of this “efficacy of absence” will be the central challenge of this book, and the key to embracing our ententional nature, rather than pretending to ignore or deny its existence.
