6



CONSTRAINT



. . . while, in the past, biologists have tended to think of organization as something extra, something added to the elementary variables, the modern theory, based on the logic of communication, regards organization as a restriction or constraint.



—W. ROSS ASHBY, 19621





HABITS



What emerges? New laws of physics? New forms of matter? Clearly, even if there is considerable diversity of opinion about what should be considered emergent, most if not all of the candidate examples of emergent transitions involve some radical and all-but-discontinuous reorganization of physical processes, but without a departure from what we might describe as physics-as-usual. Consider the two transitions that will most occupy us in the remainder of this book: the transitions from non-life to life and from insentient mechanism to mind. Each involves an unprecedented alteration in the pattern of the way things change—one that inverts some previous nearly exceptionless pattern of causal influences. Of course, a causal pattern isn’t any specific individual change. It is something like a general tendency that is exhibited by a vast many events. Though it needn’t be some new “law” of physics, or even a violation of existing physical laws, in these cases at least there is a consistent and predictable expression of what would be exceedingly unlikely prior to this transition. As in the case of the second law of thermodynamics, a tendency to change in a distinctive asymmetric way can be nearly ubiquitous, and yet at the same time not be universal. As a first pass at a general definition, then, we can say an emergent transition is a change in conditions that results in a fundamental shift in the global symmetry of some general causal tendency, despite involving the same matter, energy, and physical laws. But what sort of thing is a global causal tendency that is not a law?

The American philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce, writing at the end of the nineteenth century, argued that, at base, change is spontaneous and singular, and thus intrinsically uncorrelated: a metaphysical assumption he termed tychism.2 And yet, he also argued that there is a tendency of things to fall into habits. Habit was Peirce’s general term referring to regularities of behavior arising in both physical and organic contexts. The term could thus apply equally to the tendency for hurricanes to circle counterclockwise in the northern hemisphere and the yearly migration of Monarch butterflies between the Yucatán and New England. Peirce did not offer an explicit account of why otherwise uncorrelated events might ever tend to become correlated with one another, and thus habitual, but he postulated the existence of a universal habit of habit formation, considering it to be fundamental to the nature of things. In an extreme framing of this principle, he even suggested that what we think of as fundamental physical laws might themselves have evolved from less regular, less habitual tendencies to change. He characterized this most fundamental property of nature with the phrase, “habits tend to beget habits.” One way to characterize the point of this chapter is that it is an attempt to give this notion a more precise physical characterization.

This is a somewhat archaic use of the term habit, as compared to our modern colloquial use, which typically characterizes repetitive human or animal behaviors. But even this connotation is relevant, since we often consider something to be a habit even though it only periodically exhibits a precisely repetitive characteristic. Thus a person’s smoking habit or a habit of clearing one’s throat when talking may only periodically, and somewhat irregularly, be expressed. A “habit” in this sense is a behavioral bias or predisposition that may or may not be overtly expressed, but is always a tendency. This is an important caveat, because it will allow us to consider a much more general class of only quasi-regular phenomena that don’t easily correspond to notions of order, pattern, or organization. Peirce, too, had a statistical notion of habit in mind. For example, he metaphorically described the invariant regularities of inorganic matter as processes that are “hidebound with habit” in comparison to organic matter.

Peirce’s concept of habit was the foundation for his somewhat iconoclastic defense of metaphysical realism. Realism is a classic metaphysical viewpoint which argues that ideal forms, regular tendencies, types of things, and general properties of phenomena—not just specific singular events, objects, or effects—are important in determining what happens in the world. Realism is generally traced to the philosophy of Plato, who famously argued that the material world only imperfectly reflects the influence of the ideal universal forms. These forms were at once both perfect and unchanging, while their physical manifestations were inevitably flawed and impermanent. Though Peirce’s version of realism did not postulate the existence of a realm of ideal forms, he nevertheless argued that physical regularities of a general type—habits—can influence the creation of other physical regularities of the same or different type, despite being embodied in diverse substrates. He argued that regularity itself, rather than any specific materially regular feature, is what is causally most relevant.

The problem of the physical influence of general types dates back to the late Middle Ages and the question of whether general terms referring to types of things rather than individual things (sometimes referred to as “tokens” of a type) actually refer to anything “real,” since no two examples of things of the same type are truly identical. The issue was whether types could have any real influence in the world except as a consequence of the specific features of individual exemplars of the type. If being a type of thing only mattered to an observer interested in clustering phenomenal details into classes or collections for cognitive or communicative convenience, then being of that type would effectively be epiphenomenal, and of no physical consequence. But more to the point, can we really assume that the laws of physics and chemistry are any more than idealized descriptions, since they apply across individual instances? And what about properties of things like hardness or opacity?

Ironically, realism claimed that general properties, laws, and physical dispositions to change in such-and-such a way are fundamental facts about reality irrespective of anyone’s having considered them, whereas the view that these generalizations are merely conveniences of thought, abstracted from observation and otherwise epiphenomenal in the world of physical cause and effects, was called nominalism.

Nominalism arose as a critique of realism. In its most extreme form, nominalism claims that general types of physical properties, like being hard, liquid, reflective, living, or general dispositions of behavior, are all ultimately epiphenomenal. Accordingly, they contribute nothing to explain causal properties and merely provide a way of mentally clustering individually diverse physical interactions. They are according to this view mere projections of our descriptive simplifications. However, each utterance of such a term, that is, the name of a type, is itself an instance of a discrete physical phenomenon capable of having a discrete effect on the world, even if its general content corresponds to no real thing. This is the source of the term describing this view, where nom- refers to “name.” In effect, then, only the name of the general type is a real part of the world. Peirce characterized the core issue in terms of “whether laws and general types are figments of the mind or are real.” A general type, in Peirce’s metaphysics, is not merely an aspect of mind, but is “the most important element of being.” It is the ultimate locus of physical causality so discovering these general features should be “the end and aim of knowledge.”3

The concept of emergence assumes that new general types of properties and physical dispositions—new causal habits of nature—can arise de novo. Hence, this classic unresolved debate is fundamental to questions of emergence.

Realism and nominalism were serious issues for Scholastic thinkers struggling to make sense of theological problems, because ideals and norms, such as characterize the true, the good, and the beautiful, were not specific instances but general properties. The debate is nearly as old as Western philosophy. The existence of Plato’s ideal forms and properties and their presumed physical influence was challenged even by Aristotle, who argued that there is a necessary link between matter and its formal properties. While not denying the efficacy of formal influences (implicit in his notions of formal cause), Aristotle nevertheless argued that the forms, regular tendencies, and general properties were always embodied materially and specifically. Even the end-directed tendencies (final causes) of living organisms were literally embodied in their material constitution. His concept of an entelechy was for him inseparable from the material of that body. This compromise resisted serious challenges until the late medieval period.

The beginning of a serious challenge to realism can probably be traced to William of Occam. Occam’s interest in developing principles of precise logic led him to argue that although different material objects exhibit characteristic forms and properties, the similarities among classes of these are solely the result of how the human mind (“soul” in his terminology) applies the same mental sign (i.e., distinct concept) to aspects of these objects, due to limitations in mental capacity. Like the words themselves, he argues, these mental signs are distinct and individual, but the general aspects and properties of things to which they refer do not exist.

Basically, Occam considered it mistaken to assume that universal properties exist independent of specific individual instances. Mental signs are themselves singular individual entities, and every instance to which these are applied is a singular and distinct individual case. There is no general feature that can be understood without being singularly embodied. There are only things to which these signs apply. So, while mental signs apply plurally, there is no unambiguous general property in the world that corresponds to a given mental sign. Most scholars point out that Occam did not deny the possibility that there might be actual universal properties in the world, but nevertheless felt that the existence of words referring to them did not guarantee their existence. The words may only reflect the finiteness and limitations of the mind. Although this does not directly follow from his famous exhortation to eliminate redundant hypotheses in favor of the simplest or fewest—memorialized in what came to be called Occam’s razor—it is consistent with it.

The reductionistic assumptions characteristic of modern science exemplify an analogous denial of any simple notion of general realism by treating all properties of things as reducible to properties of their parts and their interactions. Curiously, however, modern science remains agnostic about this assumption in other respects. For example, the acceptance of general physical laws as determining the way things can change and physically affect each other can be taken to imply that at least these general laws have some kind of real efficacy, independent of the physical events that exhibit them.

It would take us too far afield to review and critique the many subtleties of argument that have been proposed on both sides of this long and complex philosophical debate, and yet it should be obvious that some form of realism must hold for an emergentist view of the physical world to be accurate. For an emergence theory to offer anything more than a descriptive reframing of events, it must explain how general regularities and dispositions of causal interaction can be responsible for which particular causal interactions occur and which don’t, over and above any particular physical antecedent state of things. This is an issue that ultimately cannot be ignored. As we’ve seen above, the force of the critique of the efficacy of general types derives from a particular set of Platonic assumptions about what constitutes something general, and so this apparent dilemma may dissolve if these assumptions can be dispensed with.





REDUNDANCY



To reexamine these assumptions of realism, let’s consider what is implied by Peirce’s concept of habit. Habits and patterns are an expression of redundancy. Redundancy is a defining attribute of dynamic organization, such as the spiraling of galaxies, the symmetries defining geometric forms such as polygons, and the global regularities of physical processes such as are expressed by the second law of thermodynamics. Each is a form of organization in which some process or object is characterized by the repetition of similar attributes. But this characterization of organization in terms of repetition or similarity brings up another long-standing philosophical debate. Consider an individual whirlpool in a stream. What distinguishes its individuality and continuity?

Obviously, the individuality of the whirlpool is not determined by its material constitution. The whirlpool is composed of different water molecules, moment to moment, and none remain more than a few seconds. What about the pattern of the movement of water molecules through the whirlpool? An individual whirlpool is easily distinguished from the surrounding flowing water because of its roughly circular symmetry and the general movement of water around a center of rotation. And it is the persistence of both this circular symmetry and the locus of the rotational center that we implicitly refer to when describing this flow pattern as the same whirlpool moment to moment. But of course, on closer inspection, an actual whirlpool is slightly irregular, and this irregularity of shape is constantly changing. Moreover, if we were to explore the flow of water through an individual whirlpool (e.g., by injecting a stream of dye just upstream or tracking the movement of individual molecules within the flow), we would probably discover that some of the water even passes more or less directly through the whirlpool and does not follow a circular or spiraling path at all. And if we were able to examine it in even more precise submicroscopic molecular detail, it is likely that we would find that no individual water molecule ever actually follows a precise, circularly symmetric path. Each will be differently deviant in its trajectory from this ideal pattern.

Is there anything that is constant—anything that we can use to define something as the same whirlpool moment to moment, other than a general tendency that we notice only because we ignore these many details? Indeed, it might be argued that defining a whirlpool as something stable and persistent is merely an artifact of having failed to attend to these many differences. There really is nothing quite the same, and nothing exactly regular in the whirlpool, from one moment to the next. So, is the regularity on which we base its individuality merely a simplification due to descriptive abstraction?

This example is of course generalizable. No two instances of a general category of dynamical organization—whether two whirlpools in water, two members of the same species, or even “identical” twins—are ever truly identical. Furthermore, similarities of an even more general sort, such as characterize the commonalities between whirlpools in water and in spiral galaxies, may only have very abstract characteristics in common. In all cases, similarity is assessed by ignoring differences at some level of detail, and in some cases by ignoring almost all differences, including vast differences of scale (as in the spiraling of water and of stars). So describing both of these dynamical objects as exemplars of the same general type of phenomenon is an account that only makes sense at a very high level of abstraction. Does this mean that there is nothing in common about the causes of these similar-appearing processes? Is the rough circular symmetry of these two processes only a commonality in the mind of an observer, but otherwise of no causal consequence? Does the effect of the symmetry of global angular momentum in each have any independent causal relevance over and above the molecular collisions and cohesion in the one and the center of gravitational attraction in the other? Or is this apparent commonality also merely a descriptive feature imposed by external analysis and descriptive simplification? In other words, shouldn’t we stop thinking of the spiraling as being “out there” when it is just a case of observational simplification? Isn’t this just a result of what we ignore?

Of course, a description is not a physical attribute of the thing being described. Comparison to some ideal type of geometric object, such as a regular spiral, is merely something that goes on in the mind. If these similarities are only descriptive glosses, then indeed invoking them as causes of anything is physically irrelevant because it is redundant. What matters are all the many individual physical interactions, not the vague similarities we notice. Analogously, then, if emergence is defined in terms of descriptive abstractions alone—regularities and patterns that are merely projections of our ideal types, mental categories, and formal models—it would seem as though we are identifying emergence in merely descriptive (and thus epistemological) terms, but not causal (ontological) terms. Emergence in this sense would only exist in the mind of the beholder.

When we attribute some general property or regularity to some natural phenomenon, like spiral motion, we have certainly made an assessment based on our experience. The regularities that we focus on to distinguish different types of things are indeed constructions of our perceptual and cognitive apparatus. Our abilities are only sensitive to very few of its physical characteristics, and usually we are only attentive to a fraction of the details that we can discern. Does this necessarily imply that these similarities and regularities are somehow mere figments of mind? Can they be mental abstractions and physically relevant causal features of the world at the same time? One reason to think that mental abstraction does not imply physical epiphenomenalism is that mental processes are themselves also dependent on physical processes. To even perceive regularity or pattern this act of observation must itself be grounded in a habit of mind, so to speak. In other words, to attribute physical regularity to some perceived or measured phenomenon presumes a prior mental regularity or habit with respect to which the physical regularity is assessed. So, unless we grant mentality some other undefined and mysterious means of observational abstraction, claiming that regularities, similarities, and general types are only in the mind but not in the world simply passes the buck, so to speak. Some general tendency must already exist in order to attribute a general tendency to something else.





MORE SIMILAR = LESS DIFFERENT



Even if we grant that general tendencies of mind must already exist in order to posit the existence of general tendencies outside the mind, we still haven’t made any progress toward escaping this conceptual cul-de-sac. This is because comparison and abstraction are not physical processes. To make physical sense of ententional phenomena, we must shift our focus from what is similar or regularly present to focus on those attributes that are not expressed and those states that are not realized. This may at first seem both unnecessary and a mere semantic trick. In fact, despite the considerable clumsiness of this way of thinking about dynamical organization, it will turn out to allow us to dispense with the problem of comparison and similarity, and will help us articulate a physical analogue to the concept of mental abstraction.

The general logic is as follows: If not all possible states are realized, variety in the ways things can differ is reduced. Difference is the opposite of similarity. So, for a finite constellation of events or objects, any reduction of difference is an increase in similarity. Similarity understood in this negative sense—as simply fewer total differences—can be defined irrespective of any form or model and without even specifying which differences are reduced. A comparison of specifically delineated differences is not necessary, only the fact of some reduction. It is in this respect merely a quantitative rather than a qualitative determination of similarity, and consequently it lacks the formal and aesthetic aspects of our everyday conception of similarity.

To illustrate, consider this list of negative attributes of two distinct objects: neither fits through the hole in a doughnut; neither floats on water; neither dissolves in water; neither moves itself spontaneously; neither lets light pass through it; neither melts ice when placed in contact with it; neither can be penetrated by a toothpick; and neither makes an impression when placed on a wet clay surface. Now, ask yourself, could a child throw both? Most likely. They don’t have to exhibit these causal incapacities for the same reasons, but because of what they don’t do, there are also things that both can likely do or can have done to them.

Does assessing each of these differences involve observation? Are these just ways of assessing similarity? In the trivial example above, notice that each negative attribute could be the result of a distinct individual physical interaction. Each consequence would thus be something that fails to occur in that physical interaction. This means that a machine could be devised in which each of these causal interactions was applied to randomly selected objects. The objects that fail all tests could then get sorted into a container. The highly probable result is that any of these objects could be thrown by a child. No observer is necessary to create this collection of objects of “throwable” type. And having the general property of throwability would only be one of an innumerable number of properties these objects would share in common. All would be determined by what didn’t happen in this selection process.

As this example demonstrates, being of a similar general type need not be a property imposed by extrinsic observation, description, or comparison to some ideal model or exemplar. It can simply be the result of what doesn’t result from individual physical interactions. And yet what doesn’t occur can be highly predictive of what can occur. An observational abstraction isn’t necessary to discern that all these objects possess this same property of throwability, because this commonality does not require that these objects have been assessed by any positive attributes. Only what didn’t occur. The collection of throwable objects is just everything that is left over. They need have nothing else in common than that they were not eliminated. Their physical differences didn’t make a difference in these interactions.

Had we started this thought experiment with a large collection of randomly chosen objects and subjected them to this series of interactions, the resulting objects would have been a small subset of the original collection, and the differences in properties among the objects in that subset would have been only a fraction of the differences exhibited by the initial collection. To say this in other terms: the variety of properties exhibited was significantly constrained in the resultant set of objects, compared to this initial variety. This concept of constraint can provide a negative approach to realism,4 though it might also be paradoxically described as a nominalism of absences, since it is determined by discrete interaction effects that don’t occur.

Along these lines, the introductory quote from W. Ross Ashby—a pioneering figure in the history of cybernetics—offers a negative way to define concepts like order, organization, and habit. The concept of constraint is, in effect, a complementary concept to order, habit, and organization, because it determines a similarity class by exclusion. Paying attention to the critical role played by constraints in the determination of causal processes offers us a figure/background reversal that will turn out to be critical to addressing some of the more problematic issues standing in the way of developing a scientific theory of emergence. In this way, we avoid assuming that abstract properties have physical potency, and yet do not altogether abandon the notion that certain general properties can produce other general properties as causal consequences. This is because the concept of constraint does not treat organization as though it is something added to a process or to an ensemble of elements. It is not something over and above these constituents and their relationships to one another. And yet it neither demotes organization to mere descriptive status nor does it confuse organization with the specifics of the components and their particular singular relationships to one another. Constraints are what is not there but could have been, irrespective of whether this is registered by any act of observation.

In statistical mechanics, constraint is a technical term used to describe some reduction of degrees of freedom of change or a restriction on the variation of properties that is less than what is possible. In colloquial terms, constraint tends to be understood as an external limitation, reflecting some extrinsically imposed factor that reduces possibilities or options. So, for example, railcars are constrained in their movement by the location of tracks, farmers are constrained in what can be grown by the local climate, and citizens are constrained in their behaviors by laws. In each case, there are reduced degrees of freedom that could potentially be realized in the absence of these constraints.

In a 1968 paper entitled “Life’s Irreducible Structure,” the philosopher-scientist Michael Polanyi argued that the crucial difference between life and chemistry is the constraint that DNA imposes on the range of chemical reactions that tend to occur in an organism. Genetic information introduces these constraints by virtue of the ways that it generates molecules which either act as catalysts to facilitate certain chemical reactions or serve as structural elements which minimize certain other molecular interactions. Polanyi argues that this formal influence is what separates life from non-living chemistry, and distinguishes both man-made machines and living organisms from other physical systems. For this reason, he argues that this formal aspect cannot be reduced to chemistry. This is an important insight, but it falls short of resolving the issue of life’s ententional features in one important respect: it treats the source of constraint as extrinsic. Indeed, this is critical to his argument for irreducibility; but as the analogy to machines indicates, treating this influence as external to the chemistry passes the explanatory buck to DNA as an instruction manual and ultimately to natural selection as its author. If this constraint is the defining feature of life, but must be created and imposed extrinsically, then life’s ententional features are inherited from an extrinsic homunculus, which in this case doesn’t exist.

Constraints can also be intrinsic. The etymology of the term—which derives from the Latin, and roughly means “that which binds together”—does not imply anything about the cause of that restriction or reduction of variety; for example, whether it is a property that is intrinsic or extrinsic to whatever it is that is thereby constrained. The term constraint thus denotes the property of being restricted or being less variable than possible, all other things being equal, and irrespective of why it is restricted. This latter usage has become common in statistical and engineering applications, such as when describing the range of values for some measured feature of a collection of objects, a set of observations, or a sample of informant answers. Used in an intrinsic sense, we might say that the errors in a set of measurements fall within certain constraints or tolerances. Or we might comment that the limitations of a given measuring technique impose constraints on the accuracy of the results. In this sense, constraint is a property of a collection or ensemble of some sort, but a negative property. It is a way of referring to what is not exhibited, but could have been, at least under some circumstances. As we will see, distinguishing between an imposed restriction and a restriction that develops because of intrinsic properties and processes is critically important to the project of making sense of ententional properties, and avoiding any implicit realist assumptions that compromise the concepts of order and organization.

As critics of emergence have long argued, we tend to categorize different forms of pattern and organization in terms of possessing abstract formal properties. Since such properties are not intrinsic to the collection of interacting components involved but are instead based on comparisons to some abstract ideal forms, they are indeed causally epiphenomenal. We can now counter that general formal properties do exist independent of external observed comparison, but they are not positive attributes in this traditional sense. They are, so to speak, correlates of the physical simplification that follows from constraint. Thinking in terms of constraint in this way changes how we must understand the concepts of order, organization, and pattern—and thus emergence.

Organization is a general property that can be more or less specifically described, but it is typically defined with respect to some model. When we describe the organization of stars in a galaxy, it is with respect to being globular or spiral in shape, and when we characterize a human organization, such as the United Nations, it is with respect to a charter and purpose. Similarly, describing something as exhibiting order typically appeals to some abstract ideal, such as arranging a deck of playing cards according to numerical values and suits. Even just saying that events follow a pattern implies that we observe regularly repeated similar attributes. Modern science and philosophy have long rejected the Platonic notion that the objects and events in the world are merely flawed instantiations of ideal forms, in favor of the recognition that form and organization refer to idealizations abstracted from observation. Thus it is accurate to assume that scientific descriptions framed in terms of order and form are to be understood heuristically. This is even often applied to that ubiquitous asymmetry of change, the second law of thermodynamics, which characterizes the predictable pattern of change toward increasing disorder. When we describe an organized room as “ordered” and a messy room as “disordered,” we are in effect privileging one arrangement of objects over another, and characterizing the tendency to spontaneously fall into messiness as a loss of something. Statistical mechanics simply recognizes that there are a great many more arrangements considered messy, according to human preferences, than there are orderly ones, and that random change tends to inevitably produce the more probable results. So describing a high-entropy state as disordered implicitly suggests that we cannot recognize any pattern.

By abandoning descriptive notions of form, however, and thinking of regularity and organization in terms of possible features being excluded—real possibilities not actualized—two things are gained. First, individuation: possible features not expressed and degrees of freedom not exhibited are specific individual facts. They are precisely measurable in space and time, in just the same way as are specific trajectories and velocities of moving atoms. Second, extension: constraints can have definite extension across both space and time, and across whole ensembles of elements and interactions. But although the specific absences that constitute a constraint do not suffer the epiphenomenality of descriptive notions of organization, they are nevertheless explicitly not anything that is present. This requires that we show how what is absent is responsible for the causal power of organization and the asymmetric dynamics of a physical or living process. Beginning to explain how this might be possible is the major task of this chapter. But a full explanation (undertaken in subsequent chapters) will require that we eventually reconceptualize even something as basic as physical work, not to mention concepts like self-organization and evolution—concepts that are typically defined in terms of explicit model relationships.

There is one other advantage of this approach. Employing the concept of constraint instead of the concept of organization (as Ashby proposes in the epigraph) not only avoids observer-dependent criteria for distinguishing patterns, it also undermines value-laden notions of what is orderly and not. As in the case of the messiness of a room, order is commonly defined relative to the expectations and aesthetics of an observer. In contrast, constraint can be objectively and unambiguously assessed. That said, order and constraint are intrinsically related concepts. Irrespective of specific observer preferences, something will tend to be assessed as being more orderly if it reflects more constraint. We tend to describe things as more ordered if they are more predictable, more symmetric, more correlated, and thus more redundant in some features. To the extent that constraint is reduced variety, there will be more redundancy in attributes. This is the case with respect to any change: when some process is more constrained in some finite variety of values of its parameters or in the number of dimensions in which it can vary, its configurations, states, and paths of change will more often be “near” previous ones in the space of possibilities, even if there is never exact repetition.

The advantage of this negative way of assessing order is that it does not imply any model-based conception of order, regularity, or predictability. It is only something less than varying without limit. But this assessment encompasses a wide range of phenomena between those that we normally describe as orderly and those that we describe as entirely chaotic. As we saw earlier, chaos theory provides an important context for demonstrating the usefulness of this figure/background shift in the analysis of order and organization. Calling a pattern “chaotic” in this theoretical context does not necessarily mean that there is a complete absence of predictability, but rather that there is very little redundancy with which to simplify the description.

This way of characterizing disorder is exemplified by an information-theoretic means of measuring complexity termed Kolmogorov complexity, after the theoretician who first promoted its use, the Russian mathematician Andrey Nikolaevich Kolmogorov (1903–1987). It can most easily be understood in terms of a method for analyzing or generating a string of numbers. If the same string can be generated by an algorithm that is shorter than that string, it is said to be compressible to that extent. Such an algorithm effectively captures a form of redundancy that is not superficially exemplified in its product. So, for example, even an apparently non-repeating sequence, such as the decimal digits of π, can be generated by an algorithm that progressively calculates an approximation of the relationship between the diameter and circumference of a circle. This is how a short and simple computer algorithm can generate the numbers of this infinite sequence to any length desired. Similarly, a superficially simple non-linear equation5 may produce an irregular non-repeating trajectory when plotted on a graph. This is the case with the Lorenz attractor graph, discussed in the last chapter, and yet iterating successive values of the equation shows that the non-repetition of values nevertheless is considerably less variable than fully chaotic. But if a sequence of values (such as in a string of numbers or coordinates of a trajectory) cannot be generated by an algorithm that is shorter in length than the sequence itself, that sequence is described as maximally complex. Since there is no algorithm able to extract some regularity from such a sequence, it is in this sense also maximally disordered.

Calling this theoretical field “chaos theory” was in this sense somewhat ironic, since the focus is not on maximal disorder, but on what order could be discovered amidst the apparent disorder. As a result, the field is more commonly and more appropriately described as “complexity theory.” But note that the term complexity is given contrasting connotations here. The word “complex” etymologically derives from roots that together mean something like woven, braided, or plaited together, and not merely involving many details. So what may appear chaotic may be merely the result of a simple operation that tends to entwine with itself to the point that any regularity is obscured. Alternatively, being impossible to simplify means that there are only details to contend with, nothing simpler. Irrespective of whether all real phenomena are maximally algorithmically complex—as extreme nominalism would suggest—or are algorithmically compressible without residue—as extreme realism would suggest—a constraint view of orderliness still applies. It is tantamount to allowing sloppy compression. For example, if all we require of the prediction algorithm is that it specifies a numerical sequence in which each number is within ±2 of the predicted value for some specified finite sequence length, then many more sequences will be approximately describable by the same algorithm. In some sense, this is analogous to the way we psychologically identify similarity, and thus characterize order.

Thinking of Peirce’s notion of habit as the expression of constraint is implicit in his doctrine of tychism, which he considers to be the most primitive feature of his ontology. This is critical to his conception of “law,” which, although it can be framed in Platonic terms, was for Peirce merely a habit of nature that “evolved” in some sense. From a Peircean point of view, a natural law should be described as an invariant tendency that requires us to explain why it is not tychistic. By translating Peirce’s notion of habit into the terms of constraint, his unique reframing of metaphysical realism can be made more precise. Recasting the Realism/Nominalism debate in terms of dynamics and constraints eliminates the need to refer to both abstract generals, like organization, and simple particular objects or events lacking in organization. Both are simplifications due to our representation of things, not things in themselves. What exist are processes of change, constraints exhibited by those processes, and the statistical smoothing and the attractors (dynamical regularities that form due to self-organizing processes) that embody the options left by these constraints.





CONCRETE ABSTRACTION



To return to the conundrum that began this exploration: Are constraints in the head or also in the world? Do they exist irrespective of observation, and if so, how do they make a difference in the world? To answer this, we need to know if causal interactions in the physical world also, in effect, tend to “ignore” certain details during physical interactions. If so, this negative characterization of regularity and habit would be both a more accurate representation of the underlying physics and ultimately the relevant causal factor. Recall that the nominalist critique of Platonic realism argues that the regularities and similarities that we discern in the world are merely descriptive simplifications—abstractions away from the details—and thus causally irrelevant. However, if certain physical interactions also tend to drop out selective details, then there can also be a purely physical analogue to the abstraction process. Constraint is precisely this: the elimination of certain features that could have been present.

But can the concept of constraint account for something like concrete abstraction: a physical analogue to mental abstraction? One important clue is that what something doesn’t exhibit, it can’t impose on something else via interaction. In other words, where there is no difference, it can cause no difference. To the extent that differences in one system can produce differences in the other, those variations not expressed in one will not be transferred to the other during their interaction. Although this may initially sound like there is no causality involved, it’s not that simple. As we will see later (in chapter 11), this is because the presence of constraint—the absence of certain potential states—is a critical factor in the capacity to perform work. Thus, it is only because of a restriction or constraint imposed on the release of energy (e.g., the one-directional expansion of an exploding gas in a cylinder) that a change of state can be imposed by one system on another. It is precisely by virtue of what is not enabled, but could otherwise have occurred, that a change can be forced.

So the nature of the constraint (and therefore the absent options) indirectly determines which differences can and cannot make a difference in any interaction. This has two complementary consequences. Whenever existing variations are suppressed or otherwise prevented from making a difference in any interaction, they cannot be a source of causal influence; but whenever new constraints are generated, a specific capacity to do work is also generated.

In massively componential processes involving linearly interacting components, such as in a simple near-equilibrium thermodynamic system, low-probability fluctuations will tend to be statistically “washed out” with increase in scale. Microscopic fluctuations will have minimal macroscopic influence. But this means that macroscopic interactions between such systems will largely be insensitive to these microscopic fluctuations, and the system’s capacity to do work that alters another system will be determined by this constraint. Alternatively, in massively componential dynamical systems where there is the possibility of extensive non-linear interactions, such as in systems that are persistently maintained far from equilibrium, constraints can sometimes amplify to become macroscopically expressed. In these cases, the emergence of these new constraints at the macroscopic level can be a source for new forms of work. We will focus on the first of these dynamical conditions—near-equilibrium thermodynamic processes—in the remainder of this and the next chapter, and will take up the second of these conditions—persistent far-from-equilibrium processes—in chapter 8.

Ascent in scale plays a critical role, because it tends to reduce the contributions of micro fluctuations at the macroscopic level by virtue of the way that the distribution of fluctuations tends to even out. Time-scale differences also play a role. Component micro interactions tend to occur at rates that are many orders of magnitude more rapid than interactions between systems. Perturbed micro components will return to stable near-equilibrium conditions at rates that are orders of magnitude more rapid than the time involved in macro interactions. As a result, the highest-probability micro conditions will tend to correlate with the most redundant micro-interaction effects. To say this in different terms: the detailed micro fluctuations of the processes underlying higher-order system properties mostly cancel each other out over modest distances, so that only the most generalized attractor features end up having causal influence at the higher level. It is as though the details of what is happening at the lower level are filtered out, only allowing the most redundant features to be manifest at the higher level.

This is a property related to Humphreys’ concept of fusion—a loss of properties with ascent of scale—but is much more general, and less exotic. A decrease in the diversity of variations able to exert influence on systemic variation with ascent in scale means that some lower-level details are lost. There is nothing surprising about this. Consider again one of the first attempts to describe emergence: Mill’s account of chemical properties distinguishing chemical compounds and those of their component elements (his example of sodium, chlorine, and their ionically bonded compound, table salt). In the compound, the properties of the individual atoms are masked as each is in some sense modified by the bond with the other (in simplified terms, due to transfer of an electron). As a result, elemental properties are effectively suppressed (reduced to extremely low probability), whereas the properties associated with their stable (i.e., highly constrained) interactions are vastly more likely to be expressed in any interactions with other molecules.

This feature of physical hierarchies was highlighted in a 1972 Science review article by the Nobel Prize–winning physicist Philip Anderson, appropriately titled “More Is Different,” and has been reiterated in various forms by a number of theorists since. The basic argument is that material properties (especially those exhibited in solid-state forms of matter) inevitably exhibit discretely segregated levels of organization, with vast differences in mean levels of energy of interaction and intervals between interaction effects, correlated with vast differences in spatial dimensions. This is particularly striking for solid states of matter, because the atomic-scale interactions have become highly localized in their dynamics compared to atomic-scale interactions in other phases (e.g., liquid or gas). The bonds between atoms are, however, in constant flux, often flip-flopping between alternative orientations in proportion to their relative probabilities, but at rates vastly more rapid than these effects could possibly propagate to neighboring regions of the solid. This allows statistical scale effects to produce a kind of mutual insulation of the dynamical interaction possibilities between adjacent levels. For example, the specific heat of a solid is a reflection of the level of constant jostling of component molecules; but these constant micro fluctuations cycle through millions of states in the time that a solid-to-solid or solid-to-liquid interaction takes place, and so are almost entirely causally irrelevant. So, although we tend to think of solids as made up of unchanging components and liquids as uniform continua, this is an illusion of statistical smoothing.

Following in this tradition, a focus on what gets lost with ascent in scale in physical systems has become a key notion in the Nobel Prize–winning physicist Robert Laughlin’s conception of emergence. We can employ a rough caricature of Laughlin’s concept of protected states to describe this sort of insulation between levels of physical dynamics.6 Thus the reason that the atoms or molecules in a solid, liquid, or gas can largely be treated as simple billiard ball–like objects is that each tends to be in a dynamically regular stable ground state (i.e., constrained to an attractor) with a very high probability. And it will immediately return to this state shortly after being perturbed, at a rate that is effectively instantaneous compared to the interaction rates at the intermolecular scale. The electrons comprising these molecules and atoms are continually in quantum dynamical fluctuation within the confines of their orbitals. But the time frame of these fluctuations is orders of magnitude more rapid than the time frame of the exchange of energy in molecular collisions. Thus, in the time it takes colliding molecules to rebound, there has been time for a vast number of intraatomic fluctuations to occur. With respect to the intermolecular scale events, the intraatomic system has had plenty of time for vast epochs of stochastic fluctuation of electron interactions to reach quasi-stable quantum values. It is as though the micro fluctuations weren’t occurring.

This is somewhat analogous to the macroscopic thermodynamic properties of systems near equilibrium. Even at equilibrium, there are incessant deviations of local micro-level fluctuations away from mean values of molecular momentum, and so forth. These are reflected in the so-called Brownian motion of dust particles in stable air or pollen grains suspended in liquid. But although the individual particle movements contribute to the transfer of heat between two bodies, these micro deviations have little effect on the exchange of properties at the macro level. Those lower-level fluctuations that are deviant from equilibrium are, in effect, micro differences that don’t make a macro difference. Voting in a simple two-party election provides a crude analogy to this. Within a voting district there may be quite complicated patterns of voting preferences, but after an election it is a winner-take-all situation; and even if the differential is only a fraction of a percent, the result can be that political decisions are applied as though the results were highly skewed. Political negotiation between representatives from different districts can thus appear as though their populations differed radically in their opinions, even though in both the votes were extremely close. In this way, subtleties of difference can be entirely obscured.

Across levels of scale, then, higher-level dynamical properties can exhibit global properties that effectively hide any lower-level fluctuations by statistical smoothing. Thus detailed particle-by-particle dynamics will seldom propagate effects up level, while “average” values of dynamical interactions will be robustly represented. This limits bottom-up notions of causality. It is as though specific individual influences get erased in the causal bookkeeping. It also means that reductionistic analysis cannot recover these differences after the fact. Often, the best that a reductionistic analysis can do—and all that is necessary, in most cases—is to accurately characterize the constraints (e.g., the average values) converged on by the lower level of dynamics.

Translating this into Peircean terms, if not all states of a process are realized, or if there is a bias in the probability of their occurrence, there is a habit. There will necessarily be some degree of redundancy simply by virtue of the fact that changes of state will typically traverse only a fraction of the space of possibilities and extremes will be rare. A habit can thus be described as the expression of a constraint. It is an attractor disposition—whether dynamically or statistically generated—that can arise irrespective of any outside mental assessment.

A constraint is relational—not relative to a representation or mentally conceived type, but rather with respect to other dynamical options. Both the determination of the specific features of a physical disposition (or habit) and the causal efficacy of that general property are realized in relation to some other dispositions of some other phenomenon: habits determined with respect to other habits; constraints realized with respect to other constraints. Peirce’s vision of mental categorization and representation was a special case of this general principle. The general properties by which we assess the similarities and differences among the diverse phenomena of our experience (e.g., pattern and order) are a consequence of the interaction between habits of our brains and habits of the world. So, putting this in constraint terminology, we can dispense with the notion that habit, pattern, and organization presuppose mental representation and comparison. The causal efficacy of these redundant features of the world is presupposed in the very notion of a mental category, not the other way around.

But then Peirce must also be right about the physical efficacy of habits. Habits must be real causes in their own right. They are, according to him, the ultimate locus of causality. In the terms used here, habits begetting habits can be translated as constraint propagation. In these terms, states that are not realized or that occur only improbably in a given process, can play the critical causal role in the formation of further constraints at higher levels. Although what is never or seldom realized does not play the kind of causal role we usually think of in Newtonian terms, once we shed the assumption of the priority of substance, we can begin to see how to reframe this in terms of the interaction of constraints. As we will see in the next chapter, the spontaneous nature of constraint reduction is the principal source of resistant properties of things. And it is ultimately the production and propagation of constraints that make physical work possible. For example, containing the expanding gases in an internal combustion engine, and thus constraining expansion to occur in only one direction, allows this release of energy to be harnessed to do work on other systems, such as propelling the vehicle which contains the engine up a steep incline. So to argue that constraint is critical to causal explanation does not in any way advocate some mystical notion of causality. We can restate this causal logic as follows: reduction of options for change in one process can lead to even greater reduction of options in another process that in some way depends on the first.

By recasting our understanding of habit and order in negative terms, we can begin to disentangle ourselves from the “something more” fallacy of traditional emergence theories, and give new meaning to Peirce’s “law of habits.” Emergent properties are not something added, but rather a reflection of something restricted and hidden via ascent in scale due to constraints propagated from lower-level dynamical processes. In terms of the Realist/Nominalist debate, generals determined by constraint relationships are not types or classes, but neither are they individuals. Both concepts positively frame what I have been arguing must be understood negatively.





NOTHING IS IRREDUCIBLE



Thinking in terms of constraint can help resolve one of the core questions raised by emergence theories: Are there emergent phenomena that cannot be fully understood by reductionistic analysis? The concept of emergence is part of a general critique of the completeness of reductionism. This critique has been particularly motivated by the assumption that if reductionism provides a complete and sufficient account of physical causality, it would appear necessary to treat ententional processes and relationships as epiphenomenal heuristics. There can be little doubt that reductionistic science is fundamentally sound. It has provided unparalleled predictive power for explaining physical-chemical processes across unimaginable ranges of scale and diversity of phenomena. It would be pointless to even imagine that it is somehow misguided. Moreover, the most devastating critiques of emergence have identified its fatal flaw in attempting to both retain a mereological and a supervenient conception of levels of physical causation, and yet at the same time claiming that some causal relationships invert this logic. Shifting to an emergence conception framed in terms of constraint on dynamics, however, undermines both of these criteria and thus escapes this critique; and yet it does not lead to anti-reductionism in the traditional sense. All the material and energetic features of a given system are subject to mereological analysis without residue. There is nothing left out. Or rather, “what is not exemplified” is exactly what is left out in reductionistic analyses. What is not there or not exemplified is not anything that is reducible, because there are no components to what is absent.

If the constraints rather than the properties of parts are what determine the causal power of a given phenomenon, then a reductive analysis that decomposes a complexly constrained phenomenon into its observable parts and relationships can end up dropping out what may be the critical feature. If the constraints that are most prominent are intrinsic and emergent, all trace of these constraints will be “erased” by simple decomposition, unless the history of this higher-order constraint generation is already assumed. In other words, while it may often be possible to model constraint propagation and thus make general predictions about the emergence of higher-order dynamical constraints, it may not be possible to work backwards. Since, in complex dynamical systems, attractors may be converged on from many quite diverse initial conditions, this convergence history is an irreducible factor. While a general attractor form may itself be predictable by simulation, being at some specific locus within the phase space of that attractor dynamic is not highly informative about initial conditions, nor is its specific emergent history of particular relevance to the causal properties that result. This of course is just another way to conceive of the multiple-realizability relationship, but in the negative.

We can summarize the source of irreducibility in such cases in a simple slogan: Absence has no components, and so it can’t be reduced or eliminated. Or, to be a bit less cryptic: Constraint is the fact of possible states not being realized, and what is not realized is not subject to componential analysis. Reductive analysis can thus irretrievably throw away information about the basis of higher-order causal power. In cases where constraints at a higher level are linear extrapolations of those at a lower level, there is no loss due to componential analysis. Thus, in these cases (e.g., simple-equilibrium thermodynamics), there is no loss due to reductive analysis. But in systems where there is non-linear constraint, propagation with increase in scale (as in processes discussed in the next two chapters), and thus double protection of higher-order attractor features from lower-order fluctuations, both physical and analytical decomposition eliminate the source of this constraint, and hence the source of its causal power. Such cases should therefore be paradigm examples of emergent transitions.
