10



AUTOGENESIS



. . . an organized natural product is one in which every part is reciprocally both end and means.



—IMMANUEL KANT’S PRINCIPLE OF “INTRINSIC FINALITY,” 1790

(ITALICS IN THE ORIGINAL)1





THE THRESHOLD OF FUNCTION



Even though there is a close interrelationship between them, investigating the mystery of the origins of life and the origins of teleodynamics requires quite different approaches. All current approaches to the origins of life on Earth begin from tacit and unanalyzed assumptions about the nature of the basic unit of life: an organism, with its physical boundedness, functional organization, and heritable information. These assumptions are typically glossed as though they can be defined by intuitively obvious physical-chemical properties such as containment in a lipid membrane, metabolic processes powered by ATP, and information intrinsically embodied in nucleic acids. These glosses allow us to assume what we should be explaining: why these same structures and relationships do not have intrinsic functional or informational character except when embodied in living dynamics. It is their interdependent contribution to constituting the dynamical system that is an organism, and not any of their intrinsic properties that matters.

So, even before the question of how these components collectively constitute these properties, we need to understand the nature and origins of this form of collective organization itself. But whereas life demands an account of its molecular peculiarities, teleodynamics merely demands an account of its dynamical requirements. Instead of considering which compositional features matter, we can be somewhat agnostic about composition and begin to pay attention to this dynamical organization, and inquire into how it constitutes this transition. In other words, to simply assume that ententional issues can be operationally ignored or assumed as given, so long as we have the right molecules, is to fall prey to the homunculus fallacy. These properties are not intrinsic to the material constituents of life. Ententional properties like function and information will only be explained when we can demonstrate how they emerge from non-ententional precursors, and so the teleodynamic processes that characterize life must be explained (though not reduced) by reference only to thermodynamic and morphodynamic precursors.

To explain the emergence of teleodynamics, we must also resist the temptation to attribute it to similarly mysterious and counterintuitive phenomena, such as the strange and spooky properties exhibited by quantum-level processes, which similarly appear to violate our familiar notions of cause and effect. Although these might in some cases superficially resemble ententional relationships, such as those involving measurement, action at a distance, or entanglement, these must be excluded for three reasons. First, if we were to make use of any such extraordinary physical phenomena, we would at best only have substituted one mystery for another. And even so, this would not explain the difference between non-living and living systems in this respect. As we earlier noted with respect to panpsychic or pansemiotic assumptions, it would still require us to come up with an explanation for why living and mental processes are associated with such radically different causal dynamics than their non-living counterparts. Of course, were someone to show that it was in principle impossible to explain these higher-order properties and processes using the tools of known macroscopic physics and chemistry, that might force us to consider the possible role of these very different quantum properties. But this brings us to the second reason to avoid such an appeal. If we can explain this shift in causal organization without invoking strange causality, it will render the justification for appealing to strange quantum properties irrelevant.

Lastly, although quantum phenomena often seem strange, they are not strange in the sense of exhibiting the kind of causality that organisms and minds do. No one describes any of the strange quantum properties, such as the Casimir effect or quantum entanglement, as consequence-organized behavior. More important, the scale at which we do unambiguously recognize ententional properties is vastly larger than the scale of quantum events, and in between there are only thermodynamic and chemical processes. The basic physical and chemical forces that dominate at our level of scale, from cells to ecosystems, appear to be the only place we find the emergence of the ententional properties—exhibited in living and mental and communicative processes. In short, ententional phenomena are not strange in the way that quantum processes can be strange, and they are manifest only at a much higher level of scale.

With these caveats in mind, we can make a first pass at identifying the minimal requirements for the emergence of teleodynamic processes; then we will describe a molecular thought experiment that embodies these requirements. Providing a realistic, empirically testable, constructive account of the emergence of teleodynamics in a simple molecular system is only the barest starting point of a theory of the origins of life. It is a long way from explaining even the features exhibited by the simplest known bacteria. It is only a minimal proof of principle. Many more details (some to be explored in subsequent chapters) will need to be filled in to even approach a methodology sufficient to begin to account for the evolution of the higher and more complex forms of teleodynamic processes, such as are found in living organisms and mental processes.

So, in this first step out of mere physics, we will only offer evidence that a spontaneous transition from non-ententional to ententional forms of causal organization is possible. The goal is solely to develop a minimally complicated, thoroughly described, physically plausible model system exemplifying this transition. With such a model system at our disposal, we can begin to ground our accounts of at least simple ententional processes and relationships in more precise physical, chemical, and thermodynamic details. The basic principles developed in this simple system can then later be applied at higher levels of analysis, where we encounter ententional phenomena of considerably more subtle and complex form. To the extent that we develop such a plausible and non-mysterious bridge analysis, it will open the door to a methodology for examining how these higher-level ententional phenomena might have emerged and evolved from the lower-level ententional phenomena exhibited by the first precursors to life.

To conceive of the first lifelike process, we must remind ourselves that it was not reproduced, it had no parent, and therefore it did not evolve. It emerged. It was fitted to its environment by chance alone, not by virtue of having been tested by natural selection, and yet the very fact of its emergence indicates a consistency with its environment. Indeed, it would be circular to argue that the process of natural selection itself evolved by natural selection, or that the reproductive process arose by being reproduced. On the other hand, it is quite likely that the first ancestral counterpart to today’s genetically mediated process of reproduction was quite simple and inefficient, and that the first ancestral counterpart to natural selection was considerably less effective at achieving and maintaining favorable variations within a lineage.

With ultimate simplicity, we can expect only a very crude first exemplar of that which modern organisms accomplish with comparatively flawless elegance. In comparison to this first form, even the genetically undisciplined and promiscuous nature of bacterial and viral evolution would appear like the essence of clockwork precision. This is because the process we now see enshrined in these mechanisms of reproduction is the outcome of billions of years of fine-tuning by natural selection, and the entire web of contemporary Earth life descends from the one winner in a billion-year competition among possible alternatives. This contemporary near uniformity is almost certainly the outcome of an older period of disorderly inefficient experiments in adaptation and inheritance. The tricks that life currently employs to generate its many lineages and diverse adaptations likely evolved to be ever more evolvable over these many billions of years. How these critical and powerful semiotic and functional capacities arose will be the subject of a later chapter. But the processes that honed the evolutionary process itself cannot have been any form of evolution as we now know it, and as we will shortly see, the very logic of evolution must have also emerged in this transition.

The challenge of this book is to explore the possibility that teleodynamic processes can emerge spontaneously by natural laws from physical and molecular processes devoid of these properties. But we should be wary of looking to contemporary biology for clues. The debates that raged in past centuries over the plausibility of spontaneous generation suggest a useful caution. Surrounded by teeming life, so imperceptibly minuscule as to require extreme care to avoid contamination, spontaneous generation theorists were fooled again and again into thinking they had demonstrated the emergence of life from non-life. Like the early Enlightenment biologists immersed in a world teeming with invisible life, we are immersed in a world of ubiquitous ententional assumptions that we barely recognize as potential contaminants. Trying to explain this emergent transition, from the perspective of hindsight, and within our currently well-honed biological context, risks analogous contamination. Setting our thought experiments in a teleologically barren context is thus the equivalent of testing spontaneous generation in a sterile environment. This is not as easy as it sounds.





AUTOCATALYSIS



One of the most significant insights concerning the nature of life has come from studies of thermodynamic processes that are far from equilibrium, which I have collectively referred to as morphodynamic processes. In organisms, far-from-equilibrium conditions are maintained by the complex cycles of molecular reactions constituting cell metabolism. Normally, in a closed system, each instance of a given chemical reaction will slightly decrease the future probability of similar reactions, due to the depletion of precursors, the increase of products, the dissipation of the energy of the reaction, and how all these changes affect the relative probability of the reaction running forwards versus backwards. So, in general, a closed molecular system will tend toward some steady state with fewer and fewer asymmetric reactions occurring over time, as the overall distribution of reactions runs in directions that offset each other—the second law of thermodynamics at work in chemistry. In contrast, in chemical systems maintained far from equilibrium, where the conditions for asymmetric reaction probabilities are not reduced, non-equilibrium dynamics can produce some striking features. The most relevant are morphodynamic chemical processes.

One of the most relevant classes of non-equilibrium chemical process is autocatalysis. It is relevant both because there are many analogues to this in living cell metabolism and because it can arise spontaneously as a transient, locally deviant, non-equilibrium process. A catalyst is a molecule that, because of its allosteric geometry and energetic characteristics, increases the probability of some other chemical reaction taking place without itself being altered in the process. It thus introduces a thermodynamic bias into a chemical reaction as a consequence of its shape with respect to other molecules. Autocatalysis is a special case of catalytic chemical reactions in which a small set of catalysts each augment the production of another member of the set, so that ultimately all members of the set are produced. This has the effect of producing a runaway increase in the molecules of the autocatalytic set at the expense of other molecular forms, until all substrates are exhausted. Autocatalysis is thus briefly a self-amplifying chemical process that proceeds at ever-higher rates, producing more of the same catalysts with every iteration of the reaction.

Because of the widespread presence of chemical cycles in living systems, autocatalysis offers a suggestive starting point for discussing the origins of life, and it has been promoted by many as the chemical analogue of self-replication. Unfortunately, it requires the remarkably coincidental coalescence of reciprocally interlocking molecules, making it a fairly rare and spontaneously improbable chemical condition. But is its spontaneous occurrence sufficiently probable to serve as a one-in-a-billion-years springboard for life?

The theoretical biologist Stuart Kauffman has, however, argued that this intuition about the improbability of spontaneous autocatalysis is mistaken.2 Using principles from graph theory to model the networks of reaction of catalytic interactions, he argues that autocatalysis will be almost inevitable under not too extreme chemical conditions. Because catalysis is a more-or-less effect, based on only the relative precision of “fitting” between different molecules, a polymeric “soup” with sufficient diversity of molecular forms will tend to include many molecules able to at least weakly catalyze reactions among others in the soup. This plurality of potential catalytic possibilities can be envisioned as comprising a sort of network of relationships between molecular types (forming the nodes in the network), and their synthesis and breakdown relationships (constituting branching relationships in the network). As molecular diversity increases (or with high average catalytic potential between any two molecules), the effective connectivity of the corresponding network will increase as well. With increasing network connectivity, re-entrant circles of reactions become more common. So, as molecular shape diversity increases, the probability of spontaneous circles of catalysis will increase as well. We may then expect that multiple interlinked autocatalytic loops will be present in sufficiently “rich” polymeric soups that are not so concentrated as to form glue, and that this provides for a sort of initial exploration for the most robust and sustainable variants. But although autocatalysis is a function of molecular diversity, it turns around and generates molecular homogeneity, since molecules that tend to produce other molecules from a linked autocatalytic set rapidly replace other forms that do not.

At the point where the molecular diversity in the solution reaches the stage where circles of reactions of this sort start to become common there is a discontinuity in the dynamics of chemical reactions. With the introduction of autocatalysis, there is a break in the symmetry of the distribution of probabilities of the different types of chemical reactions. Members of this autocatalytic constellation will rapidly increase in proportion to all other molecular types, and as they do so, this very process will speed up too. It is analogous to the rapid multiplication and growth of new organisms introduced into a pristine environment. But also like over-reproduction, it will be a transient dynamic that quickly undermines its base.

A higher-order special case of autocatalysis was investigated by the physical chemist Manfred Eigen in which two or more autocatalytic cycles are interdependently linked to create cycles of cycles.3 These were dubbed hypercycles. In general, a hypercycle is a second-order autocatalytic cycle formed when a product of one autocatalytic cycle is an essential element in another autocatalytic cycle, which produces a product that is essential to the first; thus forming an autocatalytic cycle of autocatalytic cycles. There are probably many ways this kind of higher-order autocatalysis can be constituted, but the obvious cases involve autocatalytic cycles contributing substrates to one another, or autocatalytic cycles partially overlapping by sharing catalysts in common. Both occur in living cells, where higher-order networks of linked catalytic reactions produce highly complex and interwoven metabolic and synthetic cycles of cell biochemistry that are mutually reinforcing.

Of course, all catalysis—and especially autocatalysis, because of its runaway dynamic—is constrained by the availability of substrate molecules and energy. This is even more critical for hypercycles, because they include multiple autocatalytic cycles, each of which is subject to such extrinsic dependencies, as well as on the continual productivity of all the other linked cycles. When the raw materials are used up, or energy for molecular reactions is no longer available, reactions stop and the set of interdependent catalysts dissipates. Autocatalysis is thus self-promoting, but not self-regulating or self-preserving. And hypercycles will be even more sensitive to substrate conditions and dissipation, because they are subject to weakest-link effects. Substrate limitations on any one subcycle of a hypercycle will limit all, and the slowest catalytic process will exert a rate-limiting influence on all other linked subcycles.

In addition to these problems, there is an intrinsic limitation on the initiation and persistence of any autocatalytic process. Such factors as the relative concentrations of the interdependent catalysts with respect to any other molecules not involved in autocatalysis, their tendency to react with other molecules in ways that are non-conducive to autocatalysis, and the ubiquitous effects of spontaneous diffusion, all will limit autocatalysis. These are not unlikely limiting conditions, even in laboratory settings, and they pose significant impediments to spontaneous autocatalysis, especially if spontaneously achieving autocatalysis among a random assortment of molecules depends on significant molecular diversity. Moreover, these difficulties increase geometrically with the complexity of the autocatalytic network of reactions, making even modest catalytic complexity highly unlikely. Nevertheless, complex reciprocally catalytic networks of molecular interactions characterize the metabolic processes of living cells, so it is far from impossible.





CONTAINMENT



The second ubiquitous feature of life is containment. All units of life on Earth, whether single cells, multicelled organisms, or viruses, are self-contained. All cells have lipid cell membranes that prevent indiscriminant diffusion of molecules between inside and outside. Even viruses, which lack other sorts of molecular systems, are encased by protein shells or more complex coverings that both protect their nucleic acid payload and aid in getting the virus insinuated into a host cell. Self-containment is a ubiquitous feature of life because life depends on the structural contiguity of its molecular systems remaining intact and unchanging over long periods of time. Containment is the most obvious expression of the importance of constraint for the successful persistence of life.

Containment creates physical individuality. A boundary that distinguishes inside and outside is almost synonymous with the self/other distinction, both functionally and metaphorically. The characteristic unit of contained individuality in life is a cell, and although there is individuation at higher levels in multicellular organisms (e.g., organism bodies), and at lower levels with respect to cellular subdivisions (e.g., organelles), it is the cellular level of life that exemplifies the most robust and omnipresent unit of functional individuality throughout the living world. The cell membrane is a boundary distinguishing a continuously maintained self-similar milieu inside from a varying and unconstrained outside world. Though neither impermeable nor inert, its role is vested in what cannot happen as a result. The constraint on molecular movements and interactions that containment provides is a necessary constitutive factor in all living systems.

Finiteness of the contained materials also makes the state space of their interrelationships manageable. Insulation from extrinsic factors that are too many, too distributed, and too unpredictable likewise is an essential contributor to the maintenance of self-similarity across time. And simply maintaining material proximity of potentially diffusible components that must interact regularly and predictably to maintain living processes is an important constraint on the increase in entropy. For all these reasons, and because of its ubiquity in the living world, many scenarios concerned with the origins of life treat containment as primary.

But containment is a double-edged sword. Maintaining components in continual proximity and excluding new interactions increases similarity and predictability from moment to moment, but this happens for the same reason that a closed thermodynamic system quickly and inevitably runs down to a maximum entropy state. Complete closure rapidly leads to stasis. Self-similarity rather than stasis is the basis for life’s individual units, however. Partial or periodic containment, on the other hand, is able to contribute to both. Without spatial constraint on the correlated loci of interdependent molecules and processes, neither life nor evolution seems possible.

Interestingly, most abstract conceptions of Darwinian processes ignore this factor. In simulations, for example, self-replication is almost universally represented without any consideration of containment, but this may again reflect more on the abstraction process than on the constraint requirement. A-Life, evolutionary programming, genetic algorithms, and social evolution theories may not need to deal with the problem of containment because the symbolic medium provides it implicitly in another form. Conventionalization of sign vehicles allows the selective identification of each representative unit by distinctive characteristics. Von Neumann’s replicating mechanism can also ignore containment because the physical mechanism is identical to its container. It is presumed to be a permanently interconnected device that by design coheres as a physical machine without diffusion tendencies. Still, the measurement of what must be replicated at least requires the assessment of essential boundaries to determine what must be “contained” in the representation, as “self” (to be copied) versus other. But where we cannot take for granted the self-identification or intrinsic structural coherence of all essential functional elements, some coherence-maintaining, proximity-maintaining mechanism must be present. For any molecular system whose elements are necessarily available for chemical interaction, there must be some additional barrier to diffusion and interaction consisting of relatively non-reactive molecules that limits this potential. Whether in the form of extrinsically maintained proximity and coherence or intrinsically integrated binding mechanisms, these functional roles must somehow be fulfilled to sustain a functional unity.

Containment of organisms and viruses is generally achieved by a molecular process called self-assembly. This is a ubiquitous feature of all organisms and viruses, and is responsible for more than mere containment. Virtually all multimolecular complexes that constitute the molecular machines doing the molecular work of the cell spontaneously assemble. So their structure is not explicitly constructed in the way engineered devices or fabricated artifacts must be. As noted in previous chapters, organisms and machines differ critically in this respect. A machine must have its parts chosen, gathered together, aligned, interconnected, and set in motion by extrinsic processes. The process of assembly of molecular building blocks into large multicomponent structures in living cells, in contrast, seldom requires the existence of an external means of accomplishing this feat. These structures tend to spontaneously self-assemble, and in effect “fall” together. This makes life radically unlike the self-reproducing device that von Neumann envisioned. Recall that his self-reproducing device had to include both instruction-copying mechanisms and a machine-fabrication mechanism, with the latter being capable of fabricating a copy of itself from the instructions. The engineering paradigm takes as given the need to impose structure from without; but this is not an intrinsic requirement, and it is almost entirely irrelevant for life. In many ways, this is more than just an advantage that life has over engineering. It is a necessity. This critical constitutive feature helps to explain a good deal about what makes life unusual, and makes evolution possible.

Spontaneous self-assembly is neither as esoteric nor as special as the term implies. One does not need to imagine parts that are animated and seeking each other out or the existence of special intrinsic assemblers. Self-assembly of macromolecular structures is essentially a special case of crystallization. Like crystal lattice formation, the growth of multi-unit macromolecular structures is an expression of the intrinsic geometry of component molecules, the collective symmetries these offer in aggregate, and the lower energy state of the crystallized forms. It is in this sense an expression of a thermodynamic orthograde tendency to reduce total entropy. It’s just that molecular shape and charge features, and their relationships to other molecules—including especially to the surrounding water—are responsible for the spontaneity of their growth. The accretion of molecules into crystallinelike arrangements is thus a function of thermodynamics, but the influence of their structural and charge characteristics may contribute to the amplification of constraints, thereby generating regularities in the ways they form into aggregates; a morphodynamic consequence.

The combination of these features ultimately determines which among the possible macroscopic arrangements is most likely. Macromolecular structures within cells result from the same symmetry logic that produces the geometrically regular growth of crystal lattices. Individual molecules can align with each other with respect to complementary structural symmetries in their shapes and charges so long as there are nearly complementary symmetries in these molecular features. Crystal-like growth of cellular structures, composed of hundreds or thousands of identical or iterated complementary elements, is common and plays a central role in cellular-scale architecture.

Paradigm examples of self-assembling macromolecular structures in cells include a wide array of laminar and tubular structures within cells. These include various forms of cell membrane that are found both inside and outside cells, and tubular structures which provide the internal three-dimensional support for cells, the thoroughfares along which molecules and vesicles are moved, the capacity for differential mobility and reshaping of cell geometry as in pseudopodium extension, and the structural elements that form the core of flagella and cilia.

Consider one of the most ubiquitous of these forms: microtubules. Most microtubule formation is based on the spontaneous, spirally symmetric packing of component molecules (tubulin) to produce crystal prism shapes that can be indefinitely extended. Spontaneous precipitation onto the end of a tubule occurs when there is a sufficient concentration of component tubulin molecules and an appropriate ionic concentration for their (orthograde) precipitation. Extension and collapse of these tubular structures at specific loci within a cell can thus be regulated by a variation in substrate availability, solute factors, and other relevant conditions. This coupling of spontaneous formation and conditionality is the key to their functional usefulness. Note that the structure of these tubes is not a function of genetically specified protein structure alone, because the genetic code only incompletely constrains its range of possible three-dimensional structure (which also depends on contextual conditions), and even this structure may be consistent with many different semi-regular packing configurations. Ultimately, both the specification of the structure and the symmetries that drive the self-assembly process are context-derived—emergent from laws of symmetry and thermodynamics. Much of the structural information and construction work thus comes “for free,” so to speak, in the sense that it is neither maintained by natural selection nor strongly determined by genetic information. The genetic information might rather be thought of as maintaining all these variables within constraints that make such spontaneous tendencies highly likely.

Another paradigmatic class of self-assembling structures are the sheets and surface structures that constitute the walls and partitions of cellular architecture, including lipid bilayers, protein and carbohydrate matrices, and the protein capsid containers of viruses. These also tend to form spontaneously via the symmetric aggregation of large numbers of identical components. Probably the simplest constitute the lipid bilayer sheets that form the external and internal membranes of all cells. These form as a result of the polar hydrophilic-hydrophobic structure of lipid molecules. In an aqueous solution, the hydrophobic “tails” of lipid molecules tend to aggregate together, exposing only the hydrophilic ends to the surrounding aqueous solution. Aggregate lipid balls and bubbles are energetically more “relaxed” than individual lipid molecules in water because aggregation allows neighboring molecules’ hydrophobic tails to hide each other from water molecules. Again, this is an expression of the interaction between thermodynamic and structural features of the molecules, which bias how they interact as a consequence of congregating due to settling into a lower energy state. But it is also possible for lipids to form sheets, either at the interface of water and a non-aqueous medium, or with a complementary sheet of lipid molecules, resulting in the formation of a bilayer sheet in which the hydrophobic tails of each lipid molecule faces inward from both sides. This is again a more relaxed geometry than forming irregular aggregates in water; and so free lipid molecules will spontaneously “prefer” to aggregate into sheets when conditions are favorable to this, and these sheets will tend to form into closed spheres if they grow large enough. Because of the highly specific symmetry of the molecular orientation in a sheet, and the structural instability of growing sheets only a couple of molecules thick, lipid bilayers form more effectively and predictably when there is some surface to provide an appropriate planar template to bias this orientation and growth.

Other molecular types are also capable of forming into surfaces with slightly different properties. For example, the formation of viral shells is more analogous to crystal growth than lipid sheet formation, and yet is also quite distinctive from both in that it often involves the formation of regular polyhedral structures. The capsid units that form these shells are typically composed of proteins. Individual protein molecules or protein multimers fold into shapes that tend to bind edge-to-edge with one another due to structural symmetries. Proteins that assume regular polygonal or polyhedral shapes will tend to aggregate spontaneously into tessellated sheets, also due to the lower energy of the close packing enabled by this geometric symmetry. Polyhedral prisms created by tessellated surfaces of protein molecules will be the most stable of these forms. This is because all molecules in a three-dimensional polyhedron are bound to one another and surrounded on many sides in a low-energy symmetrical configuration that is thereby structurally resistant to external forces. The regular or semi-regular polyhedrons thus formed typically enclose a DNA- or RNA-filled core.



FIGURE 10.1: Two self-organizing molecular processes common to all life: autocatalysis and self-assembly. Left: in autocatalysis, one molecule catalyzes a reaction that produces a second catalyst as a byproduct, which in turn catalyzes the first. In this depiction, energy is released by the breaking of bonds of split substrate molecules and causes the process to be self-sustaining so long as substrate molecules are present. Right: three different self-assembling molecular process are depicted: self-assembly of the protein and RNA components of a virus; self-assembly of a lipid bilayer due to hydrophobic and hydrophilic affinities of these molecules’ polar structure (hydrophilic “tails” are forced together); and self-assembly of tubulin molecules into a microtubule, one of the major components forming the flagella that propel bacteria and other mobile cells. Details of each of these processes are described in the text.





After incorporation into a host cell, viral genes are released from this core and repeatedly transcribed by host cell mechanisms to generate high concentrations of capsule proteins. At the same time, viral genes are being replicated in high numbers as well. The spontaneous formation of hundreds of viral shells in the context of hundreds of gene replicas thus has a high probability of encapsulating the genes that produce them, even without additional packaging mechanisms (though packaging is typically aided by other molecules synthesized from viral genes). The spontaneous self-assembly of viral capsule molecules into regular containers allows viruses to be elegantly simple and minimalistic, and consequently highly efficient replicating systems.





SYNERGY



Probably the most prescient and abstract characterization of the dynamic logic of organism design was provided by the philosopher Immanuel Kant. In a 1790 critique of the problem of teleology in nature, he argued that “An organized being is then not a mere machine, for that has merely motive power, but it possesses in itself formative power of a self-propagating kind which it communicates to its materials though they have it not of themselves” (italics in the original).4

Implicit in Kant’s abstract characterization of “formative power” is the fact that organisms are organized so as to resist dissolution by replacing and repairing their degraded components and structural characteristics, and eventually replacing themselves altogether by reproduction. More important, as described in the epigraph to this chapter, he emphasizes that this is a reciprocal process. No component process is prior to any other. Kant’s characterization is prescient in another way that is relevant to our enterprise. In this essay, he is puzzling over the question of whether there is something like intrinsic teleology in organisms. Kant concludes that this formative reciprocity constitutes what he calls “intrinsic finality.” Although modern accounts can be far more concrete and explicit than Kant’s, by virtue of their incorporation of over two hundred years of biological science, this knowledge can also be a source of distraction. In these intervening centuries we have of course discovered a vast hidden world of molecules, chemical processes, and cellular interactions, as well as forms of life and half-life (e.g., viruses) that no one in Kant’s time could have dreamed of. But it is not clear that contemporary definitions of life are actually any more fundamental and general. Only able to reason about life in the abstract, Kant focused on life’s distinctive dynamical organization, and so it is the synergy of living processes that stands out for him. Today, it is possible to add flesh to Kant’s skeletal definition and in so doing demonstrate its prescience.

As we have seen, both autocatalysis and self-assembly are morphodynamic molecular processes that are capable of occurring spontaneously in a wide variety of conditions. What they share in common is a dependency on molecular shape-effects and a propensity for promoting rapid self-amplifying regularities. They are both non-linear processes, like compound interest, and are as a result intrinsically constraint-amplifying. What is amplified in each case is a bias based on symmetry and shape complementarities between molecules, which together produce increasing self-similarity (of molecular types or geometric regularity, respectively) over time. These processes are achieved and sustained by a constant availability of raw materials and energy in the case of catalysis, or local concentrations of identical molecules in the case of self-assembly.

These requirements, however, make autocatalytic cycles (and especially hypercycles) intrinsically susceptible to diffusion and side reactions, and make self-assembly a self-limiting process due to its intrinsically concentration-depleting dynamic.

Thus, despite the spontaneous potential for formation of autocatalytic sets, autocatalysis is a fleeting and transient occurrence in the non-living world because it is self-undermining and self-limiting. Precisely because of its deviation-amplifying dynamic, autocatalysis will rapidly deplete the local environment of required substrates. As the process continues and catalysis slows with declining concentration, the diffusion tendencies of the second law of thermodynamics will no longer be compensated by replacement of newly synthesized molecules, and the component catalysts will tend to diffuse away from available substrates and away from other members of the set with which they could interact, if substrate molecules were available.

Similarly, self-assembly is dependent on a local concentration of free-floating component molecules that will tend to give up their kinetic energy to settle into a lower-energy state within a growing sheet, matrix, or tube. Changes in concentrations of components, changes in the rest of the chemical milieu, or the presence or absence of different external structural biases can halt growth, or even trigger the shift to alternative binding symmetry, disrupting large-scale structure growth. And growth itself depletes this local substrate concentration. Without the continual availability of unbound substrates, growth ceases. Growth must also outpace forces that tend to disrupt the coherence of the enlarging—and therefore more fragile—structure. As sheets expand, or molecules link up into larger surfaces or longer tubes, they may decrease in their overall energetic stability to the point where further growth becomes limited by structural fragility. For this reason, sheets tend to form into stable closed configurations (e.g., polyhedrons or tubes) that are both more robust to external perturbation and nearly as energetically relaxed. As closed structures, however, they may cease to be able to grow further.

But these intrinsic limitations of autocatalysis and self-assembly processes are also a source of potential synergy. The conditions produced by each of these processes and their limitations together comprise a complementary and reciprocally supportive effect.

Self-assembly provides the conditions that are most critical for sustaining autocatalysis: the proximity of reciprocally interdependent catalysts. The major consequence of self-assembling containment is local blockage of molecular diffusion. Spatial proximity of all constituents of an autocatalytic set is an essential necessary precondition for sustained autocatalysis, but in solution, spontaneous diffusion will undermine this requirement. Containment can, however, maintain proximity irrespective of whether catalysis is or is not taking place, and even in the absence of substrates.

And reciprocally, autocatalysis complements self-assembly. The major consequence of autocatalysis is the continual production of identical molecules in the same region, whereas self-assembly is most robust if the concentration of component molecules is maintained despite depletion due to this process. So self-assembly is most reliable in conditions where there is continual replenishment of component structural molecules up to the point of structural closure, at which point additional components are irrelevant. Thus rapid production of identical molecules at an accelerating pace by autocatalysis is specifically consistent with the conditions promoting self-assembly.

The reciprocal complementarity of these self-organizing processes means that spontaneous linkage of autocatalysis with self-assembly containment is a possibility. This would occur in the case that an autocatalytic cycle produced a byproduct molecule that itself was conducive to spontaneous self-assembly into a shape that could act as a container. In this configuration, each self-organizing process would reciprocally contribute to conditions promoting the stability, persistence, or recurrence of the other. Raw materials would be produced that are conducive to container formation. An enclosing structure would tend to form in the vicinity of the most active autocatalysis and thus would spontaneously tend to enclose autocatalytic set molecules within it. And closure of the container would prevent dissipation of the components of the autocatalytic set. Although this containment would also eventually halt autocatalysis by limiting availability of substrates, it would do so only after closure.





AUTOGENS



This complementarity of morphodynamic processes can produce far more than merely the creation of a kind of molecular bottle. Their reciprocity produces a special kind of emergent stability, unavailable to either process in isolation. Although continuous catalysis is prevented in the enclosed state, it remains potentiated by the proximity of all the essential molecules of the autocatalytic set. In the event that such a container were to be broken up or breached by agitation or chemical disruption in the vicinity of new substrate molecules, autocatalysis would recommence and new container-forming molecules would be synthesized. This could lead to either re-formation of the original or formation of two or more new containers of catalysts in its place. In other words, the reciprocal complementarity of these two self-organizing processes creates the potential for self-repair, self-reconstitution, and even self-replication in a minimal form.



FIGURE 10.2: Two forms of simple autogenic molecular processes. Left: the formation of polyhedral capsules which contain catalysts that reciprocally catalyze the synthesis of each other and also produce molecules that tend to spontaneously self-assemble into these polyhedral capsules thereby likely to enclose the catalysts that generate them. Right: the formation of a tubular form of encapsulation, which although not fully closed will tend to restrict movement of contained catalysts along its length, but will tend to be increasingly susceptible to partial breakage and release of reciprocal catalysts as it grows longer. Both will tend to re-form or replicate additional copies if disrupted in the presence of appropriate catalytic substrates.





Importantly, this is not a property that is likely restricted to just a tiny set of molecular forms. It is in effect a generic class of chemical dynamics that may be achievable in numerous quite diverse ways. In general terms, the key requirements are only a reciprocal coupling of a spontaneous component production process and a spontaneous proximity maintenance process that encompasses all essential components. Though these reciprocal relationships are modestly restrictive, they are not extreme, and their spontaneous occurrence is made more probable because they are likely realizable in quite diverse chemical environments.

Candidate molecular conditions will be discussed in a later chapter, but the co-facilitation between two such morphodynamic processes could likely be realized by a wide variety of molecular substrates, and in the laboratory it could probably even be achieved using non-organic materials. Although the stereochemical and energetic requirements for such a system to form spontaneously are nevertheless quite limiting, similar limitations apply to any set of molecular interactions proposed as precursors for living processes. It is the relative simplicity of this system of dynamical relationships, and the diversity of ways this co-facilitation could be achieved, that makes this type of molecular complex a far more likely candidate for a first spontaneous self-reproducing system. With respect to known processes extracted from life, protein-based autocatalytic sets enclosed by the analogues of viral capsules could likely be synthesized in the laboratory. So this is also a realistically testable hypothesis.

Because of the familiarity of such component classes of molecular processes, and despite the currently hypothetical nature of the process, I think it is justified to assume that the characteristics I have attributed to these simple molecular systems are realistic extrapolations, which justify considering the implications for emergent dynamic effects. Indeed, I offer this as the potentially simplest class of teleodynamic systems. Because of its simplicity and the non-mysterious nature of the properties that such a molecular process would exhibit, if we can demonstrate that its dynamical properties have resulted in a clear, higher-order orthograde dynamic than its component processes with unambiguous ententional properties, even if these are minimal, then we have at our disposal a model system capable of fully demystifying this realm without reducing it to mere thermodynamics or sneaking homuncular properties into the account.



FIGURE 10.3: A cartoon depiction of various stages of polyhedral autogenic structures (as in Figure 10.2) self-assembling. The final image (e) shows the breakup and reassembly due to collision.





Elsewhere, I have called this sort of hypothetical molecular system an autocell.5 Unfortunately, I have found this term to be somewhat limiting and misleading, since the components described are not necessarily cellular, and the term is not mnemonically descriptive of its most distinctive properties. For the remainder of the book, I will adopt the more descriptive term autogen for the whole class of related minimal teleodynamical systems. This term captures what is perhaps its most distinctive defining feature: being a self-generating system. In this respect, it is closely related to Maturana and Varela’s autopoiesis, though referring to a distinct dynamical unit process rather than a process more generally, for which I have reserved the more general term telodynamic. The term autogen is also easily modified to apply to a broader class of related forms by describing any form of self-encapsulating, self-repairing, self-replicating system that is constituted by reciprocal morphodynamic processes as autogenic, and describing the process, appropriately, as autogenesis.

Autogenesis is not, however, meant to be descriptive of just any process of self-generation. It is conceivable that a looser interpretation of this term could refer for example to replication of identical molecules in autocatalytic processes or to the hypothetical self-replication of RNA molecules.6 The term is reserved for simple dynamical systems that accomplish self-generation by virtue of harnessing the co-dependent reciprocity of component morphodynamic processes. Though I am here provisionally assuming that this is only a property exhibited by simple molecular systems, there is no theoretical reason to assume that it is impossible in radically different forms. Experimentation with simple molecular autogenic systems will ultimately be required to determine the parameters for formation, persistence, and replication of molecular autogens, as well as to determine the supportive properties required of substrate molecules and the surrounding molecular environment. But the logical and theoretical plausibility of this form of dynamical organization provides sufficient justification to consider its implications for the emergence of ententional phenomena. So, in advance of definitive laboratory creation of autogenic molecular processes, and irrespective of whether this property can be realized in other kinds of substrates, many reliable extrapolations concerning the properties of such systems can be explored; and in particular, those that exemplify teleodynamic organization.

Autogenic theory is superficially similar to Manfred Eigen’s hypercycle theory to the extent that each of these two self-promoting processes also promotes the other in some way, forming the analogue of a causal circle of causal circles, so to speak. But the resemblance to hypercycle architecture stops there, and in other respects autogenic theory is fundamentally different. As we saw above, an autocatalytic cycle is susceptible to self-undermining and self-limiting dynamics, and a hypercycle is doubly (or multiply) susceptible to this (depending on the number of substrate-dependent subcycles that constitute it). Each is a potential weak link that if broken will be catastrophic for the larger synergy. In contrast, the reciprocal linkage of the two complementary morphodynamic processes constituting an autogen has the opposite effect. Though each component process is self-undermining in isolation and co-dependent, together they are reciprocally self-limiting, so that their self-undermining features are reciprocally counteracted. Thus, whereas substrate exhaustion leads to both autocatalytic and hypercycle cessation and component dispersion, an autogenic system will establish its capacity to re-form before exhausting substrates, so long as closure is completed before this point is reached. Each process contributes essential boundary conditions for the other, providing the equivalent of a continual supportive environment for both processes. One might then describe an autogen as a hierarchic hypercyclic system, with each self-organizing component acting as supporting environment or context for the other.

To the extent that autogenesis provides the possibility for self-reconstitution after partial disruption, it also provides a potential mechanism for self-reproduction. By the same process that enables an autogen to form in the first place, fractional components of a disrupted autogen—including shell and catalytic molecules in close proximity and new substrate molecules from the surrounding medium—will be able to reconstitute a new complete whole. In other words, a disrupted autogen will be as likely to produce two identical autogens as one. So an autogen can accomplish in molecular terms—and with considerably more compactness than previously envisioned—what von Neumann demanded of self-reproduction: it can reproduce itself as well as its physical capacity to reproduce itself. Remarkably, it can accomplish this without many of the attributes normally assumed to be essential for life: for example, molecular template-based replication of components and of the template molecules, incessant far-from-equilibrium thermodynamics, semi-permeable membrane containment, and so on.

This self-reconstituting dynamics provides an active self-similarity-maintaining quality which constitutes a form of individuality, or “self,” that does not otherwise exist outside of living processes. There is both an individual autogenic identity, as a closed, inert, but potentially self-reconstituting unit, and a self-maintaining lineage identity, due to the transmission of relatively invariant intrinsic dynamical constraints and molecular types from generation to generation as a result of replication. Self-reconstitution does not completely maintain material identity across time because it allows for molecular replacement, and it does not maintain energetic or dynamical continuity across time either, since it may persist in a static phase for extended periods. But this self-reconstitution capacity does maintain a persistent and distinctive locus of dynamical organization that maintains self-similarity across time and changing conditions. And yet ultimately there is no material continuity, as autogens are disrupted only to be reconstituted and replicated with newly synthesized components. Only the continuity of the constraints that determine the autogenic causal architecture is maintained across repeated iterations of dissolution and reconstitution.

So an autogen has an identity only with respect to this persistent general pattern of constraint maintenance and replication, and irrespective of any particular molecular constituents. Indeed, it is the continuity of the inheritance of constraints on its molecular dynamics that constitutes this individuality. But identity may vary as an autogen lineage evolves variant forms of this defining dynamics (see the section on autogenic evolution below). For all these reasons, an autogen self and autogen lineage identity are examples of efficacious general types, in a philosophical sense (see chapter 6). To be more specific, an autogen is an empirical type determined only by the continuity of these dynamical constraints, which are themselves expressions of dynamical limitation—potential modes of change not expressed.

Autogenic organization only exists with respect to a relevant supportive environment. So autogenic individuation is also only defined with respect to a particular type of environment. Identity and environment are thus reciprocally defined and determined with respect to each other, because the same molecular configuration in a non-supportive environment lacks any of the defining properties of autogenesis. Indeed, the very possibility for autogen existence can be described as one of the possible micro configurations of a certain class of environments with the molecular constitution conducive to autogen formation.

This is the ultimate basis for what Jacob von Uexküll called an Umwelt: the organism-relevant external world.7 This critical autogen-environment relationship is, however, curiously at once a sufficient but not a constant necessary condition for autogenesis to persist. The potential for autogenesis can be maintained even in non-permissive conditions. Although such a molecular configuration is only an autogen with respect to a specifically supportive environment, it can nevertheless persist structurally across diverse and unsupportive environments, to later be reproduced in a supportive one. In this way, autogenic identity maintenance transcends any specific context dependence. In its inert closed state, an autogen can maintain this potential across vast epochs of time and through diversely non-supportive contexts. This then provides a degree of autonomy from context that is again a distinctive quality of living but not non-living dynamical systems.

An autogen’s individuality is strangely diaphanous in one interesting sense. When closed and complete, an autogen is inert and yet when broken open and actively forming new constituents, it is merely a collection of molecules dispersed into a larger molecular milieu. In other words, it is a bounded individual only when inert, and actively self-generating only when it is no longer a discretely bounded material unit. This further demonstrates that what constitutes an autogenic “self” cannot then be identified with any particular substrate, bounded structure, or energetic process. Indeed, in an important sense, the self that is created by the teleodynamics of autogens is only a virtual self, and yet is at the same time the locus of real physical and chemical influences. This was also a feature recognized by Francisco Varela in his conception of an autopoietic system, even though he did not recognize how synergistic reciprocity of self-organizing processes could produce this. He describes this virtual self as follows:



What is particularly important is that we can admit that (i) a system can have separate local components [for] which (ii) there is no center or localized self, and yet the whole behaves as a unit and for the observer it is as if there was a coordinating agent “virtually” present at the center.8





The generic, autonomous, and diaphanous character of autogenic systems makes this a functional property, not a material, chemical, or energetic property. An autogen is a precisely identifiable source of causal influence because it generates and preserved dynamical constraints—the basis for thermodynamic work. But, as we’ve seen, constraint is the exemplification of something that does not occur. So, in this sense, an autogenic system confronts us finally with an unambiguous absential quality. This is the essence of teleodynamical causality. By examining this model system more closely, we will be able to demonstrate how ententional processes acquire this seemingly paradoxical character of efficacious absence.





AUTOGENIC EVOLUTION



Because autogens are capable of self-replication, they are also potential progenitors of autogen lineages. An autogen lineage will increase in numbers so long as there are sufficient substrate molecules in the surrounding environment, along with sufficient molecular agitation to periodically disrupt autogen integrity, but not so much agitation as to disperse their contents more rapidly than they can reassemble. This is the first condition for natural selection.

The second condition is competition among these lineages. This will occur spontaneously as well because the multiplication of each lineage is dependent on the same (or catalytically similar) molecules in the surrounding environment. Different lineages are therefore in competition for these substrates, as well as for persistence against the relative disruptive influences potentially present in the environment—and to an extent necessary for lineage growth.

The third condition is variation among these lineages. Let’s begin with the simplest case: a single type of autogen. Although autogens tend to self-reconstitute and thus reestablish the molecular structures predisposed by the catalysts and shell molecules that produced their progenitor, because this must occur via partial breakup and reclosure of the shell, it is likely that each new shell will additionally incorporate other molecules present in the local environment, some of which may continue to be passed on via future divisions. For the most part, these will tend to be innocuous inclusions that might only decrease the relative concentrations of active catalysts. Higher or lower concentrations of these relatively neutral molecules will tend to produce slight differences in rates of reconstitution or sensitivity to dissociation between lineages. If, however, incidentally included molecules are uncorrelated with any allosteric specificity of autogen functions, their addition to or loss from a lineage will be a matter of chance. Some fraction of incidentally incorporated molecules will have allosteric similarities with functional catalysts, their products, or their substrates. These will have a tendency to interact directly with them and will affect functional attributes of autogen chemistry. Their possible effects include directly interfering with or augmenting the rate of catalysis, affecting container formation, altering container stability, influencing molecular diffusion during disruption, providing linked parallel catalytic steps in the cycle that enables utilization of alternate or slightly variant molecular substrates, and so on.

Incorporation of functionally interactive molecules will make a given lineage relatively more or less successful in propagation. Autogen lineages containing different types of molecules that augment function in any of these ways will tend to out-reproduce others. This will only have a permanent selective effect on a lineage when another condition is met. Persistent inclusion of these divergent molecular types within a lineage will depend on being synthesized as part of an extended or parallel autocatalytic cycle. By these means, increased complexity and reliability of autocatalysis, improved containment, and utilization of special structural and energetic features of other molecular types (e.g., metals) could evolve by differential lineage propagation.

Together, these considerations show that although autogens are incredibly simple molecular systems, their self-reconstitution properties in favorable environments spontaneously bring into being the systemic conditions that are sufficient to initiate a persistent, if weak, form of natural selection. So, in an environment where autogen reproduction is likely, autogen evolution is also likely. In molecularly complex environments, autogen lineage competition for resources will tend to lead to the evolution of variant lineages differentially “fitted” to their local environments. This satisfies all necessary and sufficient material and logical conditions for natural selection, despite occurring in a system lacking many core attributes of life, including genetic inheritance in the biological sense.

Having established the logic of autogen evolvability, we can briefly consider certain special cases and features of this process that diverge from the norm of natural selection among organisms.

One potential source of lineage difference is independent emergence. It is possible that entirely independent and distinct types of autogens could arise in slightly differing environments, each giving rise to lineages that eventually overlap in their environments. Such independently arising lineages need not have overlapping substrate needs, and so would not necessarily be in competition. Multiple parallel threads of autogen evolution are possible, and perhaps likely, since a molecular context that is sufficiently rich to give rise to one type probably has the potential to give rise to other variants as well. This would not necessarily produce a natural selection dynamic, except to the extent that there was chance overlap of some substrate. Even so, their independent effects on other aspects of the environment might eventually lead to indirect effects that influence relative propagation rates in some more generic way (e.g., by effects on molecular diffusion).

This is crudely analogous to the way different species in an ecosystem affect each other’s evolution, even if not directly interacting. But the passive and partially destructive nature of autogen propagation, which is quite unlike most living cellular reproduction, also introduces other potential avenues of evolutionary interaction. The most direct form of interaction could arise by mixing, as a result of inclusion of the components of one type of autogen within another. Since containment and co-localization of essential catalysts are somewhat generic features of autogen dynamics, there are many opportunities for linkages to develop between lineages with very different origins, and even for inclusion of the entire catalyst set of one autogen type within another. This is like endosymbiosis, now recognized as an important, if perhaps rare, source of novel synergistic functions in evolution, or lateral gene exchange, which is common in bacterial and viral evolution. The incorporation of complementary self-reconstituting systems within other self-reconstituting systems with somewhat different substrate requirements, catalytic dynamics, and structural self-assembly conditions could be a significant source of complexification and adaptation. The somewhat unregulated cycles of breakup and re-enclosure that autogen propagation depends on are in this way more analogous to virus reproduction than to cellular reproduction, and so may share other characteristics with virus evolution as well.

Natural selection is the aggregate dynamic that arises out of the interactions of large numbers of unit systems with these properties. Different lineages of autogens each maintain a thread of mnemonic continuity and identity, even when mixture occurs. Irrespective of such lineage convergence effects, when they are separated in different lineages, variant autogenic mechanisms will be in competition with respect to resources available in surrounding conditions. This makes each individual autogenic mechanism also a representative of a specific correlation between its intrinsic dynamic topology and features of the larger environment.

So, with autogens, there are multiple interlocking units of evolutionary individuation: the lineage, the autogen as autonomous system, and the reciprocally self-maintaining dynamical synergy, though the latter will likely grade into an autogenic unity once independent reciprocal dynamics intertwine into a single integrated system. Living organisms derive their peculiar causal dynamics—their seeming end-directedness, functional logic, superficial reversal of the second law of thermodynamics, and adaptability—from this upward shift in what constitutes a unit of reproductive and evolutionary individuation.

The foregoing analysis has shown that natural selection emerges from the dynamics of reciprocally reinforcing self-organizing processes. This self-reconstitutive dynamical synergy is the essential ingredient that precedes and underlies life. This in turn suggests that natural selection is ultimately an operation that differentially preserves certain alternative forms of morphodynamic processes compared to others, with respect to their synergy with one another, and with respect to the boundary conditions that enable them. Selection is not then fully defined only with respect to replication of genetic information. As Kant recognized, a self-maintaining “formative power” is critical. And this requires processes that generate, preserve, and propagate constraints. Morphodynamic processes are the only spontaneous processes that generate and propagate constraints, and autogens demonstrate that reciprocity between morphodynamic processes can preserve and replicate constraints.





THE RATCHET OF LIFE



Autogens may be subject to natural selection and evolution but they are not alive in most senses. They lack the majority of attributes associated with living organisms today. Most significantly, they are effectively passive—though not inert—structures, because they do not actively accumulate and mobilize energy within themselves that can be used for self-repair and reproduction. The energy driving their self-perpetuating dynamics may derive from an environmental source (such as the heat of volcanic vents), or it may be obtained by breaking the molecular bonds of large substrate molecules. In any case, autogens are parasitic on their environment, even for the initiation of replication, in much the same ways that viruses are. Unlike viruses, however, autogens reproduce without the help of other organisms.

In this respect, autogens are not quite “autonomous agents,” in Stuart Kauffman’s sense. For Kauffman, the most basic characteristic of living systems is their ability to “act on their own behalf.” Although an autogen does not “act” in a self-animated sense, it nevertheless fulfills the two criteria that Kauffman uses to define what he means by autonomous agency—criteria that he argues are the basis for this self-directed activity. It has the capacity to reproduce (and/or reconstitute) itself, and it completes a work cycle in the process. In other words, with each disruption and self-reconstitution cycle, an autogen performs sufficient work to also reconstitute the capacity to repeat this cycle all over again. Because of this, an autogen can be the progenitor of lineage that can continue indefinitely.

Perhaps the most striking difference between autogens and organisms is that autogens do not maintain persistent non-equilibrium dynamics. They nevertheless effectively out-maneuver the second law with respect to their own structure and function. They do so via what amounts to a higher-order ratchet effect. As we have seen, morphodynamic processes maximize entropy flow—that is, the dissipation of constraints—but as fast as entropy increase diffuses the introduced distributional asymmetry, external perturbation reestablishes it. The result is a constant throughput of energy and a constant rate of entropy generation. In dissipative systems (discussed in chapter 8), those processes that dissipate constraints more slowly and less efficiently will tend to be spontaneously supplanted by those that do so more rapidly and more efficiently. The buildup of local constraints creates conditions where a fraction of their potential to do work is diverted into the generation of global constraints that progressively increase global dissipation rates. In this way, continual dynamical perturbation causes local impediments to dissipation to become self-eliminating. For this reason, self-organization is often described as a process that works in the service of the second law—i.e., maximum entropy production (see chapter 9).

A number of theorists have argued that life too should be considered as an entropy flow-maximizing process. Could the evolution of life on Earth be seen as a dynamical process in service of efficiently generating entropy to balance the constant flux of solar energy bombarding the planet? If life were merely a morphodynamic process, this would indeed be likely. But this is not the case for teleodynamics. Even though teleodynamic processes are constituted by the interactions between morphodynamic processes, the entropy flow maximization of these component processes is not additive in this interaction. This is because the attractor basins toward which morphodynamic processes tend are specifically structured, and thus constitute constraints in their own right. The teleodynamic features that emerge in an autogenic process are the result of reciprocal constraint generation. Autogen formation must indeed involve an increase in entropy, and each component morphodynamic process naturally develops toward a state of maximum entropy production rate. But the complementary constraints that each generates with respect to the other are self-undermining. Their progression toward optimal entropy production rate is also toward a state where dynamical change ceases. Regularity is built up, only to be frozen by closure. Full dissipation is prevented at a point where optimal conditions for rapidly reinitiating the process are achieved.

An autogen is thus effectively a negentropy ratchet. This ratchet effect, which conserves constraint at the cost of stopping entropy generation prematurely, is the secret to life’s tendency to preserve information about past adaptive organization. This enables both the adaptive fine-tuning and the complexification of life by making it possible to build on previous successes. This retained foundation of reproduced constraints is effectively the precursor to genetic information (or rather, the general property that genetic information also exhibits). As will become clearer in subsequent chapters, whether it is embodied in specific information-bearing molecules (as in DNA) or merely in the molecular interaction constraints of a simple autogenic process, information is ultimately constituted by preserved constraints.



FIGURE 10.4: Typical examples of the ratchet effect. Left: the barb of a honeybee stinger redrawn from a scanning electron micrograph magnified 400 times. The barb structures make penetration easy in one direction and nearly impossible in the other. Right: the structure of a typical ratchet gear and movable catch. Clockwise rotation of the gear is easy, but counterclockwise motion is prevented; thus random forces tending to rotate the gear in both directions will only result in one direction of movement. This same logic determines that an autogenic system will tend to support the generations of constraints by morphodynamic and thermodynamic work, but will prevent their dissipation.





It should come as no surprise that an organism does not maximize the rate at which it generates entropy or the throughput of energy. Instead, an organism uses the flow of entropy to build constraints that ultimately divert and slow this process, increasing the amount of local work it can extract. Our ability to tap the fossil fuel reserves of the Earth for the energy to run our industries and ease our lives is the result of the buildup of complex molecules, using the energy of sunlight. Ancient organisms accumulated this surplus in ways that the inorganic Earth could not have. They slowed this dissipation process and redirected the flows of energy down byzantine molecular pathways, capturing a fraction in newly synthesized molecular bonds (constraints on atomic mobility) over the course of millions of years. This temporarily sequestered, unreleased energy was not allowed to dissipate at the death of many of these organisms because they were buried under layers of sediment, which further impeded the dissipation process. The comparatively simplistic chemistry of combustion that we use to extract this ratcheted energy is a way to rapidly generate the entropy increase that the process slowed for so long.

By transforming the formative dynamics of self-organizing processes into structures that transiently resist degradation, living organisms and autogens provide the foothold for additional linked forms of constraint propagation to develop. So, whereas morphodynamic processes merely propagate and amplify constraints, teleodynamic processes additionally preserve them. This is the common theme of both life and evolution.

There is one further complication to this physical twist of thermodynamics provided by life. Organisms and autogens differ in one other very important respect from other sorts of dissipative processes: they reproduce. In this way, they not only can use local flows of energy to reconstitute the constraints that individuate them, and thus resist full dissipation; they can also generate additional individuated replicas. This multiplies paths of energy dissipation and loci of constraint generation. Reproduction therefore multiplies regional rates of constraint dissipation, even as each individual autogenic unit ratchets it. In the course of evolution, more rapidly reproducing species tend to replace slower-reproducing species by degrading the available energy gradient more rapidly. An interesting balance tends to develop between organism and ecosystem rates of entropy production. Since a resource niche will tend to be rapidly invaded, further reproductive competition will tend to favor species with a higher efficiency of constraint generation. This, of course, is a crucial driver of natural selection.





THE EMERGENCE OF TELEODYNAMICS



Autogens mark the transition from maximum entropy production to constraint production and preservation, and from orthograde processes characterized by self-simplification (morphodynamics) to the orthograde processes exemplified by self-preservation and correlative complexification (teleodynamics). This transition from morphodynamic to teleodynamic organization can be described as an emergent transition, in the same sense as the transition from thermodynamic to morphodynamic organization is emergent. Each of these transitions is characterized by the development of an orthograde disposition that is contrary to what preceded and gave rise to it.

Thus morphodynamic organization emerges due to the interaction of opposed thermodynamic processes (e.g., perturbation and equilibration), and it results in constraint amplification rather than constraint dissipation (i.e., increase in entropy). Analogously teleodynamic organization emerges due to reciprocally organized morphodynamic processes, and results in constraint stabilization rather than constraint amplification, and entropy ratcheting rather than entropy production. In this respect, autogen formation exemplifies the defining feature of an emergent phase transition—the appearance of a new form of orthograde organization.

Autogen dynamics also demonstrates that the chasm between thermodynamics and living dynamics cannot be crossed in a single step, but requires an intermediate morphodynamic bridge: a synergistic arrangement of non-equilibrium self-organizing processes. The evolutionary processes that result are in this way two emergent levels removed from simple thermodynamic processes. Teleodynamics emerges from morphodynamics emerges from thermodynamics.

Being able to provide a complete description of an extremely simple molecular system, capable of self-reproduction and susceptible to natural selection, puts us in a unique position to reflect on the emergent status of living and evolutionary process and their relationships to other natural processes. The plausibility of autogens provides a simple model system for exploring the requirements of ententional properties in general. This is an important first step on the way to an augmented physical theory adequate to explain living and mental processes, as well as non-living processes. In simple terms, it is the scaffolding from which to build an emergent rather than an eliminative methodology for studying all consequence-organized phenomena, from metabolism to mental representation (though this in no way suggests that they are equivalent).

Theoretically, this analysis also helps to distinguish between self-organized and selection-based features of complex adaptive systems, and shows how they are intrinsically linked. The generality of this type of dynamical relationship suggests that the specific molecular features of life on Earth may be far less universal than might otherwise have been guessed, and that autogenlike processes may be present in forms and planetary conditions with very different features than ever were present on Earth. Beyond explaining the linked contribution of self-organization and Darwinian selection to phylogenetic evolution, this analysis may also shed light on their interaction in other biological and even non-biological processes, such as epigenesis, neural signal processing, and language evolution. Self-organizing processes can arise in many dynamic systems and can be constituted by many substrates. The dependence of evolutionary processes on self-organizing processes is not necessarily confined to molecular processes. This analysis should be general. Evolutionary dynamics should emerge spontaneously in any domain where analogous reciprocal self-organizing conditions are met.

The emergence of teleodynamic processes includes more than merely consequence-organized phenomena. Even within a teleodynamically organized system as simple as an autogen, we can identify component relationships that are the minimal precursors of many end-organized features we associate with life.

For example, although the higher-order orthograde dynamic that characterizes autogens provides their robustness to perturbation and their maintenance of integrity, this is not in itself sufficient to constitute something we could justifiably call autonomous individuality. Robustness to perturbation is one of the defining features of any orthograde dynamic. Thus systems in thermodynamic equilibrium resist being driven further from that state, and morphodynamic (self-organizing, dissipative) systems near their most “relaxed” attractor dynamics will also tend to resist disruption of their characteristic regularity. Because autogens are constituted both by thermodynamic and morphodynamics processes, they inherit both of these forms of resistance. But they don’t merely resist perturbation. In the face of catastrophic perturbation, the physically dissociated components nevertheless retain their systemic identity sufficiently well to be able to reassociate into identically organized unit structures. This indicates that these components are to some extent present because of their contributions to a higher-order whole. It is in this respect that self and function are interdependent concepts that are intrinsically defined with respect to consequences.

Although the concept of a function is also sometimes applied to inanimate systems—such as when describing the gravitation of the Sun as functioning to counter the expansive effect of fusion—this is largely a metaphoric use, treating some physical relationship as though it were organized to accomplish that end. Of course, with the exception of man-made devices, inanimate non-living systems are not organized for the sake of achieving a given consequence. But autogens are. For example, it is appropriate to describe the self-assembling container of an autogen as functioning for the maintenance and perpetuation of the autocatalytic set’s capacity to cycle, and the autocatalytic set can likewise be described as functioning for the sake of supporting the self-assembly process. So, in Kant’s terms, each of these component processes is present for the sake of the other. Each is reciprocally both end and means. It is their correlated co-production that ensures the perpetuation of this holistic co-dependency.

Functions are normative to the extent that they fail or succeed to achieve some end. The autocatalysis, the container, and the relationship between them are generated in each replication precisely because they are of benefit to an individual autogen’s integrity and its capacity to aid the continuation of this form of autonomous individual. Although one could say that, like the gravitation and fusion forces in the Sun, the component processes in a first spontaneously generated autogen just happened to accidentally co-occur to produce this metastable form, one couldn’t say this about the replication of this organization in succeeding autogens. Unlike accidental correlations, the organization that is created anew via autogen replication occurs precisely because it had this consequence. But to repeat: it was the teleodynamic organization that had this consequence, and not merely some collection of interreacting molecules, because these are replaceable while the organization is not. The identity and the beneficiary is not a thing but a dynamical form.

So, even these simple molecular systems have crossed a threshold in which we can say that a very basic form of value has emerged, because we can describe each of the component autogenic processes as there for the sake of the autogen integrity, or for the maintenance of that particular form of autogenicity. Likewise, we can describe different features of the surrounding molecular environment as “beneficial” or “harmful” in the same sense that we would apply these assessments to microorganisms. More important, these are not merely glosses provided by a human observer, but intrinsic and functionally relevant features of the consequence-organized nature of the autogen itself.

Adaptive functions are, however, more than just elements of an entity that respond to the entity’s environment. They embody in their form and dynamic potential—as in a photo negative—certain features of this environment that, if present, will be conducive or deleterious to the persistence of this complex dynamic. The presence of these conditions may or may not obtain. Thus adaptations may be appropriate or inappropriate to a given context, to the extent that the consequence with respect to which they are organized may or may not be achieved. This is another indication of functional normativity: the possibility of dysfunction.

In the case of dysfunction, the correspondence relationship between internal organization and extrinsic conditions no longer exists. In a crude sense, then, we can describe this as an erroneous prediction based on a kind of physical induction from past instances. It is in this respect—of possible but fallible correspondence—that we can think of an adaptation as embodying information about a possible state of the world. And like more obvious forms of representation, this projection can be in error; there may be nothing in the immediate environment to which it corresponds. So, in this very basic sense, autogens could be said to represent their environment, in roughly the same sense as a shoeprint could be said to represent a shoe.

We are far from a full explanation for the sorts of teleological processes experienced at the level of human consciousness, and a considerable distance from what is found in the simplest living forms on Earth. The “proof of principle” is in this regard quite minimalistic. Nevertheless, it is a definitive exemplar of crossing the fundamental gap that separates the mechanical world from the functional and normative world.

In summary, then, in this simple dynamical molecular system we can discern the minimal precursors of function, adaptation, teleology, valuation, and even the dim anticipation of information about the environment and a self with respect to which all this matters. Each of these attributes is implicitly ententional, and yet their emergence can be precisely understood without the need either to attribute them to mysterious or weird forms of causality or to argue that there isn’t any fundamental threshold crossed at this point. This demonstrates that, at least in principle—and ultimately that’s all that matters—real teleological and intentional phenomena can emerge from physical and chemical processes previously devoid of these properties.

Now that we have thoroughly explored this simple teleodynamic system, and have demonstrated how it can emerge from less convoluted morphodynamic processes, and ultimately from thermodynamics, we are in a position to begin to reframe the way we understand the physics of consequence-organized processes (i.e., Aristotle’s final causality). At a minimum, this analysis demonstrates that there can be no simple one-to-one mapping of teleodynamic relationships to mechanistic relationships. The link between basic mechanics and ententional processes and relationships must necessarily be bridged by an intervening level of morphodynamic processes. The persistent failures to map living dynamics and cognitive processes directly to simpler physical processes, and thus to reduce mental to mechanistic processes, was always doomed to fail, though not because of some fundamental discontinuity or dualism. The supervenient relationship between them is indeed necessary, but it is both doubly indecomposable and doubly negative. It is doubly indecomposable because it is based on two emergent transitions, each defined by the intrinsic generation of higher-order holistic constraints, that cannot be decomposed to any lower-level components or relationships. It is doubly negative because each level of dynamics emerges from the interaction of lower-level constraints, which are themselves absential properties. So, in effect, each is the expression of a form of higher-order absence generated by relationships between lower-order absences. This doubly negative, doubly absential character of teleodynamic processes is almost certainly one reason that we find them so mechanistically counterintuitive.

The analysis of this additional level of emergent transition also enables us to identify a common logic for unambiguously defining emergence more generally. An emergent dynamical transition is signaled by a change in the topology of the phase space of probable dynamical trajectories. Using the term that we have applied to asymmetries of probable changes of state, each emergent dynamical transition involves the appearance of a new mode of orthograde attractor logic. Thus the transition from a simple thermodynamic regime to a morphodynamic regime is marked by the emergence of orthograde tendencies toward highly regularized global constraints that run counter to the constraint-dissipation orthograde tendencies of the underlying thermodynamic processes.

Emergence is, in effect, defined by a polarity reversal in orthograde dynamics with ascent in scale. Thus the orthograde signature of thermodynamic change is constraint dissipation, the orthograde signature of morphodynamic change is constraint amplification, and the orthograde signature of teleodynamic change is constraint preservation and correlation. The polarity reversal that defines the emergence of teleodynamics from morphodynamics is what characterizes life and evolution. A fit or interdependent correspondence between constraints in different domains is the essence of both biological adaptation and the relationship characterizing representational relationships. So this provides the first bridge across the “epistemic cut” that has been the dividing line between the two sides of the Cartesian dilemma—the no-man’s-land that has divided both science and metaphysics into seemingly incommensurate universes.

So far this analysis has been mostly confined to processes in the range from molecular thermodynamics to the very simplest lifelike processes. Emergent dynamical transitions are, however, ubiquitous in nature, and although they are necessarily simpler at lower levels of scale, they can be correspondingly far more complex at levels of scale where multicelled organisms, brains, and human social phenomena emerge. Nevertheless, there is a general principle exemplified by the simplest autogenic system, described here, that applies at all higher levels of emergent dynamics: all teleodynamic processes must be constituted by reciprocally synergistic morphodynamic relationships, and all morphodynamic processes must be constituted by competing homeodynamic processes. Although higher-order teleodynamic processes may exhibit properties that are more elaborate than those exhibited by basic autogenic systems, they must arise by a recapitulation of this same hierarchic emergent dynamic logic, even if the components are themselves teleodynamic systems. Teleodynamic systems can interact homeodynamically; homeodynamic relationships between teleodynamic systems can produce morphodynamic relationships; and synergistically reciprocal morphodynamic relationships constituted by interacting teleodynamic systems can produce higher-order teleodynamic relationships.

With each such emergent transition, there will be a characteristic new level of orthograde geometry of causality, but the generation of each emergent transition must necessarily depend on this homeo-morpho-teleo emergent logic. Like basic autogentic systems, higher-order teleodynamical systems will also be self-creating, self-maintaining, self-reproducing individuated systems; but they may also exhibit emergent teleodynamic properties not exhibited by their lower-order teleodynamic components. Terming such second- and third-order teleodynamic systems autogens and describing their properties as autogenic would therefore be too restrictive and falsely reductive. So I will call such higher-order teleodynamic systems teleogens, in order to designate both their individuality and their capacity to generate additional forms of teleodynamic processes. We will survey some of the properties of such higher-order emergent teleodynamic relationships (such as sentience) in the final chapters of this book, and discuss the implications of homeodynamic, morphodynamic, and even teleodynamic processes constituted by the interaction of lower-order teleodynamic systems, as is found in ecosystems, complex organisms, brains, and even social systems. But before we can apply this logic to ever more complicated systems, we need to reflect on the generality of the analysis beyond this basic model system, which we have used to exemplify this third realm of dynamics.
