12



INFORMATION



The great tragedy of formal information theory is that its very expressive power is gained

through abstraction away from the very thing that it has been designed to describe.



—JOHN COLLIER, 20031





MISSING THE DIFFERENCE



The current era is often described as “the information age,” but although we use the concept of information almost daily without confusion, and we build machinery (computers) and networks to exchange, analyze, and store it, I believe that we still don’t really know what it is. In our everyday lives, information is a necessity and a commodity. It has become ubiquitous largely because of the invention, perfection, and widespread use of computers and related devices that record, analyze, replicate, transmit, and correlate data entered by humans or collected by sensor mechanisms. This stored information is used to produce correspondences, invoices, sounds, images, and even precise patterns of robotic behavior on factory floors. We routinely measure the exact information capacity of data storage devices made of silicon, magnetic disks, or laser-sensitive plastics. Scientists have even recently mapped the molecular information contained in a human genome that corresponds to proteins, and household users of electronic communication are sensitive to the information bandwidth of the cable and wireless networks that they depend on for connection to the outside world.

Despite this seeming mastery, it is my contention that we currently are working with a set of assumptions about information that are only sufficient to handle the tracking of its most minimal physical and logical attributes, but are insufficient to understand either its defining representational character or its functional value. These are serious shortcomings that impede progress in many endeavors, from automated translation to the design of intelligent Internet search engines.

The concept of information is a central unifying concept in the sciences. It plays critical roles in physics, computation and control theory, biology, cognitive neuroscience, and of course the psychological and social sciences. It is, however, defined somewhat differently in each, to the extent that the aspects of the concept that are most relevant to each may be almost entirely non-overlapping. The most precise technical definition of information has come from the work of Claude Shannon, who in the 1940s made precise quantitative analysis of information capacity and transmission possible. As we will see, however, this progress came at the cost of entirely ignoring the representational aspect of the concept that is its ultimate base. As the epigraph to this chapter hints, this reduced definition of information is almost devoid of any trace of its original and colloquial meaning. By stripping the concept of its links to reference, meaning, and significance, it became applicable to the analysis of a vast range of physical phenomena, engineering problems, and even quantum effects. But this reduction of the concept specifically obscures distinctions which are critical to identifying the fundamental features that characterize living and mental processes from other physical processes. To begin to make sense of these world-changing transitions, then, we need a concept of information that is both precise and yet also encompasses the referential and functional features that are its most distinctive attributes.

In many ways, we are in a position analogous to the early nineteenth-century physicists in the heyday of the industrial age (with its explosive development of self-powered machines for transportation, industry, timekeeping, etc.), whose understanding of energy was still laboring under the inadequate and ultimately fallacious conception of ethereal substances, such as caloric, that were presumably transferred from place to place to animate machines and organisms. Even though energy was a defining concept of the early nineteenth century, the development of a relational rather than substantive concept of energy took many decades of scientific inquiry to clarify. The contemporary notion of information is likewise colloquially conceived of in substancelike terms, as for example when we describe the “purchase” and “storage” of information, or talk about it being “lost” or “wasted” in some process.

The concept of energy was ultimately tamed by recognizing that it was a quite general sort of physical difference, which could be embodied in any of many possible substrates (heat, momentum, magnetic attraction, chemical bonds, etc.), and which could give rise to non-spontaneous change if able to interact with another physical substrate. Eventually, scientists came to recognize that the presumed ethereal substance that conveyed heat and motive force from one context to another was an abstraction from a process—the process of performing work—not anything material. Importantly, this abandonment of a substance-based explanation did not result in the concept of energy becoming epiphenomenal or mysterious. The fallacious conceptions of an ineffable special substance were simply abandoned for a dynamical account that enabled precise assessment.

A complete account of the nature of information that is adequate to distinguish it from merely material or energetic relationships also requires a shift of focus, but the figure/background shift required is even more fundamental and more counterintuitive than that for energy. This is because what matters is not an account of only its physical properties, or even its formal properties. What matters in the case of information, and produces its distinctive physical consequences, is a relationship to something not there. Information is the archetypical absential concept.

Consider a few typical examples. Information about an impending storm might cause one to close windows and shutters, information about a stock market crash might cause millions of people to simultaneously withdraw money from their bank accounts, information about some potential danger to the nation might induce idealistic men and women to face certain death in battle, and (if we are lucky) information demonstrating how the continued use of fossil fuels will impact the lives of future generations might affect our patterns of energy use worldwide. These not-quite-actualized, non-intrinsic relationships can thus play the central role in determining the initiation and form of physical work. In contrast, the material sign medium that mediates these effects (a darkening sky, a printed announcement, a stirring speech, or a scientific argument, respectively) cannot. The question is: How could these non-intrinsic relationships become so entangled with the particular physical characteristics of the sign medium that the presence of these signs could initiate such non-spontaneous physical changes?

Answering this question poses a double problem. Not only do we need to give up thinking about information as some artifact or commodity, but we must also move beyond an otherwise highly successful technical approach that explicitly ignores those aspects of information that are not present (i.e., referential content and significance).

The currently dominant technical conception of information was important for the development of communication and computing technologies in response to the need to precisely measure information for purposes of transmission and storage. Unfortunately, it has also contributed to a tendency to focus almost exclusively on only the tangible physical attributes of information processes, even where this is not the only relevant attribute. The result is that the technical use of the term information is now roughly synonymous with difference, order, pattern, or the opposite of physical entropy, and thus is effectively reduced to a simple physical parameter entirely divorced from its original meaning. Indeed, something like this was implicit in Boltzmann’s account of the concept of entropy, because at maximum entropy, we have minimal information about any given microstate of the system. This redefinition of the concept of information as a measure of order has, in effect, cemented the Cartesian cut into the formal foundations of physics. More perniciously, the assumption that information is synonymous with order has been used to implicitly support the claims of both eliminativism and panpsychism. Thus, if it is assumed that we can simply replace the term information with order, thought becomes synonymous with computation, and any physical difference can be treated as though it has mentalisitc properties.

To step beyond this impasse and make sense of the representational function that distinguishes information from other merely physical relationships, we will need to find a precise way to characterize its defining non-intrinsic feature—its referential capacity—and show how the content thus communicated can be causally efficacious, despite its physical absence. And yet this analysis must also demonstrate its compatibility with the precise technical conception of information, which although divorced from this key defining attribute, has been the basis for unparalleled technical advances in fields as different as quantum physics and economics.

Tacit metaphysical commitments have further hindered this effort. This more encompassing concept of information has been a victim of a philosophical impasse that has a long and contentious history because of its entanglement with the problem of specifying the ontological status of content of thought. We have progressively chipped away at this barrier in previous chapters, so that at last it can be addressed directly with fresh conceptual tools. The enigmatic status of this relationship was eloquently, if enigmatically, framed by the German philosopher Franz Brentano’s use in 1874 of the curious word “inexistence” when describing mental phenomena:



Every mental phenomenon is characterized by what the Scholastics of the Middle Ages called the intentional (or mental) inexistence of an object, and what we might call, though not wholly unambiguously, reference to a content, direction toward an object (which is not to be understood here as meaning a thing), or immanent objectivity.



This intentional inexistence is characteristic exclusively of mental phenomena. No physical phenomenon exhibits anything like it. We can, therefore, define mental phenomena by saying that they are those phenomena which contain an object intentionally within themselves.2





As I will argue below, neither the engineer’s technical definition of information as physical difference nor the view that information is irreducible to physical relationships confront the problematic issues raised by its not-quite-existent but efficacious character. The first conception takes the possibility of reference for granted, but then proceeds to bracket it from consideration to deal only with physically measurable features of the information-bearing medium. The second conception disregards its physicality altogether and thus makes the efficacy of information mysterious. Neither characterization explicitly accounts for the relationship that the “inexistent” content has to existing physical phenomena.





OMISSIONS, EXPECTATIONS, AND ABSENCES



The importance of physical regularity to the analysis of information is that it is ultimately what enables absence to matter. Where something tends to regularly occur, failing to occur or in other ways diverging from this regularity can stand out. A predictable behavior (and more generally any tendency to change in a redundant way or to exhibit regularity or symmetry) is presupposed in many circumstances where something absent makes a difference. The source of this regularity need not be exemplified by human action. It could, for example, be exemplified by the operation of a machine, as when stepping on the brakes fails to slow one’s vehicle and thus provides information about damage. It could be provided by some naturally occurring regularity, like the cycling of the wet and dry seasons, which in a bad year may be interpreted as information that certain deities are angry. Even systems that appear mostly chaotic and only partly constrained in their behavior can offer some degree of predictability against which deviation can be discerned. So, although financial markets are highly volatile and largely defy prediction on a day-to-day basis, there are general trends with respect to which certain deviations are seen as indicative of major changes in the economy that cannot be discerned otherwise.

In the realm of social interactions, we are quite familiar with circumstances where omissions can have major consequences. For example, after April 15, if a U.S citizen has not prepared and submitted a U.S. tax return, or an extension request, serious consequences can follow. In a legal context that requires producing a tax return by this date, its non-existence will set in motion events involving IRS employees coercing the delinquent taxpayer to comply. They may write and send threatening letters and possibly contact banks and credit agencies to interfere with the taxpayer’s access to assets. Similarly, so-called sins of omission can also have significant social consequences. Consider the effect of the thank-you note not written or the RSVP request that gets ignored. Omissions in social contexts often prompt deliberations about whether the absence reflects the presence of malice or merely a lack of social graces. Failure to initiate an intervention can also provide information about the actor. A failure to prepare or to attend to important warnings can be the indirect cause of a disaster, and this failure can be grounds for punishment, if intervention is expected. Even ignorance or the absence of foresight due to lack of appropriate information or analytic effort can be blamed for allowing “accidents” to occur that might otherwise have been avoided.

Intuitively, then, we are comfortable attributing real-world consequences to not thinking, not noticing, not doing, and so on. In these human contexts, we often treat presence and absence as though they can have equal potential efficacy. But these omissions are only meaningful and efficacious in a context of specific expectations or processes that will ensue if certain conditions are not met, or in the context of undesirable tendencies that will ensue in the absence of opposition. Where there is a habit of expectation, a tendency that is intrinsic, a process that needs to be actively opposed or avoided, or a convention governing or requiring certain actions, the failure of something to occur can have definite physical consequences.

These familiar examples are, of course, special cases that invert the general case of representation—something present that is taken to be about something absent—and yet they exemplify a critical point: being about something need not be based on any intrinsic properties of the signal medium. Indeed, this fact suggests that specific details of a sign’s embodiment can be largely irrelevant.

One might object that although this is our colloquial way of describing these relationships, we don’t actually believe that absence is causative in these cases. We tend to consider only the habit itself as causally relevant. Nevertheless, it is because the habit in question is organized around a likely future change of state—that is, something not currently present which in some way is likely to follow—that we correspondingly develop a habit of expectation. This indicates that deviation from regularity alone isn’t enough. Ultimately, this something missing with respect to a tendency must also stand out with respect to another tendency that interprets it; and (as we will see in the next chapter) for this relationship to be informative, at some point there must be a teleodynamic regularity involved, which is the ground of this expectation; a projection into the future.

As we have repeatedly argued, regularity is the expression of constraint, and it is with respect to some constraint on variety that something absent or deviant can stand out. This absence or deviance is ultimately what is conveyed. So, not surprisingly, besides being the formal requirement for a transformation of energy to result in work, constraint is one of the defining attributes of information. Information is in this respect a feature of certain forms of work: teleodynamic work. As we will see, even the most reduced conception of information, as it is defined in mathematical information theory, is a function of constraint and the possibility for work that this embodies.





TWO ENTROPIES



To the extent that regularity and constraint provide a necessary background for deviation and absence to stand out, nature’s most basic convergent regularity must provide the ultimate ground for information. This regularity is of course the spontaneous tendency for entropy to increase in physical systems. Although Rudolf Clausius coined the term entropy in 1865, it was Ludwig Boltzmann who in 1866 recognized that this could be described in terms increasing disorder. We will therefore refer to this conception of thermodynamic entropy as Boltzmann entropy.

This reliably asymmetric habit of nature provides the ultimate background with respect to which an attribute of one thing can exemplify an attribute of something else. The reason is simple: since non-correlation and disorder are so highly likely, any degree of orderliness of things typically means that some external intervention has perturbed them away from this most probable state. In other words, this spontaneous relentless tendency toward messiness provides the ultimate slate for recording outside interference. If things are not in their most probable state, then something external must have done work to divert them from that state.3

A second use of the term entropy has become widely applied to the assessment of information, and for related reasons. In the late 1940s, the Bell Labs mathematician Claude Shannon demonstrated that the most relevant measure of the amount of information that can be carried in a given medium of communication (e.g., in a page of print or a radio transmission) is analogous to statistical entropy.4 According to Shannon’s analysis, the quantity of information conveyed at any point is the improbability of receiving a given transmitted signal, determined with respect to the probabilities of all possible signals that could have been sent. Because this measure of signal options is mathematically analogous to the measure of physical options in thermodynamic entropy, Shannon also called this measure the “entropy” of the signal source. I will refer to this as Shannon entropy to distinguish it from thermodynamic entropy (though we will later see that they are more intimately related than just by analogy).

Consider, for example, a coded communication sent as a finite string of alphanumeric characters. If each possible character can appear with equal probability at every point in the transmission, there is maximum uncertainty about what to expect.5 This means that each character received reduces this uncertainty, and an entire message reduces the uncertainty with respect to the probability that any possible combination of characters of that length could have been sent. The amount of the uncertainty reduced by receiving a signal is Shannon’s measure of the maximum amount of information that can be conveyed by that signal.

In other words, the measure of information conveyed involves comparison of a received signal with respect to possible signals that could have been sent. If there are more possible character types to choose from, or more possible characters in the string, there will be more uncertainty about which will be present where, and thus each will potentially carry more information. Similarly, if there are fewer possible characters, fewer characters comprising a given message, or if the probabilities of characters appearing are not equal, then each will be capable of conveying proportionately less information.

Shannon’s notion of entropy can be made quite precise for analysis of electronic transmission of signals and yet can also be generalized to cover quite mundane and diverse notions of possible variety. Shannon entropy is thus a measure of how much information these media can possibly carry. Because it is a logical, not a physical, measure, it is widely realizable. It applies as well to a page of text as to the distribution of objects in a room, or the positions that mercury can occupy in a thermometer. Since each object can assume any of a number of alternative positions, each possible configuration of the collection of objects is a potential sign.

Shannon’s analysis of information capacity provides another example of the critical role of absence. According to this way of measuring information, it is not intrinsic to the received communication itself; rather, it is a function of its relationship to something absent—the vast ensemble of other possible communications that could have been sent, but weren’t. Without reference to this absent background of possible alternatives, the amount of potential information of a message cannot be measured. In other words, the background of unchosen signals is a critical determinant of what makes the received signals capable of conveying information. No alternatives = no uncertainty = no information. Thus Shannon measured the information received in terms of the uncertainty that it removed with respect to what could have been sent.

The analogy to thermodynamic entropy breaks down, however, because Shannon’s concept is a logical (or structural) property, not a dynamical property. For example, Shannon entropy does not generally increase spontaneously in most communication systems, so there is no equivalent to the second law of thermodynamics when it comes to the entropy of information. The arrangement of units in a message doesn’t spontaneously “tend” to change toward equiprobability. And yet something analogous to this effect becomes relevant in the case of real physically embodied messages conveyed by real mechanisms (such as a radio transmission or a computer network). In the real world of signal transmission, no medium is free from the effects of physical irregularities and functional degradation, an unreliability resulting from the physical effects of the second law.

So both notions of entropy are relevant to the concept of information, though in different ways. The Shannon entropy of a signal is the probability of receiving a given signal from among those possible; and the Boltzmann entropy of the signal is the probability that a given signal may have been corrupted.

A transmission affected by thermodynamic perturbations that make it less than perfectly reliable will introduce an additional level of uncertainty to contend with, but one that decreases information capacity. An increase in the Boltzmann entropy of the physical medium that constitutes the signal carrier corresponds to a decrease in the correlation between sent and received signals. Although this does not decrease the signal entropy, it reduces the amount of uncertainty that can be removed by a given signal, and thus reduces the information capacity.

This identifies two contributors to the entropy of a signal—one associated with the probability of a given signal being sent and the other associated with a given signal being corrupted. This complementary relationship is a hint that the physical and informational uses of the concept of entropy are more than merely analogous. By exploring the relationship between Shannon entropy and Boltzmann entropy, we can shed light on the reason why change in Shannon entropy is critical to information. But the connection is subtle, and its relationship to the way that a signal conveys its information “content” is even subtler.





INFORMATION AND REFERENCE



Warren Weaver, who wrote a commentary article that appeared in a book presentation of Shannon’s original paper, commented that using the term information to describe the measure of the unpredictability reduced by a given signal is an atypical use of the term.6 This is because Shannon’s notion of information is agnostic with respect to what a signal is or could be about. This agnosticism has led to considerable confusion outside of the technical literature, because it is almost antithetical to the standard colloquial use of the term. Shannon was interested in measuring information for engineering purposes. So he concentrated exclusively on the properties of transmission processes and communication media, and ignored what we normally take to be information, that is, what something tells us about something else that is not present in the signal medium itself.

This was not merely an arbitrary simplification, however. It was necessary because the same sign or signal can be given any number of different interpretations. Dirt on a boot can provide information on anything from personal hygiene to evidence about the sort of geological terrain a person recently visited. The properties of some medium that give it the potential to convey information don’t determine what it is about, they merely make reference possible. So, in order to provide a finite measure of the information potential of a given signal or channel, Shannon had to ignore any particular interpretation process, and stop the analysis prior to including any consideration of what a sign or signal might be about. What is conveyed is not merely a function of this reduction of Shannon entropy.

This is where the relation between Shannon and Boltzmann entropy turns out to be more than merely analogical. A fuller conception of information requires that these properties be considered with respect to two different levels of analysis of the same phenomenon: the formal characteristics of the signal and the material-energetic characteristics of the signal. Consider what we know about Boltzmann entropy. If, within the boundaries of a physical system such as a chamber filled with a gas, a reduction of entropy is observed, one can be pretty certain that something not in that chamber is causing this reduction of entropy. Being in an improbable state or observing a non-spontaneous change toward such a state is evidence of extrinsic perturbation—work imposed from outside the system.

Despite their abstract character, information transmission and interpretation are physical processes involving material or energetic substrates that constitute the transmission channel, storage medium, sign vehicles, and so on. But physical processes are subject to the laws of thermodynamics. So, in the case of Shannon entropy, no information is provided if there is no reduction in the uncertainty of a signal. But reduction of the Shannon entropy of a given physical medium is necessarily also a reduction of its Boltzmann entropy. This can only occur due to the imposition of outside constraints on the sign/signal medium because a reduction of Boltzmann entropy does not tend to occur spontaneously. When it does occur, it is evidence of an external influence.

Openness to external modification is obvious in the case of a person selecting a signal to transmit, but it is also the case in more subtle conditions. Consider, for example, a random hiss of radio signals received by a radio antenna pointed toward the heavens. A normally distributed radio signal represents high informational entropy, the expected tendency in an unconstrained context, which for example might be the result of random circuit noise. If this tendency were to be altered away from this distribution in any way, it would indicate that some extrinsic non-random factor was affecting the signal. The change could be due to an astronomical object emitting a specific signal. But what if instead of a specific identifiable signal, there is just noise when there shouldn’t be any?

Just such an event did occur in 1965 when two Bell Labs scientists, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson, aimed a sensitive microwave antenna skyward, away from any local radio source, and discovered that they were still recording the “hiss” of microwave noise no matter which way they pointed the antenna. They were receiving a more or less random microwave signal from everywhere at once! The obvious initial assumption was that it probably indicated a problem with the signal detection circuit, not any specific signal. Indeed, they even suspected that it might be the result of pigeons roosting in the antenna. Because it exhibited high Shannon entropy and its locus of origin also had high Shannon entropy (i.e., equal probability from any location), they assumed that it couldn’t be a signal originating from any object in space.

Only after they eliminated all potential local sources of noise did they consider the more exotic possibility: that it did not originate in the receiving system itself, but rather from outside, everywhere in the cosmos at once. If the signal had consisted only of a very narrow band of frequencies, had exhibited a specific oscillatory pattern, or was received only from certain directions, that would have provided Shannon information, because then compared with signals that could have been recorded, this would have stood out. They only considered it to be information about something external, and not mere noise, when they had compared it to many more conceivable options, thus effectively increasing the entropy (uncertainty) of potential sources that could be eliminated. As they eliminated each local factor as a possible source of noise, they eliminated this uncertainty. In the end, what was considered the least reasonable explanation was the correct one: it was emanating from empty space, the cosmic background. The signal was eventually interpreted as the deeply red-shifted heat of the Big Bang.

In simple terms, the brute fact of these deviations from expectation, both initially, then with respect to possible sources of local noise, and much later with respect to alternative cosmological theories, was what made this hiss information about something. Moreover, the form of this deviation from expectation—its statistical uniformity and lack of intrinsic asymmetries—provided the basis for the two scientists’ interpretation. Heat is random motion. The form of this deviation from what they expected—that the signal would be irregularly distributed and correlated with specific objects—ultimately provided the clue to its interpretation. In other words, this became relevant for a second kind of entropy reduction: analytic reduction in the variety of possible sources. By comparing the form of the received signal with what could have been its form, they were able to eliminate many possible causes of both intrinsic and extrinsic physical influence until only one seemed plausible.

This demonstrates that something other than merely the reduction of the Shannon entropy of a signal is relevant to understanding how that signal conveys evidence of another absent phenomenon. Information is made available when the state of some physical system differs from what would be expected. And what this information can be about depends on this expectation. If there is no deviation from expectation, there is no information. This would be the case for complete physical isolation of the signal medium from outside influence. The difference is that an isolated signal source cannot be about anything. What information can be about depends on the nature of the reduction process and the constraints exhibited by the received signal. How a given medium can be modified by interaction with extrinsic factors, or how it can be manipulated, is what is most relevant for determining what information can be conveyed by it.

Not only is the Shannon entropy of an information-bearing process important to its capacity; its physical dynamics with respect to the physical context in which it is embedded is important to the determination of what it can be about. But in comparison to the Shannon entropy of the signal, the physical constraints on the forms that a change in signal entropy can take contribute another independent potential for entropy reduction: a reduction of the entropy of possible referents. In other words, once we begin considering the potential entropy of the class of things or events that a given medium can convey, the physical characteristics of the medium, not merely its range of potential states, become important. This reduces the Shannon entropy of the range of possible phenomena that a given change in that medium can be about. In other words, what we might now call referential information is a second order form of information, over and above Shannon information (Figures 12.1, 12.2).

A first hint of the relationship between information as form and as a sign of something else is exemplified by the role that pattern plays in the analysis. In Shannon’s terms, pattern is redundancy. From the sender’s point of view, any redundancy (defined as predictability) of the signal has the effect of reducing the amount of information that can be sent. In other words, redundancy introduces a constraint on channel capacity. Consider how much less information could be packed into this page if I could only use two characters (like the 0s and 1s in a computer). Having twenty-six letters, cases, punctuation marks, and different-length character strings (words), separated by spaces (also characters), decreases the repetition, increases the possibility of what character can follow what, and thereby decreases redundancy. Nevertheless, there is sufficient redundancy in the possible letter combinations to make it possible to fairly easily discover typos (using redundancy for error correction will be discussed below).



FIGURE 12.1: Depiction of the logic that Claude Shannon used to define and measure potential information-conveying capacity (“Shannon information”).





FIGURE 12.2: Depiction of the way that Shannon information depends on the susceptibility of a medium to modification by work. It derives its potential to convey information about something extrinsic to that medium by virtue of the constraints imposed on that medium by whatever is responsible for this work.





Less information can get transmitted if some transmissions are predictable from previous ones, or if there are simply fewer alternatives to choose from. But the story is slightly more complicated when we add reference. From the receiver’s point of view, there must be some redundancy with what is already known for the information conveyed by a signal to even be assessed. In other words, the context of the communication must already be redundantly structured. Both sender and receiver must share the set of options that constitute information.

Shannon realized that the introduction of redundancy is also necessary to compensate for any unreliability of a given communication medium. If the reliability of a given sign or signal is questionable, this introduces an additional source of unpredictability that does not contribute to the intended information: noise. But just as redundancy reduces the unpredictability of signals, it can also reduce the unreliability of the medium conveying information. Introducing expected redundancy into a message being transmitted makes it possible to distinguish these two sources of Shannon entropy (the variety of possible signals that could have been generated versus the possible errors that could have arisen in the process). In the simplest case, this is accomplished by resending a signal multiple times. Because noise is, by definition, not constrained by the same factors as is the selection of the signal, each insertion of a noise-derived signal error will be uncorrelated with any other, but independent transmissions of multiple identical signals will be correlated with one another by definition. In this way, noisy components of a signal or a received message can be detected and replaced.

Error-reducing redundancy can be introduced by means other than by signal retransmission. English utilizes only a fraction of possible letter combinations, with very asymmetric probabilities and combinatorial options. Grammar and syntax further limit what is an appropriate and inappropriate word string. Last but not least, the distinction between sense and nonsense limits what words and phrases are likely to occur in the same context. This internal redundancy of written English makes typos relatively easy to identify and correct.

Redundancy as a means of information rectification is also relevant to assessing the reliability of second-order (i.e., referential) information. For example, when one hears multiple independent reports by observers of the same event, the redundancy in the content of these various accounts can serve an analogous function. Even though there will be uncorrelated details from one account to another, the redundancies between independent reports make these more redundant aspects more reliable (so long as they are truly independent, i.e., don’t reflect the influence of common biases). So, whereas redundancy decreases information capacity, it is also what makes it possible to distinguish information from noise, both in terms of the signal and in terms of what it conveys.





IT TAKES WORK



What a signal medium can indicate is dependent on the possibility of physical relation with some relevant features of its physical context, and the possibility that this can result in a change of its Shannon entropy. Since reduction in the Shannon entropy of a physical medium is also often a reduction of its physical entropy, such a change is evidence that work was done to modify the signal medium. Recall that work in some form is required to change something from its spontaneous state or tendency to a non-spontaneous state. So, for any physical medium, a contragrade change in its state is an indication that work has been performed. Moreover, a contragrade change can only be produced by extrinsic perturbation; the medium must be an open system in some respect. The reference conveyed by a reduction in Shannon entropy is therefore a function of the ways that the medium is susceptible to outside interference.

Though the external factors that alter a system’s entropy (variety of possible states) are not intrinsic features of that medium, the signal constraint is an intrinsic feature. Referential information is in this sense inferred from the form of the constraints embodied in the relationship between unconstrained possibility and received signal. In this way, Shannon information, which is assessed in terms of this constraint, embodies a trace of the work that produced it.

But openness to the possibility of an extrinsic influence involves specific physical susceptibilities, which also constrain what kind of work is able to modify it, thus constraining the domain of potential extrinsic phenomena that can be thereby indicated. Because of this explicit physical constraint, even the absence of any change of signal entropy can provide referential information. No change in entropy is one possible state. This means that even unconstrained fluctuations may still be able to convey referential information. This is information about the fact that of the possible influences on signal constraint, none were present. It is the mere possibility of exhibiting constraints due to extrinsic influence that is the basis of a given medium’s informative power.

This possibility demonstrates that reference is more than just the consequence of physical work to change a signal medium. Although such a relation to work is fundamental, referential information can be conveyed both by the effect of work and by evidence that no work has been done.7 This is why no news can be news that something anticipated has not yet occurred, as in the examples of messages conveyed by absence discussed above. The informative power of absence is one of the clearest indications that Shannon information and referential information are not equivalent. This is again because the constraint is both intrinsic and yet not located in the signal medium; it is rather a relationship between what is and what could have been its state at any given moment. A constraint is not an intrinsic property but a relational property, even if just in relation to what is possible. Only when a physical system exhibits a reduction of entropy compared to some prior state, or more probable state, is extrinsic influence indicated. This ubiquitous tendency can, conversely, be the background against which an unaltered or unconstrained feature can provide information about what hasn’t occurred. If the sign medium exhibits no constraint, or hasn’t diverged from some stable state, it can be inferred that there has been no extrinsic influence even though one could have been present. The relationship of present to absent forms of a sign medium embodies the openness of that medium to extrinsic intervention, whether or not any interaction has occurred. Importantly, this also means that the possibility of change due to work, not its actual effect, is the feature upon which reference depends. It is what allows absence itself, absence of change, or being in a highly probable state, to be informative.

Consider a typo in a manuscript. It can be thought of as a reduction of referential information because it reflects a lapse in the constraint imposed by the language that is necessary to convey the intended message. Yet it is also information about the proficiency of the typist, information that might be useful to a prospective employer. Or consider a technician diagnosing the nature of a video hardware problem by observing the way the image has become distorted. What is signal and what is noise is not intrinsic to the sign medium, because this is a determination with respect to reference. In both, the deviation from a predicted or expected state is taken to refer to an otherwise unobserved cause. Similarly, a sign that doesn’t exhibit the effects of extrinsic influence—for example, setting a burglar alarm to detect motion—can equally well provide information that a possible event (a break-in) did not occur.

In all these cases, the referential capacity of the informational vehicle is dependent on physical work that has, or could have, altered the state of some medium open to extrinsic modification. This tells us that the link between Shannon entropy and Boltzmann entropy is not mere analogy or formal parallelism. More important, it demonstrates a precise link to the concept of work. Gregory Bateson’s description of information as “a difference that makes a difference” is actually a quite elegant description of work. Now we can see why this must be so. The capacity to reflect the effect of work is the basis of reference.





TAMING THE DEMON



This should not surprise us. The existence of an intimate relationship between information and work has been recognized since almost the beginning of the science of thermodynamics. In 1867, James Clerk Maxwell initially explored the relationship in terms of a thought experiment. He imagined a microscopic observer (described as a demon), who could assess the velocity of individual gas molecules on either side of a divided container and could control a door between them to allow only faster- (or slower-) than-average molecules through one way or the other. Using this information about each molecule, the demon would thus be able to decrease the entropy of the system in contradiction to the second law of thermodynamics. This would normally only be possible by doing thermodynamic work to drive the entire system away from thermodynamic equilibrium; and once in this far-from-equilibrium state, this thermodynamic gradient itself could be harnessed to do further work. So it appears on the face of things that the demon’s information about molecular velocity is allowing the system to progressively reverse the second law, with only the small amount of work that determines the state of the door. This seems consistent with our intuition that information and entropy have opposite signs, in the sense that a decrease in entropy of the system increases the predictability of molecular velocities on either side of this divide. For this reason, information is sometimes described as “negentropy,”8 and has been equated with the orderliness of a system.

Maxwell’s demon does not have to be a tiny homunculus. The same process could conceivably be embodied in a mechanical device able to link differences of detected molecular velocity and the correlated operation of the door. In the century that followed Maxwell’s presentation of this thought experiment, many sophisticated analyses probed the question of whether the information gleaned by such an apparatus would in fact be able to cheat the second law of thermodynamics. As many analyses were subsequently to show, the mechanisms able to gather such information and use it to open the pass-through would inevitably require more work than the potential gained by creating this increase of heat gradient, and would therefore produce a net increase in total entropy of the system. The increase in entropy would inevitably exceed the reduction of entropy produced by the demon’s efforts.

Although purely theoretical, this analysis validated the assumptions of thermodynamics, and also made it possible to measure the amount of Shannon information required to produce a given amount of Boltzmann entropy decrease. So, although the demon’s activity in transforming differences of molecular velocity into differences of local entropy doesn’t ultimately violate the second law, it provides a model system for exploring the relationship between Shannon information and work.

But if we replace the demon with an equivalent mechanical apparatus, does it make sense to say that it is using information about velocity to effect this change in entropy, or is it merely a mechanistic linkage between some physical change that registers velocity and whatever physical process opens the door? Although as external observers we can interpret a signal whose changes correlate with molecular velocity as representing information about that property, there is nothing about the mechanism linking this signal state to the state of the door that makes it more than just a physical consequence of interacting with the signal.

What enables the observer to interpret that the signal is about velocity is the independent availability of a means for relating differences of molecular velocity to corresponding differences of signal state. The differential activation of the door mechanism is merely a function of the physical linkage of the signal-detection and door-operation mechanisms. Molecular velocity is otherwise irrelevant, and a correlation between signal value and molecular velocity is not in any way necessary to the structure or operation of the door-opening mechanism. A correlation with molecular velocity is, however, critical to how one might design such a mechanism with this Maxwellian outcome in mind. And it is cryptically implied in the conception of an observing demon. Unlike its mechanical substitute, the demon must respond because of this correlation in order to interpret the signal to be about molecular velocity. The designer must ensure that this correlation exists, while the demon must assume that it exists, or at least be acting with respect to this correlation and not merely with respect to the signal. Thus the demon, like an outside observer, must already have information about this habit of correlation in order to interpret the signal as indicating this missing correlate. In other words, an independent source of information about this correlation is a precondition for the signal to be about velocity, but the signal-contingent door-opening mechanism has no independent access to this additional information.

More important, correlation is not a singular physical interaction, but rather a regularity of physical interactions. A mechanism that opens the door in response to a given signal value is not responding to this regularity but only to a singular physical influence. In this respect, there is an additional criterion besides being susceptible to extrinsic modification that constitutes the referential value of an informing medium: this modifiability must have a general character.

The analysis so far has exposed a common feature of both the logic of information theory (Shannon) and the logic of thermodynamic theory (Boltzmann). This not only helps explain the analogical use of the entropy concept in each, it also explains why it is necessary to link these approaches into a common theory to begin to define the referential function of information. Both of these formal commonalities and the basis for their unification into a theory of reference depend on physical openness. In the case of classic information theory, the improbability of receiving a given sign or signal with respect to the background expectation of its receipt compared to other options defines the measure of potential information. In the case of classic thermodynamics, the improbability of being in some far-from-equilibrium state is a measure of its potential to do work, and also a measure of work that was necessarily performed to shift it into this state. Inversely, being in a most probable state provides no information about any extrinsic influence, and indeed suggests that to the extent that this medium is sensitive to external perturbation, none was present that could have left a trace.

The linkage between these two theories hinges on the materiality of communication (e.g., the constitution of its sign and/or signal medium). So, in a paradoxical sense, the absent content that is the hallmark of information is a function of the necessary physicality of information processes.
