13



SIGNIFICANCE



The first surprise is that it takes constraints on the release of energy to perform work, but it takes work to create constraints. The second surprise is that constraints are information and information is constraint.



—STUART KAUFFMAN, PERSONAL COMMUNICATION1





ABOUTNESS MATTERS



As we have seen, nearly every physical interaction in the universe can be described in terms of Shannon information, and any relationship involving physical malleability, whether exemplified or not, can be interpreted as information about something else. This has led some writers to suggest that the universe is made of information, not matter. But this tells us little more than that the universe is a manifold of physical differences and that most are the result of prior work. Of course, not every physical difference is interpreted, or even can be interpreted, though all may at some point contribute to future physical changes. Interpretation is ultimately a physical process, but one with a quite distinctive kind of causal organization. So, although almost every physical difference in the history of the universe can potentially be interpreted to provide information about any number of other linked physical occurrences, the unimaginably vast majority of these go uninterpreted, and so cannot be said to be information about anything. Without interpretation, a physical difference is just a physical difference, and calling these ubiquitous differences “information” furthermore runs the risk of collapsing the distinction between information, matter, and energy, and ultimately eliminating the entire realm of ententional phenomena from consideration.

Although any physical difference can become significant and provide information about something else, interpretation requires that certain very restricted forms of physical processes must be produced. The organization of these processes distinguishes interpretation from mere physical cause and effect. Consider again Gregory Bateson’s aphorism: “a difference that makes a difference.” Its meaning turns on the ambiguity between two senses of to “make a difference.” The more literal meaning is to cause something to change from what otherwise would have occurred. This is effectively a claim about performing work (in any of the senses that we have described). In idiomatic English, however, it also means to be of value (either positive or negative) to some recipient or to serve some purpose. I interpret Bateson’s point to be that both meanings are relevant. Taken together, then, these two meanings describe work that is initiated in order to effect a change that will serve some end. Some favored consequence must be promoted, or some unwanted consequence must be impeded, by the work that has been performed in response to the property of the sign medium that is taken as information.

This is why an interpretive process is more than a mere causal process. It organizes work in response to the state of a sign medium and with respect to some normative consequence—a general type of consequence that is in some way valued over others. This characterization of creating/making a difference in both senses suggests that the sort of work that Bateson has in mind is not merely thermodynamic work. To “make a difference” in the normative sense of this phrase is (in the terms we have developed) to support some teleodynamic process. It must contribute to the potential to initiate, support, or inhibit teleodynamic work, because only teleodynamic processes can have normative consequences. So to explain the basis of an interpretation process is to trace the way that teleodynamic work transforms mere physical work into semiotic relationships, and back again.

As our dynamical analysis has shown, teleodynamic work emerges from and depends on both morphodynamic and thermodynamic work. Consequently, these lower forms of work must also be involved in any process of interpretation. If this is the case, then an interpreting process must depend on extrinsic energetic and material resources and must also involve far-from-equilibrium self-organizing processes. In this roundabout way, like the dynamical processes that characterize organisms, the interpretation of something as information involves a form of recursive organization whereby the interpretation of something as information indirectly reinforces the capacity to do this again.





BEYOND CYBERNETICS



Perhaps the first hint that the 2,000-year-old mystery of interpretation might be susceptible to a physical explanation rather than remaining forever metaphysical can be attributed to the development of a formal theory of regulation and control, which can rightfully be said to have initiated the information age. This major step forward in defining the relationship between information and its physical consequences was provided by the development of cybernetic theory in the 1950s and 60s. The term cybernetic was coined by its most important theoretician, Norbert Wiener, and comes from the same Greek root as the word “government,” referring to steering or controlling. Within cybernetic theory, for the first time it became possible to specify how information (in the Shannonian sense) could have definite physical consequences and could contribute to the attractor dynamics constituting teleonomic behaviors.

In chapter 4, we were introduced to the concept of teleonomic behavior and the simple mechanistic exemplar of negative feedback regulation: thermostatic control circuit. This model system not only demonstrates the fundamental principles of this paradigm, and the way it conceives of the linkage between information as a physical difference and a potential physical consequence; it also provides a critical clue to its own inadequacy.

A thermostat regulates the temperature in a room by virtue of the way that a switch controlling a heating device is turned on or off by the effects of that temperature. The way these changes correlate with the state of the switch and the functioning of the heating device creates a deviation-minimizing pattern of behavior. It’s a process whereby one difference sets in motion a chain of difference-making processes that ultimately “make a difference” in keeping conditions within a desired range for some purpose. Thus a difference in the surrounding temperature produces a difference in the state of the switch, which produces a difference in the operation of the heater, which produces a difference in the temperature of the room, which produces a difference in the state of the switch, and so forth. At each stage, work is done on a later component in the circuit with respect to a change in some feature of the previous component, resulting in a circularity of causal influences. Thus it is often argued that each subsequent step along the chain of events in this cycle “interprets” the information provided by the previous step, and that information is being passed around this causal circuit. But in what sense do these terms apply? Are they merely metaphoric?

We can dissect this problem by dissecting the circuit itself. A classic mechanical-electrical thermostat design involves a mercury switch attached to a coiled bimetallic strip, which expands when warmed, thus tipping the switch one way, and contracts when cooled, tipping the switch the other way (cf. Figure 4.1). The angle of the switch determines whether the circuit is completed or interrupted. But let’s consider one of these steps in isolation. Is the coiling and uncoiling of a bimetallic strip information about temperature? It certainly could be used as such to an observer who understood this relationship and was bringing this knowledge to bear in considering the relationship. But what if this change of states goes unnoticed? Physically, there is no difference. The change in state of the coiled strip and of the room temperature will occur irrespective of ether being observed. Like the wax impression of a signet ring, it is merely a physical phenomenon that could be interpreted as information about something in particular. Of course, it could also be interpreted as information about many other things. For example, its behavior could be interpreted to be information about the differential responsiveness of the two metals. Or it could be mistakenly interpreted as magic or some intrinsic tendency to grow and shrink at random. Is being incorporated into a thermostatic circuit sufficient to justify describing the coiling behavior as “information” about temperature to the circuit? Or is this too still only one of many possible things it could provide information about? What makes it information about anything rather than just a simple physical influence? Clearly, it is the process of interpretation that matters, not merely this physical tendency, and that is an entirely separate causal process.

Consider, in contrast, a single-cell organism responding to a change in temperature by changing its chemical metabolism. Additionally, assume that some molecular process within the organism, which is the equivalent of a simple thermostatic device, accomplishes this change. In many respects, it is more like a thermostat installed by a human user to maintain room temperature than a feedback process that might occur spontaneously in inorganic nature. This is because both the molecular regulator of the cell and the engineered thermostat embody constraints that are useful to some superordinate system for which they are at the same time both supportive and supported components. In a thermostat, it is the desired attractor dynamics (desired by its human users), and not any one specific material or energetic configuration, that determines its design. In organisms, such convergent behaviors were likely to have been favored by natural selection to buffer any undesirable changes of internal temperature. Indeed, in both living and engineered regulators, there can be many different ways that a given attractor dynamics is achieved. Moreover, analogously functioning living mechanisms often arise via parallel or convergent evolution from quite different precursors.

This drives home the point that it is this pattern of behavior that determines the existence of both the evolved and engineered regulatory systems, not the sharing of any similar material constitution or a common accidental origin. In contrast, Old Faithful was formed by a singular geological accident, and the regularity of its deviation-minimizing hydrothermal behavior had nothing to do with its initial formation. Nor does its feedback logic play any significant role in how long this behavior will persist. If the geology changes or the source of water is depleted, the process will simply cease.

We are thus warranted in using the term information to describe the physical changes that get propagated from component to component in a designed or evolved feedback circuit only because the resultant attractor dynamics itself played the determinate role in generating the architecture of this mechanism. In such cases, we also recognize that its physical composition and component dynamical operations are replaceable so long as this attractor-governed behavior is reliably achieved. In contrast, it is also why, in the case of Old Faithful or any other accidentally occurring non-living feedback process, it feels strange to use information terminology to describe their dynamics, except in a metaphoric or merely Shannonian sense. Although they too may exhibit a tendency to converge-toward or resist-deviation-away-from a specific attractor state, the causal histories and future persistence of these processes lack this crucial attribute. Indeed, a designed or evolved feedback mechanism and an accidentally occurring analogue might even be mechanistically identical, and we still would need to make this distinction.





WORKING IT OUT



As Shannon’s analysis showed, information is embodied in constraints, and, as we have additionally shown, what these constraints can be about is a function of the work that ultimately was responsible for producing them (or could have produced them, even if they are never generated), either directly or indirectly. But as Stuart Kauffman points out in the epigraph at the beginning of this chapter, not only does it take work to produce constraints, it takes constraints to produce work. So one way in which the referential content of information can indirectly influence the physical world is if the constraints embodied in the informing medium can become the basis for specifying further work. And differences of constraint can determine differences in effect.

This capacity for one form of work to produce the constraints that organize another, independent form of work is the source of the amplifying power of information. It affords a means to couple otherwise unrelated contragrade processes into highly complex and indirect chains. And because of the complementary roles of constraint and energy-gradient reduction, it also provides the means for using the depletion of a small energy gradient to create constraints that are able to organize the depletion of a much larger energy gradient. In this way, information can serve as the bridge linking the properties of otherwise quite separate and unrelated material and energetic systems. As a result, chains of otherwise non-interacting contragrade processes can be linked. Work done with the aid of one energy gradient can generate constraints in a signaling medium, which can in turn be used to channel work utilizing another quite different energy gradient to create constraints in yet some other medium, and so forth. By repeating such transfers step by step from medium to medium, process to process, causal linkages between phenomena that otherwise would be astronomically unlikely to occur spontaneously can be brought into existence. This is why information, whether embodied in biological processes, engineered devices, or theoretical speculations, has so radically altered the causal fabric of the world we live in. It expands the dimensions of what Kauffman has called the “adjacent possible” in almost unlimited ways, making almost any conceivable causal linkage possible (at least on a human scale).

In this respect, we can describe interpretation as the incorporation of some extrinsically available constraint to help organize work to produce other constraints that in turn help to organize additional work which promotes the maintenance of this reciprocal linkage between forms of work and constraint. So, unlike a thermostat, where the locus of interpretive activity is extrinsic to the cycle of physical interactions, an interpretive process is characterized by an entanglement between the dynamics of its responsiveness to an extrinsic constraint and the dynamics that maintains the intrinsic constraints that enable this responsiveness. Information is in this way indirectly about the conditions of its own interpretation, as well as about something else relevant to these conditions. Interpreting some constraint as being about something else is thus a projection about possibility in two ways: it is a prediction that the source of the constraint exists; and also that it is causally relevant to the preservation of this projective capacity. But a given constraint is information to an interpretive process regardless of whether these projected relationships are realized. What determines that a given constraint is information is that the interpretive process is organized so that this constraint is correlated with the generation of work that would preserve the possibility of this process recurring under some (usually most) of the conditions that could have produced this constraint.

For this reason, interpretation is also always in some sense normative and the relationship of aboutness it projects is intrinsically fallible. The dynamical process of interpretation requires the expenditure of work, and in this sense the system embodying it is at risk of self-degradation if this process fails to generate an outcome that replenishes this capacity, both with respect to the constraints and the energy gradient that are required. But the constraint that serves as the sign of this extrinsic feature is a general formal property of the medium that embodies it, and so it cannot be a guarantee of any particular specific physical referent existing. So, although persistence of the interpretive capacity is partly conditional on this specificity, that correlation may not always hold.

The interpretive capacity is thus a capacity to generate a specific form of work in response to particular forms of system-extrinsic constraints in such a way that this generates intrinsic constraints that are likely to maintain or improve this capacity. But, as we have seen, only morphodynamic processes spontaneously generate intrinsic constraints, and this requires the maintenance of far-from-equilibrium conditions. And only teleodynamic systems (composed of reciprocal morphodynamic processes) are capable of preserving and reproducing the constraints that make this preservation possible. So a system capable of interpreting some extrinsic constraint as information relevant to this capability is necessarily a system dependent on being reliably correlated in space and time with supportive non-equilibrium environmental conditions. Maintaining reliable access to these conditions, which by their nature are likely to be variable and transient, will thus be aided by being differentially responsive to constraints that tend to be correlated with this variability.

Non-living cybernetic mechanisms exhibit forms of recursive dynamical organization that generate attractor-mediated behavior, but their organization is not reflexively dependent on and generated by this dynamics. This means that there is no general property conveyed by each component dynamical transition from one state of the mechanism to the next. Only a specific dynamical consequence.

As Gregory Bateson emphatically argued, confusing information processes with energetic processes was one of the most problematic tendencies of twentieth-century science. Information and energy are distinct and in many respects should be treated as though they occupy independent causal realms. Nevertheless, they are in fact warp and weft of a single causal fabric. But unless we can both clearly distinguish between them and demonstrate their interdependence, the realms they exemplify will remain isolated.





INTERPRETATION



For engineering purposes, Shannon’s analysis could not extend further than an assessment of the information-carrying capacity of a signal medium, and the uncertainty that is reduced by receipt of a given signal. Including referential considerations would have introduced an infinite term into the quantification—an undecidable factor. What is undecidable is where to stop. There are innumerable points along a prior causal history culminating in the modification of the sign/signal medium in question, and any of these could be taken to be the relevant reference. The process we call interpretation is what determines which is the relevant one. It must “pick” one factor in the trail of causes and effects leading up to the constraint reflected in the signal medium. As everyday experience makes clear, what is significant and what is not depends on the context of interpretation. In different contexts and for different interpreters, the same sign or signal may thus be taken to be about very different things. The capacity to follow the trace of influences that culminated in this particular signal modification in order to identify one that is relevant is in this way entirely dependent on the complexity of the interpreting system, its intrinsic information-carrying/producing capacity, and its involvement with this same causal chain.

Although the physical embodiment of a communication medium provides the concrete basis for reference, its physical embeddedness also opens the door to an open-ended lineage of potentially linked influences. To gain a sense of the openness of the interpretive possibilities, consider the problem faced by a detective at a crime scene. There are many physical traces left by the interactions involved in the critical event: doors may have been opened, furniture displaced, vases knocked over, muddy footprints left on a rug, fingerprints on the doorknob, filaments of clothing, hair, and skin cells left behind during a struggle, and so on. One complex event is reflected in these signs. But for each trace, there may or may not be a causal link to this particular event of interest. Each will also have a causal history that includes many other influences. The causal history reflected in the physical trace taken as a sign is not necessarily relevant to any single event, and which of the events in this history might be determined to be of pragmatic relevance can be different for different interpretive purposes and differently accessible to the interpretive tools that are available.

This yields another stricture on the information interpretation process. The causal history contributing to the constraints imposed on a given medium limits, but does not specify, what its information can be about. That point in this causal chain that is the referent must be determined by and with respect to another information process. All that is guaranteed by a potential reduction of the Shannon entropy of a signal is a possible definite linkage to something else. But this is an open-ended set of possibilities, only limited by processes that spontaneously obliterate certain physical traces or that block certain physical influences. Shannon information is a function of the potential variety of signal states, but referential entropy is additionally a function of the potential variety of factors that could have contributed to that state. So what must an interpretive process include in order to reduce this vast potential entropy of possible referents?

In the late nineteenth-century world of the fictional detective Sherlock Holmes, there were far fewer means available to interpret the physical traces left behind at a crime scene. Even so, to the extent that Holmes had a detailed understanding of the physical processes involved in producing each trace, he could use this information to extrapolate backwards many steps from effect to cause. This capacity has been greatly augmented by modern scientific instruments that, for example, can determine the chemical constitution of traces of mud, the manufacturer of the fibers of different fabrics, the DNA sequence information in a strand of hair, and so on. With this expansion of analytic means, there has come an increase in the amount of information which can be extracted from the same traces that the fictional Holmes might have encountered. These traces contain no more physical differences than they would have in the late nineteenth century; it is simply that more of these have become interpretable, and to a greater causal depth. This enhancement of interpretive capacity is due to an effective increase in the interpretable Shannon entropy. But exactly how does this expansion of analytic tools effectively increase the Shannon entropy of a given physical trace?

Although from an engineer’s perspective, every possible independent physical state of a system must be figured into the assessment of its potential Shannon entropy, this is an idealization. What matters are the distinguishable states. The distinguishable states are determined with respect to an interpretive process that itself must also be understood as a signal production process with its own potential Shannon entropy. In other words, one information source can only be interpreted with respect to another information production process. The maximum information that can be conveyed is consequently the lesser of the Shannon entropies of the two processes. If the receiving/interpreting system is physically simpler and less able to assume alternative states than the sign medium being considered, or the relative probabilities of its states are more uneven (i.e., more constrained), or the coupling between the two is insensitive to certain causal interactions, then the interpretable entropy will be less than the potential entropy of the source. This, for example, happens with the translation of DNA sequence information into protein structure information. Since there are sixty-four possible nucleotide triplets (codons) to code for twenty amino acids, only a fraction of the possible codon entropy is interpretable as amino acid information.2 One consequence of this is that scientists using DNA sequencing devices have more information to work with than does the cell that it comes from.

This limitation suggests two interesting analogies to the thermodynamic constraints affecting work that were implicit in Shannon’s analysis. First, the combined interpretable Shannon entropy of a chain of systems (e.g., different media) through which information is transferred can be no greater than the channel/signal production device with the lowest entropy value. Each coupling of system-to-system will tend to introduce a reduction of the interpretable entropy of the signal, thus reducing the difference between the initial potential and final received signal entropy. And second, information capacity tends to be lost in transfer from medium to medium if there is noise or if the interpreting system is of lower entropy (at least it cannot be increased), and with it the specificity of the causal history that it can be about. Since its possible reference is negatively embodied in the form of constraints, what a sign or signal can be about tends to degrade in specificity spontaneously with transmission or interpretation. This latter tendency parallels a familiar thermodynamic tendency which guarantees that there is inevitably some loss in the capacity to do further work in any mechanical process. This is effectively the informational analogy to the impossibility of a perpetual motion machine: interpretive possibility can only decrease with each transfer of constraints from one medium to another.

This also means that, irrespective of the amount of Shannon information that can be embodied in a particular substrate, what it can and cannot be about also depends on the specific details of the medium’s modifiability and its capacity to modify other systems. We create instruments (signal receivers) whose states are affected by the physical state of some process that we wish to monitor and use the resulting changes of the instrument to extract information about that phenomenon, by virtue of its special sensitivities to its physical context. The information it provides is thus limited by the instrument’s material properties, which is why the creation of new kinds of scientific instruments can produce more information about the same objects. The expansion of reference that this provides is implicit in the Shannon-Boltzmann logic. So, while the material limits of our media are a constant source of loss in human information transmission processes, they are not necessarily a serious limitation in the interpretation of natural information sources, such as in scientific investigations. In nature, there is always more Boltzmann entropy embodied in an object or event treated as a sign than current interpretive means can ever capture.





NOISE VERSUS ERROR



One of the clearest indications that information is not just order is provided by the fact that information can be in error. A signal can be corrupted, its reference can be mistaken, and the news it conveys can be irrelevant. These three normative (i.e., evaluative) assessments are also hierarchically dependent upon one another.

A normative consideration requires comparison. This isn’t surprising since it too involves an interpretation process, and whatever information results is a function of possibilities eliminated. Shannon demonstrated that unreliability in a communication process can be overcome by introducing a specified degree of redundancy into the signal, enabling an interpreter to utilize the correlations among similar components to distinguish signal from noise. For any given degree of noise (signal error) below 100 percent, there is some level of redundant transmission and redundancy checking that can distinguish signal from noise. This is because the only means for assessing accuracy of transmission irrespective of content is self-consistency. If a communication medium includes some degree of intrinsic redundancy, such as involving only English sentences, then errors such as typos are often easy to detect and correct irrespective of the content. Because this process is content-independent, it is even possible to detect errors in encrypted messages before they are decoded. Errors in transmission or encoding that result from sources such as typing errors, transmission errors, or receiving errors will be uncorrelated with each other in each separate transmission, while the specific message-carrying features will be highly correlated from one replica to another.

This logic is not just restricted to human communication. It is even used by cells in cleaning up potentially noisy genetic information, irrespective of its function. This is possible because the genetic code is redundant, such that nucleotides on either side of the double helix molecule must exactly complement one another or the two sides can’t fully re-anneal after being separated during decoding. Thus a mechanism able to detect non-complementarity of base pairing can, irrespective of any functional consequence, be evolved to make functional repairs, so long as the damage is not too extensive.

There is a related higher-order logic involved in checking the accuracy of representation. Besides the obvious utility of being able to determine the accuracy of information about something, this issue has important philosophical significance as well. The assessment of referential error has been a non-trivial problem for correspondence and mapping theories of reference since at least the writings of the philosopher David Hume in 1739–40. This is because a correspondence is a correspondence, irrespective of whether it is involved in a representational relationship or is of any significance for any interpretive process. In some degree or other, it is possible to find some correspondence relation between almost any two facts. What matters is the determination of a specific correspondence, and this requires a means for distinguishing accurate correspondence relationships and ignoring spurious ones. The solution to this problem has a logic that is analogous to correcting for signal noise in Shannon’s theory.

In everyday experience, we often use the redundancy of interpretive consequences as a means for detecting representational error whenever this is available. In practical terms, this is the widely employed method of fact checking. Comparing multiple independent reports of the same event can help to reduce interpretive error. For example, multiple witnesses to a crime who may have only observed some of the relevant events, and who may have poor memories of the details, or who may be withholding or falsifying evidence, can provide accounts that can be compared and cross-checked to reconstruct the most probable course of events. Those accounts that have concordant reference are taken to provide the most likely and most accurate representations of what occurred.

This is also the essence of the method employed in the empirical sciences. When an independent researcher replicates the results of another researcher’s experiments, it reinforces confidence in the prior claim. To do this, the second researcher provisionally assumes the accuracy of the prior claim and operates accordingly. There is an interesting asymmetry to this process. Failure to replicate prior results can lead to serious theoretical revisions, while discovering consistency between results is only a minimal guarantee of the correctness of a theory. Using many independent methods, analogous to obtaining reports from multiple independent witnesses, and finding consistent results between them all, is even more convincing. This is why developing new tools for investigating the same empirical phenomenon in different ways provides for a considerable increase in the representational confidence that is generated.

The logic of fact checking differs in an important respect from introducing signal redundancy, to distinguish signal from noise in the Shannonian sense. This is because it actually involves a means for increasing the potential entropy of the signal, not decreasing it, as happens when signal redundancy is increased. To detect representational error in this way, it is necessary to compare different and to some extent independent sources of representational information, and to instead take advantage of their otherwise uncorrelated diversity to overcome error. Each source of information will have its own idiosyncrasies to contribute, analogous to noise, but all will share in common being generated with respect to, and under the influence of, the same extrinsic events. So correcting representational error entails both an increase in the entropy of the signal—e.g., by multiplying interpretive processes—and taking advantage of redundancies in the constraints imposed on these processes by the common object of interest which is the extrinsic factor they all share in common.

This is a higher-order variant on the same theme, because it effectively treats each interpretive process as though it is a replica of the signal to be compared to the original, and relies on the probability of independent sources of variation to highlight redundancies of reference. Alternative interpretations that share prominent features in common despite being independently generated are likely to have been influenced by the same extrinsic cause. Unfortunately, assuming a common source of redundant constraints in independent interpretations is never an infallible inference, because it involves an assessment of similarity and difference, which is itself an interpretive process. There can be many reasons for not detecting difference, particularly when the Shannon entropy—reflected in the number, complexity, and diversity of interpretive sources—is not large.

To explore this more carefully, consider the example of the detective who compares many sources of information and uses their correlations to infer a common event, which they may or may not each indicate. Over time, as more interpretive techniques have become available for this purpose—such as DNA sequencing, materials analysis, and trace-elements detection—both the effective signal entropy and the sources of interpretive redundancy available to law enforcement have increased, with an attendant increase in interpretive confidence. The detective’s problem, or that of a jury listening to a welter of potentially untrustworthy evidence, is to reduce the uncertainty of interpretation—to get at the “truth.” They must generate an interpretive response to the whole ensemble of sources of evidence and counterevidence that best corresponds with what actually occurred beyond direct observation. The consistency (redundancy) and inconsistency (non-redundancy) of the evidence is not itself a guarantee that a given interpretation is accurate. Faced with the problem of comparing alternative interpretations of the same events, one is often forced to analyze other features of the source of the information to determine if there are systematic biases that might be introducing spurious or intentionally skewed levels of redundancy. Creating the false appearance of independent sources of information is, for example, a major tool employed in propaganda and confidence schemes.

Error checking is most effective when the interpretive challenge involves objects or states of affairs that remain available for subsequent exploration. In these cases, the redundancy analysis can be proactive and fairly straightforward. As we have already noted, testing a particular scientific hypothesis involves behaving as though a given trial interpretation (the initial report) is accurate, and observing the consequences of continuing to act in accordance with that interpretation (attempting to replicate it) to see if the consequences remain consistent with it. By acting in accord with a given interpretation, causal consequences of this process can be generated to act as virtual new interpretations, each of which can be compared. This approach is also relevant for criminal investigation. So, for example, on suspicion that a given business is corrupt, a law enforcement agency might set up a sting operation that will proceed as though their suspicion is true, and observe the consequences. If the hypothesis is true, the actions of the perpetrators will parallel the prediction.

The concept of producing actions to test for interpretive error was also hinted at in Bateson’s aphorism about information, and again involves the performance of work: acting to change circumstances to produce predictable results. All of these approaches to the problem of representational error checking reinforce the claim that interpretation is a dynamical process, which inevitably involves the generation of new information in the form of new signals and new interactions that do work with respect to those that were generated previously. Although this shifts our analysis upwards to a higher order of the information generation process, the same core logic that we have seen at work in Shannon’s classic analysis still applies: the information conveyed is determined with respect to the alternatives eliminated—whether about reliability of the signal, reliability of reference, or reliability of interpretation.





DARWINIAN INFORMATION



In many respects, this process of error detection is crudely analogous to the logic of natural selection, with an hypothesis as the analogue of a variant phenotype, and the selective exclusion of certain of these based on their non-concordance with others as the analogue of selection. Indeed, many theorists have compared scientific research and other truth-seeking enterprises to Darwinian processes,3 and a number of contemporary philosophers have developed theories of function and mental content based roughly on the logic of natural selection.4 But a number of problems with these approaches have been uncovered, mostly having to do with information only being defined with respect to past conditions, not current conditions. There are also questions about whether these processes can account for and detect error.5 To sort out these problems of the interpretive generation of information, then, it may be helpful to consider analogous problems posed by evolutionary theory.

In the standard Darwinian account of evolution by natural selection, many individual organisms with variant forms constitute a pool of options from which only a subset is able to successfully reproduce, to pass on its characteristics to the next generation. This subset succeeds because of its comparatively better fittedness to prevailing environmental conditions; and as a result of genetic inheritance, the new pool of variant individuals that is produced inherits features from the parent generation which functioned best in that environment.

By analogy to Shannon’s model of the transmission of information, the initial variety of genotype and phenotype forms in the prior generation provides a measure of the potential entropy of the lineage, and the extent of the reduction in “transmitted” forms due to differential reproduction and elimination provides a measure of the information generated by that process. So, in theory, one should be able to quantify this entropy reduction for a given population of organisms for a given number of generations, and estimate the amount of Shannon information produced per time in the evolution of that lineage. It is this parallelism that warrants talking about evolution in informational terms, and ultimately for describing evolution as a process that produces new information. But what is it information about? (Figure 13.1)

In the general case, reduction in signal entropy is evidence of work imposed on the signal medium from some extrinsic source, and the basis of what that signal can be about. Can we analogously conclude that “genetic” and/or phenotypic entropy is about the environment of a given lineage? In biological evolution, however, the outside source of influence may not be the environment within which this process takes place. This may be a passive context, a boundary condition such as available sunlight, ambient temperature, humidity, and so on.6 So the work performed to “make a difference” in the generation of this Darwinian information cannot be assumed to be extrinsic to the organism. It is instead mostly intrinsic to the source of the “signal”—the work required of organisms in order to persist and reproduce. Constant work is required to maintain the far-from-equilibrium conditions that characterize life. This makes organisms constantly dependent on successfully extracting resources from their environment. But such dependency also makes them selectively sensitive to the availability of these extrinsic resources. So the information that organisms transmit to future generations will reflect the relative fit between the specific forms of work they tend to engage in, the inherited constraints that make this possible, and the features in the environment that are critical to this process. In this way, the constraints implicit in this organism-environment relationship can become represented in the selective preservation of some living dynamics and not others.



FIGURE 13.1: A cartoon depiction of the process of natural selection, showing its parallel with the logic of information generation. However, in this case the work responsible for reducing the variety is generated not by an outside influence but by the individual organisms within the population. Each organism’s teleodynamic work is ultimately responsible for utilizing the constraints of the organism-environment dependency. The variety of organism traits in succeeding generations is thus reduced in ways better fitted to the environment.





This inversion of the locus of work and source of constraint in the Shannon-Boltzmann information relationship is also a characteristic shared by many scientific instruments that serve as detectors. By incessantly generating a far-from-equilibrium process, a device’s intrinsic instabilities do work that can be used to exemplify their highly sensitive reactivity to certain contextual factors. A process that must continuously do work to maintain an unstable state requires specific conditions in its environment; its state can therefore be used as an indication of the presence, absence, or change of these conditions. A change in these conditions can thus generate a large difference in signal constraint because the far-from-equilibrium state of the device affords a significant potential to do work. So it can amplify even a tiny difference in some critical parameter into a large difference in the dynamics of the signal medium.

Though highly specific sensitivity reduces the diversity of what can thereby be conveyed by a change in this dynamic signal, it can instead provide high precision of reference. The canary in the mine can tell the miner that although he is not yet gasping for air, that possibility is incrementally close. Similarly, a metal detector is highly sensitive to the presence or absence of an object capable of being attracted to a magnet, but little else, because only conductive metals can disrupt the detector’s constantly generated magnetic field. Despite the low entropy of the signal, this specificity is what the treasure hunter or minesweeper wants. While this is intuitively obvious, it often gets ignored in technical discussions that do not distinguish these two levels of information. It again demonstrates the difference between assessments of information and entropy at these different levels of analysis.

Because an organism is the locus of the work that is responsible for generating the constraints that constitute information about its world, what this information can be about is highly limited, specific, and self-centered. Like the treasure hunter with his metal detector, an organism can only obtain information about its environment that its internally generated dynamic processes are sensitive to—von Uexküll’s Umwelt, the constellation of self-centered species-relevant features of the world. For the most part, these are statistical features and general tendencies, like the average density of food resources, the probability of predation, or the cyclicity of the seasons, and specific molecular or microdynamic features of the immediate physical context. They are typically either directly or indirectly relevant boundary conditions, which support the far-from-equilibrium processes constituting the various components of the organism’s metabolism with a variety and indirectness of effect that correlates with organism complexity. So, although the information embodied in organism adaptations can be understood to be about its environment, this aboutness is always and only with respect to the constraints of organism dynamics, and not with respect to just any arbitrary properties of things.





FROM NOISE TO SIGNAL



Before we can turn our attention to the implications of this analysis of information and work for understanding the evolution of life and mind, we need to consider one further feature exemplified by evolutionary processes: their ability to create new forms of information. This is due to a fundamental difference between the abstract logic of communication theory and the evolutionary process: the shifting status of signal versus noise in evolution. If we liken the transmission of traits from generation to generation via reproduction to signal transmission over a communication channel, then mutation in biology is the analogue of noise introduced into a communication channel. In most communication processes, noise is a nuisance. It degrades the information by introducing new, uncorrelated entropy into the signal, and this increases uncertainty about what is signal and what is not, thereby potentially corrupting the message. But whereas the introduction of noise decreases the potential Shannon information capacity of a channel, it paradoxically increases the capacity for reference, because it increases total Shannon entropy. It is as though an additional information channel is available, because noise is also a consequence of the openness of the physical system that is being used as a sign medium, and so it too reflects some source of signal modification besides that which the sender provides. Of course, noise is just noise if you are only interested in what was originally sent, and not in the cause of the degradation of that signal. And yet, this normative decision depends on the interpretation process. Noise can be signal to a repairman.

From the perspective of Shannon information, noise is a source of equivocation or ambiguity in the signal. A noisy signal, like a text containing typos, contains signals replaced by uncorrelated alternatives. Shannon’s analysis showed that it is possible to compensate for equivocation between signal and non-signal if the transmission and interpretation processes can take advantage of signal constraints or redundancies. In the evolution of adaptive phenotypes, however, there is no such shared expectation to go on. Understanding how this is accomplished when there is no context of introduced redundancy to rely upon is the critical clue to explaining how evolution ultimately transforms noise into signal.

What if there is no information available in the signal to help discern transmitted from randomly substituted bits? Consider the case of a set of instructions in which there are word substitution errors, but in which there is no violation of meaning, spelling, or grammar to indicate that it is inappropriate. This sometimes happens with foreign-made devices which come with assembly or use instructions that have been poorly translated from an unfamiliar language. In these circumstances, we often provisionally assume that the instructions are accurate and attempt to accomplish the task described. If in the process we find that something doesn’t work out as described, we may suspect error in the instructions, and careful attention to the task described can often provide clues to the locus of this error.

This trial-and-error approach is also a form of hypothesis testing, as described above. The redundancy being relied upon is between the referential information in the communication and the constraints of the application context. If the information accurately represents features of some physical system (e.g., the instructions about operating some mechanical device), its interpretation in terms of the actions performed on (or interactions with) that system will correlate well with physical constraints required to achieve a given expected result. Thus the reference of a sign or signal is also susceptible to error correction via redundancy at a higher level than signal organization. The reference of a signal implicitly makes a prediction about certain extrinsic causal possibilities. Physical or logical interactions with these extrinsic conditions will be constrained either to conform or not conform to this prediction, and if not, this will disconfirm the represented state.

So the logic of natural selection is analogous in many ways to a trial-and-error process, except that in natural selection there is no extrinsic source of representation to check against. Success or failure to reproduce is all that distinguishes representational accuracy of the information embodied in the genotype and phenotype. But reproduction allows for further iterative testing of these interpretive consequences: the succeeding generations effectively stand in for the outside source of comparison necessary for error checking. If one’s genetic inheritance contributes to producing a body with appropriate adaptations, it is because the constraints it embodies are in some degree of correspondence with constraints of the environment. Unfortunately, dead men tell no tales, as the cruel aphorism suggests. So it would seem that there is no recording of the many failures-to-correspond; no independent representation of which were the errors and which were not.

What counts as useful genetic information in biological evolution is determined after the fact with respect to its ability to pass through the functional error correction mechanism of natural selection. The significance of the inheritance signal is both “tested” and refined by the way the far-from-equilibrium dynamics of organism development, maintenance, and reproduction conform to environmental constraints and opportunities. Evolution is thus a generator of information for the organism and a process that rectifies this information with its reference. Thus, although the evolutionary process is itself non-normative (i.e., is not intrinsically directed toward a goal), it produces organisms which are capable of making normative assessments of the information they receive. In this sense, evolution generates and rectifies referential information. In this way the evolutionary process can progressively increase the functional correspondences between genetics, organism dynamics, and contextual preconditions. To the extent that the constraints of this dynamics conform to environmental constraints that are consistent with its continuation, these intrinsic constraints embody this correspondence in the ongoing dynamics. In this way, natural selection exemplifies the logic of error correction.

Students of evolution have not usually insisted that the absence of the lineages that go extinct is what determines the functionality of the traits that persist. One could see the surviving lineages and their adaptations through the lens of engineering design in terms of identified functions that were designed to achieve a previously specified purpose. But although this analogy has a superficial attractiveness, it is undermined by the fact that few if any biological structures can be said to have only one distinguishing function. Their fittedness, internally and externally, is irreducibly systemic, because adaptations are the remainders of a larger cohort of variants selected with respect to one another and their environmental context. There is no simple mapping of genetic-phenotypic information and adaptive function. That which constitutes the reference of the inherited information is ultimately defined only negatively (i.e., by constraint). Biological function is not, then, positively constructed, but is rather the evolutionary remainder that occupies the constrained space of functional correlations that have not been eliminated. This is the basis for novel functions to emerge in evolution, as well as the possibility for evolutionary exaptation—the shift from one adaptive function to another. In this respect, genetic information is neither merely retrospective—about successful adaptation in the past—nor does it anticipate future novel adaptations. It is not an aspect of a static relationship, but emerges in process, as its interpretive consequences perform work that may or may not turn out to support this process continuing.





INFORMATION EMERGING



Although the account so far has been framed in terms of the information involved in biological evolution, this model is generalizable to other domains. The nested dependencies of the three levels of entropy reduction—here characterized by Shannon’s, Boltzmann’s, and Darwin’s variations on this theme of entropy reduction—define a recursive architecture that demonstrates three hierarchically nested notions of information. These three very roughly parallel the classic hierarchic distinctions between syntax (Shannon), semantics (add Boltzmann), and pragmatics (add Darwin). They also roughly parallel the relationship between data, content, and significance, though to understand how these semiotic levels are interrelated, we must carry this analysis out of the realm of biology and into the domain of communication (Figure 13.2).

The appeal to Darwinian selection as the ultimate mechanism for the generation of new information relationships might suggest that we should take a strictly etiological view of information. In other words, we might be tempted to argue that information is only discernable post hoc, after selection, and after entropy reduction. But this is misleading, both for biology and for information relationships in general. As with biological function, the specific selection history of a given representational capacity may be necessary to explain present usage, but past correspondences are not what it is currently about. Past correspondences have improved the chances for reliable and precise predictive correspondence, but it is a relationship to the present condition that matters. The very fact that information and noise are not intrinsically distinguished, and that mutational noise can become biological information in the course of evolution, exemplifies this property.



FIGURE 13.2: Three nested conceptions of information. Shannon information is the most minimal and the most basic. Referential information is emergent (e) from Shannon information, and significant—or useful—information is emergent from referential information.





This is the problem with simple etiological explanations of adaptive function and representation, which treat information and function as retrospectively determined by their selection history. Because information-generating processes emerge in systems constituted by a pragmatic selection history, the ground of the correspondence between information and context is determined negatively, so to speak, by virtue of possible correspondences that have been eliminated, but it leaves open the issue of correspondences never presented. No specific correspondence is embodied with full precision and present correspondence is not guaranteed. With functional correspondence underdetermined, novel functions can arise de novo in unprecedented contexts, and incidental properties of the sign or signal may come to serendipitously serve emergent functions. In short, while the possibility of information generation and interpretation depends on a specific physical selection history, the present influence of this information on the persistence of the system that enables it may be serendipitously unrelated to this history. This is the basis for the evolution of new function, but it is also why information is always potentially fallible.

The evolutionary process is not, however, a normative process. Conditions can be good or bad for an organism, or for life in general; an organism’s responses to the world can be effective or ineffective in achieving its intrinsic ends, and its adaptational dynamics can accurately or inaccurately link changes in organism activity with changes in extrinsic conditions contributing to the persistence of this dynamical organization; but evolution just occurs. So, although the evolutionary process can further the pragmatic convergence between interpreted content and extrinsic reference, information is not in any sense available to evolution, only to the organisms that are its products. Evolution generates the capacity to interpret something as information. This capacity is intrinsic to a self-perpetuating, far-from-equilibrium system, which depends on its environment and does work to modify that environment in a way that reinforces its persistence. Information is a relational property defined with respect to this persistently unstable dynamical regularity; or, as the philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce would have said, with respect to a “habit”7—understood in its most generic sense; specifically, a self-perpetuating self-rectifying habit.

So genetic information is about cellular chemical-reaction possibilities, their roles in constituting the organism, and how this relationship between genes and their effects also correlated with extrinsic conditions that supported the maintenance of these possibilities in the past. It is information about organism design and function because it introduces critical constraints into the non-equilibrium processes which may ultimately contribute to the perpetuation of that relationship. It is interpreted by the persistence of the self-perpetuating process that it contributes to. But although it is not information about the present world—only extrinsic signs can fill this role—the ability to make use of environmental features as information nevertheless depends upon this closed interpretation of genetic information for the ability to obtain information from extrinsic sources.

This ability to use extrinsically generated events and objects as information derives from the special dynamics of living processes. Because organisms are constituted by specially organized, persistent, far-from-equilibrium processes, they are intrinsically incomplete. In this regard, they are processes organized around absence. Not only are biological adaptations evolved and defined with respect to features of the world extrinsic to the organism, but in many respects these are only potential features which may also be absent from the current environment. Thus adaptations of an organism that have to deal with unusual conditions, like high altitude or extremes of heat or cold, may never be expressed in a lifetime. For this reason, the maintenance of intrinsically unstable, far-from-equilibrium conditions entails mechanisms that effectively anticipate the possible variations of environmental conditions by simply not excluding them. They do so with respect to a living process that is at the same time incessantly asymmetrically directed contrary to high-probability states in multiple ways: they do work (a) to maintain their far-from-equilibrium state (which supports persistence of the ability to do work); (b) to generate specific organic forms (i.e., they constrain dynamical processes and generate structures which have highly constrained, low-probability features); and (c) to achieve the specific outcome of maintaining themselves long enough to reproduce the global organization supporting processes a, b, and c. So, with respect to these three improbably asymmetric dynamics, there are many critical extrinsic factors that may be relevant. This combination of absence and necessary relevance to an asymmetric process, incessantly interacting with and modifying the world, is what projects the property of information into otherwise merely physical states and events.

Consider a non-mentalistic example: a deciduous tree which alters its metabolism in response to decreasing day length and cooling temperatures in the early months of autumn, resulting in the eventual withdrawal of metabolic support for its leaves, so that they dry up and eventually become severed from the branches they grew from. This adaptation to the difficulties of winter involves a mechanism which treats these environmental changes as information about likely future events that would have an impact on survival and effective reproduction. Insofar as this response has, in previous generations, resulted in persistence of the lineage compared to others lacking it, the mechanism has acquired interpretive reliability. The reliability of the seasonal changes in these factors provides constrained variation to which the constraints of the tree’s metabolic mechanisms have become tuned. But it is not merely these correlations that constitute the informational property of these seasonal changes for the tree. The day length and mean temperatures are also correlated, but one is not intrinsically information about the other nor about the change of season. It is only with respect to the end-directed improbable dynamics of the tree’s metabolic processes that one or the other of these is informative—and specifically informative about boundary conditions potentially affecting that dynamics.

At one point, I worked in an office near a number of trees of the same species that had been planted as part of the landscape design for the campus. A few of these trees, which were planted close to an automated streetlamp and next to the exhaust from the building’s ventilation system, always were very late to change the color of their leaves and drop them, compared to the others. On the one hand, one might argue that these few trees were misinterpreting these artificial signs, because they don’t accurately represent seasonal changes. On the other hand, to the extent that these artificial conditions were nevertheless reliably predictive of local factors affecting the trees’ metabolism, one would be justified in arguing that the interpretation was correct, because it promoted the dynamical outcome by virtue of which the mechanism exists. This shifts the focus from the evolved function to the immediate incremental consequence of the evolved mechanism as the ground for referential information. The evolved mechanism constrains the dynamics of possible interpretation, but doesn’t determine it. Each moment of interpretation is in some way supportive or disruptive of the self-maintenance of this dynamical trend. This means that not only is there an historical origin for the normative property of this interpretive process, there is also an ahistorical and immediately efficacious normative property as well. And this need not be consistent with its evolved function. In fact, this possibility is a necessary condition for evolution, since essentially every adaptation has evolved from prior forms and mechanisms that often served very different adaptive functions (such as feathers originally evolving as a form of insulation).

Function and representation are made possible by the way living processes are intrinsically organized around absent and extrinsic factors, and the Darwinian process inevitably generates increasingly convoluted forms of dependency on such internal absences. Information is a relational property that emerges from nested layers of constraint: constraints of signal probability (Shannon), constraints of the dynamics of signal generation (Boltzmann), and the constraints required for self-maintaining, far-from-equilibrium, end-directed dynamics (Darwin). Because information is a relationship among levels of constraint generated by intrinsically unstable physical processes, it is also normative with respect to those processes. But constraint is a negative property, and thus neither something intrinsic nor determinate. This means it is intrinsically incomplete and fallible. Yet it is these very properties that make it evolvable and indefinitely refinable.





REPRESENTATION



We can conclude that a representational relationship cannot be vested in any object or structure or sign vehicle. It is not reducible to any specific physical distinction, nor is it fully constituted by a correspondence relationship. But neither is it a primitive unanalyzable property of minds. Instead, even simple functional and representational relationships emerge from a nested interdependence of generative processes that are distinctive only insofar as they embody specific absences in their dynamics and their relationships to one another. These absences embody, in the negative, the constraints imposed on the physical substrates of signals, thoughts, and communications which can be transferred from one substrate to another, and which thereby play efficacious roles in the world as inherited constraints on what tends to occur, rather than acting as pushes or pulls forcing events in one direction or another. Constraints don’t do work, but they are the scaffolding upon which the capacity to do work depends.

This is only the barest outline of an information theory that is sufficient to account for some of the most basic features of functional and representational relationships, so it cannot be expected to span the entire gap from biological function to conscious agency. But considering that even very elementary accounts of biological function and representation are currently little more than analogies to man-made machines and human communications, even a general schema that offers a constructive rather than a merely descriptive analogical approach is an important advance.

In this exploration of the relationship between information theory, thermodynamics, and natural selection, we have unpacked some of the unrecognized complexity hidden within the concept of information. By generalizing the insight captured by Claude Shannon’s equation of information with entropy reduction and constraint propagation, and tracing its linkage to analogues in thermodynamic and evolutionary domains, we have been able to address some of the most vexing issues of representation, reference, and normativity (i.e., usefulness). By removing these inadequacies in current definitions of information, we may at last overcome the seemingly insurmountable obstacles to formulating a theory of representation that is sufficiently rich to serve as the basis for biology and the cognitive neurosciences, and sufficiently grounded in physics to explain representational fallibility, error checking, information creation, and the relationship between informational and energetic processes.
