14



EVOLUTION



Natural selection disposes what self-organization proposes.



—STANLEY SALTHE, 20091





NATURAL ELIMINATION



The term evolution literally refers to an unrolling process, like the unrolling of a scroll to reveal its contents. Although it can be used in a generic sense to describe a process that develops in a particular direction, as in the “evolution of a chemical reaction” or “stellar evolution” (changes that occur during the lifetime of a star), since the time of Darwin the term has become closely associated with the biological process by which living species have come to differentiate and diversify over geological time. In biological discussions, its meaning is assumed to be synonymous with natural selection and related processes such as genetic drift; and in non-technical discussions, it is generally assumed to refer to some version of the Darwinian perspective on the origin of species. The Darwinian connotation is helpful in distinguishing what amounts to a negative or subtractive conception of change, in which certain forms are progressively eliminated or culled, from a positive conception such as we see in design processes where new modifications are added. In the standard model, both the preservation of the “more fit” and the elimination of the “less fit” are understood as the result of surviving to reproduce, or not, respectively.

The processes underlying biological evolution are not, of course, limited to a subtractive effect. Even natural selection in its simplest form requires the production of variations of form and multiplication of offspring from which the most successful are preserved. In most traditional accounts of Darwinism, the source of novel variations is considered to be the primary positive factor. The introduction of novel variation into the process, according to strict neo-Darwinism, however, is presumed to be the result of a form of damage—genetic mutational—which is essentially an expression of the second law of thermodynamics, and thus an order-destroying effect. But, as the epigraph to this chapter hints, there may be a source of increasing orderliness available as well: self-organizing processes. The recognition that there needs to be such a “positive” (order-introducing) factor, and not merely a multiplicative factor, in order to explain biological evolution is becoming more widespread. This requirement is echoed also by Peter Corning, who argues that “a fully adequate theory of evolution must encompass both self-organization and selection.”2 A failure to recognize this need has been the source of persistent theoretical problems for evolutionary theory. So precisely demonstrating how self-organization and selection processes are functionally intertwined may help resolve some of these riddles.

It might be more accurate to say that natural selection theory is explicit about its subtractive aspect but agnostic about its additive aspect. Although natural selection offers a powerful logic that can account for the way organisms have evolved to fit their surroundings, it leaves out nearly all of the mechanistic detail of the processes involved in generating organisms, their parts, and their offspring. Indeed, it is one of the virtues of this theory that it is entirely agnostic about the specific mechanisms responsible for the growth and regeneration of structures and functions, for reproducing individual organisms, for passing on genetic information, and for explaining the many possible sources of variation that affect this process. But it is precisely the process of generating physical bodies and maintaining metabolism that constitutes the coin of the natural selection economy. Variations do not exist in the abstract; they are always variations of some organism structure or process or their outcome. Organisms must compete for resources to build their parts and to maintain the far-from-equilibrium dynamics, which is the source of this self-maintenance and reproduction. It is the efficiency and context-appropriateness of these processes which determine the differential reproduction that determines what persists and does not. Or to put this more simply, what natural selection eliminates is determined with respect to the effectiveness of what gets generated in a given context.

This decoupling of function from the processes responsible for its origination means that the specific mechanisms involved don’t matter. Only the consequence matters, irrespective of how it was achieved. So natural selection is a classic case of the ends justifying the means, by preserving them, retrospectively. This decoupling from specific substrates and mechanisms was the source of Darwin’s most revolutionary insight: that adaptation in biology only becomes realized ex post facto. It helped him to recognize that variations of structure and function that arise by accident can nevertheless be functional. More important, this decoupling of consequence from cause allows for the widest possible diversity of mechanisms to be available for recruitment to serve a given adaptive function. For example, the means by which flight, photosynthesis, or thought can be accomplished in a given organism is irrelevant so long as it produces useful results. Whether flight is achieved by the fluff of dandelion seeds caught by a light breeze, the leathery sheets of Pterosaur or bat wings, or the lightness and wind resistance of feathers, what counts is getting airborne. Even though these functions depend upon underlying mechanisms that converge on certain specific mechanical constraints, it is the realization of these constraints and not their specific embodiment that matters.

In this way, natural selection is a process defined by multiple realizability, and is the paradigm exemplar for defining functionalism. This complete openness to substrate and mechanism is what opens the Pandora’s box of evolvability, and makes the explosive creativity of life and mind possible. So it is with the emergence of the process of natural selection that true functional generality comes into the world. Adaptations and organisms are in this sense general types that exist irrespective of the specific details of their embodiment.

The vast power of evolvability thus is a consequence of the fact that natural selection is a process that regularly transforms incidental physical properties into functional attributes. An adaptation is the realization of a set of constraints on candidate mechanisms, and so long as those constraints are maintained, other features are arbitrary. But this means that with every adaptation, there are innumerable other arbitrary properties potentially brought into play. Although a given structure or process must be embodied by specific substrates with innumerable properties that are incidental to current adaptive usefulness—for example, the sound of the heartbeat or the redness of blood—any of these incidental properties may at any point themselves become substrates for selection, and thus functional or dysfunctional properties. Precisely because the logic of natural selection is mechanism-neutral, it also is minimally restricted in what kinds of properties can be recruited, except that they must be immediately usable given the constraints of organic chemistry (which is why, say, nuclear energy has never been recruited by natural selection to serve organism functions). The relevance of this for emergence arguments should be obvious. This capacity to transform the incidental and accidental into the significant and indispensable radically minimizes the causal role of any specific intrinsic physical tendency or immediate antecedent condition in determining what will or will not be the physical substrate for an evolved function.

Because an adaptation is mechanism-neutral, it is a bit like an algorithm that can be implemented on diverse machines, and in this sense it has something of the character of a description. It is a general, in philosophical terms. But an adaptation is not identical with the collection of properties constituting the specific mechanism that embodies it. It is far less than these! Only a very small subset of physical attributes of a given physical implementation of some function, such as oxygen binding, are ever relevant to the success of that adaptation. An adaptive mechanism is also something beyond any of its properties as well. It is the consequence of an extended history of constraints being passed forward from generation to generation—constraints that have perhaps been embodied in many different substrates along the way. Like the process of addition that can at various times be embodied in finger movements, the shifting of beads on an abacus, or the changing distributions of electric charge in the memory registers of a computer, the specific physical links in this chain have become incidental. It is only the transmission of conserved constraints that is critical, and the constraints are not the stuff. Of course, these constraints must be embodied in some specific physical substrate at every step, and the transfer from substrate to substrate must always be mediated by a specific physical mechanism that precisely determines the material overlap and the work of transferring these constraints. But it is the conservation of constraint, not of energy, material, or specific mechanism, that matters.

Precisely because constraint is not something positive, but is rather something not realized, only some of the physical details of the mechanisms recruited as adaptations are of functional relevance, even though all are part of the physical processes involved. Only those functionally relevant physical attributes—ones that guarantee the preservation of these constraints—are likely to contribute to future generations’ body composition. Other physical attributes are susceptible to eventually being eliminated if the same constraints can be transferred to other substrates, or may just get degraded by variations accumulated over the generations. It is in this sense that we are justified in arguing that life’s mechanisms are general types.

The power of evolutionary theory to explain much of the complexity and diversity of biological forms derives from this physical abstractness. This decoupling of material generative processes from functional consequence is responsible for the persistence of an adaptation across many generations, but also what allows for the transfer of function to progressively more suitable substrates. In a more mundane sense, it is also responsible for one of the most basic attributes of life: the successful bottom-up development of a vastly complex and well-integrated organism, regulated by a comparatively small set of constraints passed on in the genes and cytoplasm received from a parent organism.

Because the intrinsic material components and dynamical properties that constitute a given adaptation are not essential, but are determined by constraints on properties, not some finite set of specifically relevant properties, we need to think about the origin of organic mechanisms quite differently than designed mechanisms. In the evolutionary history leading up to a given form of adaptation, those constraints on materials and dynamics that were retained were merely those that were not eliminated. As scientists and engineers, we tend to focus on the properties that we discern to be most relevant to our abstract sense of a given function; but life is only dependent on excluding those that are least helpful.

This is the critical break in causal symmetry that makes the concept of biological function an emergent general physical property that is not determined by its lower-level constituent properties, even though we may find it useful to try to list and describe them. Those constituent properties that we biologists may find helpful in understanding and categorizing biological functions were not themselves the targets of “selection”; they represent merely part of the residue of what was not eliminated. Evolution is not imposed design, but progressive constraint.





“LIFE’S SEVERAL POWERS”



So it is essential to the power of natural selection theory that it quite explicitly declines to address how the relevant mechanisms and their variant forms are generated. The Darwinian logic quite correctly treats these issues as separable from the explanation of the determination of adaptation. Evolutionary theorists have therefore been justified in both accepting the plausibility of accidental generation of variant forms (e.g., via “chance” mutation) and rejecting the necessity of actively acquired (e.g., Lamarckian) and functionally biased variations (aka “directed mutations”). These features are neither a problem nor a necessity for the theory because the details of these mechanisms are irrelevant for the functional explanation it provides. In fact, though textbooks often suggest otherwise, Darwin himself was open to many possible sources of form generation and genetic variation, including Lamarckian mechanisms. He just recognized that the logic of natural selection was sufficient irrespective of how these generative, reproductive, and variant consequences were achieved.

Recognizing that natural selection logic is agnostic to these factors doesn’t make the problem of mechanism go away, however. As we have stressed throughout much of this book, the problems of how regular dynamical processes and physical forms are generated in the face of the second law of thermodynamics, and how biological information is generated, preserved, and transmitted, are far from trivial components in biological explanation. Natural selection may occur irrespective of the specific details of form generation and reproduction, but it only occurs if these processes are reliably present. Some specific mechanisms are required, and the processes that are capable of producing such regularities are limited and must have very specific dynamical properties in order to thwart the ubiquity of local thermodynamic tendencies. We are not, then, freed from answering questions about how specific means of achieving these processes might influence evolution.

Organisms are highly complex systems and, as many critics of natural selection have been fond of pointing out, the number of possible variant configurations of a complicated multipart system like an organism is truly astronomical. Even in the case of the simplest organisms, an undirected, unconstrained process for sorting through the nearly infinite range of combinatorial variants of forms, and testing for an optimal configuration by the trial and error of natural selection, would fail to adequately sample this space of possible variations, even given the lifetime of the universe. In contrast to this vast space of possible combinatorial variants, the process of biological development in any given lineage of organisms is highly constrained, so that only a tiny fraction of the possible variations of mechanism can ever be generated and tested by natural selection. While this limitation may at first appear to impose an added burden on the theory, it turns out to be the most important aid to the solution of this conundrum.

Just as organism “design” by evolution must be understood negatively, development of organism form is also not a construction process, in the sense we might imagine from an engineering point of view. It is the expression of the interaction of many morphodynamic processes. Like the reciprocally end-and-means logic of the morphodynamic processes that generate the “body” of an autogen, a vastly more complex and interwoven fabric of morphodynamic processes is responsible for the generation of an organism body from its initial state following conception. The inherited constraints that we identify as genetic information are specifically constraints that make morphodynamic processes highly probable at the chemical, macromolecular, cellular, and intercellular levels. Evolution in this sense can be thought of as a process of capturing, taming, and integrating diverse morphodynamic processes for the sake of their collective preservation.

Recognizing the morphodynamic origin of organism form is a critical factor in this analysis, because it means that variations appearing at the genetic level only get expressed through a dynamical filter with highly specific tendencies to dampen and amplify constraints. The variant forms that eventually become subject to natural selection have in this sense been vetted by self-organization (as the epigraph to this chapter suggests). Even if the mechanism of the generation of variations is independent of and irrelevant to the consequences of natural selection, this does not mean that variations get expressed irrespective of the systemic integration of the organism. These quite restrictive intrinsic constraints on developmentally expressed variations significantly bias variation to be minimally discordant with respect to existing ontogenetic processes, even if they are generated irrespective of any potential adaptive outcome.

Although these morphogenetic constraints radically restrict the exploration of all possible advantageous variations of form, they nevertheless vastly increase the probability of generating variations with some degree of intraorganism fittedness—that is, concordance with the constraints and synergies that maintain the integrity of organism functions. As a result, natural selection ends up sampling phenotypic options in just a tiny fraction of the possible variation space; but these variants are much more likely to exhibit features that are not too discordant with or disruptive of already existing functions.

The significance of morphogenetic constraints on the generation of variations is only one aspect of a more global set of conditions that must be considered as antecedently relevant to natural selection theory. The importance of the constraints introduced by morphogenetic processes is that they contribute a positive counterpart to the negative logic of natural selection. Because it only provides an ex post facto culling influence, natural selection is only so generative as its supply of optional forms is profligate. The constrained generation of variant forms is only the most minimal expression of this presupposition of a positive process in evolution. As James Mark Baldwin argued with respect to “organic selection”—his so-called New Factor in Evolution:



Natural selection is too often treated as a positive agency. It is not a positive agency; it is entirely negative. It is simply a statement of what occurs when an organism does not have the qualifications necessary to enable it to survive in given conditions of life. . . . So we may say that the means of survival is always an additional question to the negative statement of the operation of natural selection.



The positive qualifications which the organism has arise as congenital variations of a kind which enable the organism to cope with the conditions of life. This is the positive side of Darwinism, as the principle of natural selection is the negative side.3





A full specification of “the positive side of Darwinism” requires significantly more than merely a theory of variations, however. It requires organisms and all of the complex properties we ascribe to them (or at least their surrogates, e.g., in simulations), as well as the associated physical processes that enable organisms to preserve their critical features and to reproduce. In general terms, this means unit systems exhibiting such critical properties as self-maintenance in the face of constant thermodynamic breakdown, continual far-from-equilibrium chemistry, mechanisms sufficient to generate complete replicas of themselves, and sufficient organization to maintain these properties in the face of significant variations in the conditions of existence. But if this is a requirement for evolution by natural selection, it cannot itself have initially arisen by natural selection. Natural selection presupposes the existence of a non-homogeneous population of individuated systems with these thermodynamically rare and complex properties.

Darwin thus appropriately ends his “Origin of Species” with the following majestic sentence:



There is grandeur in this view of life, with its several powers, having been originally breathed into a few forms or into one; and that, whilst this planet has gone cycling on according to the fixed law of gravity, from so simple a beginning endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have been, and are being, evolved.





To perhaps state an obvious fact—one that is nevertheless underappreciated and glossed over by the majority of texts on biological evolution—natural selection assumes the existence of processes of persistent non-equilibrium thermodynamics, self-maintenance, reproduction, and adaptation. It cannot therefore be the complete explanation for their origins, particularly for the origins of their teleodynamic character. Natural selection can only improve the fit between these dynamical processes and the various environmental conditions on which they depend or must defend against; it cannot generate them.

The first teleodynamic systems emerged, they did not evolve. They emerged from specific patterns of interdependency that happened to arise between morphodynamic processes. Previously, we have used the concept of an autogen to exemplify the requirement for this emergent transition. As we have seen, self-organization is a distinct and vastly simpler process than natural selection. Morphodynamic processes form the ground on which teleodynamic and thus evolutionary processes have been built. In simple terms, self-organization is the expression of the intrinsic dynamics of a system that get expressed within certain non-equilibrium boundary conditions, whereas natural selection is a function of the organization of a system’s internal non-equilibrium dynamics with respect to external conditions. In this way, natural selection involves a specific mode of intrinsic self-organization dynamics that maintains itself by virtue of the generation of effects which specifically counter certain external changes of conditions away from what is conducive to the persistence of those intrinsic processes.





ABIOGENESIS



So the first organism wasn’t a product of natural evolution. The constellation of processes that we identify with biological evolution ultimately emerged from a kind of proto-evolution, supported by a kind of protolife, that ultimately must trace back to the spontaneous emergence of the first molecular systems capable of some minimal form of evolutionary dynamic. Earlier, it was shown that even a molecular system as simple as an autogen can give rise to a form of natural selection. The emergence of this constellation of properties enabling evolution, even in quite minimal form, marks a fundamental shift in the dynamical organization of the natural world. In the terms we have been developing here, this is a shift from thermodynamic and morphodynamic processes to teleodynamic processes. Wherever in the universe this occurs, it is the emergence of the first and simplest lifelike process in that region. All other teleodynamic processes and teleological relationships to develop in those environments will likely trace their origin to that crucial transition.

For this same reason, the study of the origin of life has a paradoxical status compared to the rest of biology. It violates a crucial and hard-won dogma of biology: the denial of spontaneous generation. From early Greco-Roman times, it was thought that some, if not all, life arose from inanimate matter by way of spontaneous generation. Evidence to support this theory of the genesis of life was seen in the way maggots would emerge spontaneously from rotting beef or molds would form on stale bread or overripe fruits, seemingly without these life forms being intrinsically present in these materials. In 1668, in one of the world’s first controlled biological experiments, Francisco Redi challenged the theory by demonstrating that maggots did not emerge from meat when put under glass. But belief that life emerged spontaneously from non-life nevertheless died hard. Indeed, it is ultimately (but only ultimately) a necessary assumption of scientific materialism that the essence of life does not arise from a realm outside of the physical substrates of its constitution. In these first centuries of the European Enlightenment it was, in this respect, the scientifically fashionable alternative to an otherworldly spiritual origin theory, and it was one of the central fascinations of alchemical lore. Alchemical “recipes” for generating life (even homunculi, as we saw in chapter 2) were not uncommon, and considered the mark of truly perfected alchemical methods. In many respects, the central preoccupation of alchemy—transformation of matter from one form to another, including from non-life to life—was the prescientific precursor to emergentism.

Support for spontaneous generation theories of life persisted until, more than two centuries after Redi, it was famously repudiated in 1889 by Louis Pasteur.4 Pasteur showed that sterilized rotting meat, placed in a flask with an S-shaped neck, never gave rise to maggots so long as outside contamination was prevented. Indeed, the method of sterilization, coupled with hermetic isolation of the sterilized food (e.g., in a tightly sealed canning jar), did far more than prevent new organisms from forming; it also prevented them—even those microbes still unknown to nineteenth-century science—from aiding the breakdown and putrefication of food. In this way, long-term preservation of food might be considered the most significant spin-off of origins-of-life research.

With the negative results of Pasteur’s experiments, it quickly became biological dogma that the emergence of life from non-life was effectively not something to worry about. Indeed, the now ubiquitous methods of sterilizing, canning, freezing, bottling, irradiating, and yes, pasteurizing food, depend on it. The truth of the maxim “Only life begets life” is tested untold billions of times in the modern world with each can or bottle of food that is produced and consumed. But of course to accept this fact, unconditionally, leads to a conceptual paradox. Either life has been around forever in a universe without beginning, or else it originates from some other non-physical realm (e.g., of spirit) in which its analogue is somehow preformed, or it emerges from non-living materials, abiogenetically. The first two of these are reductio ad absurdum claims in some form or other. And so we are left with the problem of proving the spontaneous generation theorists right, at least in some limited form.

Charles Darwin clearly understood that this problem was outside of his purview when at the end of the Origin of Species he describes evolution commencing only after life has been “originally breathed into a few forms or into one.” But this hardly set the issue aside. In fact, the debate with respect to spontaneous generation was actually quite intense among Darwinians in the latter part of the nineteenth century. Perhaps the most notable battle lines were exemplified by Alfred Russel Wallace—the co-discoverer of the principle of natural selection—and Thomas Henry Huxley—Darwin’s “bulldog,” as he was sometimes described. Wallace sided with theorists like the famed neurologist Henry Charlton Bastian, who supported experimentation to demonstrate the spontaneous generation of life from non-life, and who wrote three influential books on the subject in the decades following the publication of the Origin of Species. Bastian’s interest was in part a function of his medical interest in the basis of microbial disease, but also of his critical stance against supernatural theories of life.

Although Darwin’s theory appeared to specifically undermine supernatural sources for the forms and adaptive design of organisms, its silence with respect to the origins of life and the initiation of biological evolution left a gaping hole in the materialist alternative to various forms of vitalism and supernaturalism. Thus, Bastian and many others of the new generation of Darwinians felt that it was important to undertake experimentation to demonstrate that life too had a natural, purely chemical origin. Bastian distinguished this origins-of-microorganism theory from earlier spontaneous generation theories by calling it “archebiosis,” referring to the original or ancient creation of life, though he thought that he could experimentally demonstrate that this was a natural process that was likely continuing in the present. He believed that general laws would eventually be discovered that governed the generation of life from inorganic matter, though he readily admitted that it would likely be a very difficult scientific challenge to discover these laws.

Although he was a staunch Darwinian, Bastian’s deeper commitment was to materialism and the repudiation of spiritualistic theories. This was one of the most significant metaphysical assumptions expressed in the Darwinian perspective and clearly one of the reasons it recruited both zealous allies and vituperous critics. However, the idea of spontaneous generation also attracted vitalists, who thought that it might be a window into the secret of a hitherto undiscovered vital force, or élan vital, unique to life. This issue was rejoined by Huxley, who initially viewed the materialist endeavor in a favorable light, but later became convinced that the generation of life from inorganic matter was so rare and unlikely that it might only have occurred once in the ancient history of the Earth.

Huxley appears to have realized that the continuous generation of new life forms would be a problem for Darwinian theory. Both Darwin and Huxley were strongly committed to something close to a monogenesis approach to biological evolution, in which all life forms are descendant from a single or at most a very few paleo-ancestors. Were life to be continually generated over the entire epoch of life on Earth, the continuity of life forms, their interactions and interdependencies, and their deep commonalities of design would be difficult to explain. Moreover, the principle of natural selection and its corollary, “descent with modification,” would be shifted from center stage; no longer the almost exclusive explanation for biological variation and adaptation. Huxley became intensely critical of Bastian’s work both for its implications concerning the mechanism of evolution and for the damage that could come to Darwinian theory if it was thought that failure of experiments to demonstrate spontaneous generation of bacteria also undermined the materialist assumptions of evolutionary theory. So, although he recognized the necessity of a theory to explain how living chemistry could emerge from inorganic antecedents—a process he called “abiogenesis”—Huxley took great pains to distinguish this from spontaneous generation, and to highlight its improbability, complexity, and astronomical rarity, hinting that maybe only certain special conditions of the prebiotic Earth could explain it.

The intellectual context that nurtured this second generation of Darwinian theorists was, however, far more expansive than the study of the physical basis of life. The possibility of discovering general principles of nature that account for the abiotic generation of living processes also held the promise of completing the Darwinian assault on the special status of life and mind that seemed to exempt it from physics and chemistry as usual. If one could discover evidence in everyday processes that there was a regular path from complex chemistry directly to simple life, it would close this final explanatory gap. But if this transition was not in some way general, involving laws common to all material processes, and instead was so queer as to have only occurred once in billions of years and never again, its naturalness might be called into question.

In hindsight, although the critics of this post-Darwinian version of spontaneous generation were right in repudiating the claims of spontaneous generation, even for the simplest life forms (which turn out to be immensely complex), and in their insistence that all known life on Earth may have arisen from a common ancestral form, there may nevertheless have been a baby in the unsterilized bathwater of the theories of Bastian and others.5





THE REPLICATOR’S NEW CLOTHES



Although the autogenic theory proposed earlier in this book was intended primarily as a model system for elucidating the logic of the emergence of teleodynamic processes, it also offers a partial answer to Bastian’s challenge and an approach to the origin of life. It is, however, something less than an exemplar of spontaneous generation, and considerably less than an account of the last universal common ancestor (often identified with the acronym LUCA) of living organisms. This is because autogens are not alive—at least not in any current sense of that concept. They lack persistent non-equilibrium dynamics, diffusible surfaces, genetic information, an autonomously implemented reproductive process, or any way to selectively react to or act upon their environment in any way that is self-supportive. Yet autogenic theory may provide something equally useful: a first building block in a theory that allows us to deduce the origins of these fundamental attributes of organisms. Below, we will see that extrapolating from the logic of autogen evolution, and utilizing the logic of emergent dynamics, it is possible to provide an account of how such protolife forms might give rise to these properties that we recognize as the hallmarks of life. Most important, a principled account of the origins of biological information is a critical step toward demystifying and de-homunculizing our understanding of the relationship between genetic information and the defining property of life.

Autogenic theory provides a glimpse of an elusive law of emergence operative at the dawn of life, exemplifying the emergence of ententional properties from non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and thus a bridge from non-living to living processes. The theory also demonstrates why spontaneous generation is so exceedingly rare. This is because the conditions that make it possible are highly precise and at the same time highly atypical of the thermodynamically driven processes that are ubiquitous outside of biology.6 But once teleodynamic systems capable of natural selection emerged, an unbounded territory opened up. The evolution of life has led to many levels of radical and unprecedented higher-order teleodynamic phenomena, including mental phenomena. But prerequisite to this capacity to evolve level upon level of more complex ententional relationships is an ability to capture the critical dynamical constraints for each lower level of teleodynamics, in a form that allows them to be preserved and transmitted irrespective of the further convolutions of dynamical organizations that may be incorporated during the course of future evolution. If the source of constraints maintaining the core critical dynamics is not somehow itself insulated from these modifications, there can be no solid foundation to build upon. Each new change will modify existing constraints, and the compounding of higher-order teleodynamic constraints on a base of preexisting constraints will be nearly impossible. There need to be separately sequestered constraints embodied in some non-dynamical attribute, which can be preserved unmodified across changes in dynamics, so that earlier dynamical achievement will not be continually undermined.

This is what genetic information provides for living organisms—and much more. It sequesters an independent source of constraints that is partially redundant to that intrinsic to the dynamics of the organism itself. This has two immediate advantages. First, it is a conservative factor. It protects against degradation of evolved adaptive constraints that might occur due to dynamical interactions with unprecedented environmentally derived factors. Second, it is an innovative factor. Its separate material properties provide a basis for indirectly modifying dynamical constraints that are physically independent of the details and limitations of these dynamics.

The molecular informational mechanism constituting genetics that is today ubiquitous to all living organisms was not just an augmentation of the autogenic process; it took it to a whole new level. The conservative effect of embodying dynamical constraint in a separate physical substrate from that doing the work to maintain the organism provided a critical foundation on which evolution could build progressively higher-order teleodynamic processes. As our analysis of the concept of information in previous chapters has demonstrated, however, genetic information cannot be simply identified with a physical substrate or pattern. Information is dependent on the propagation of constraints linking a teleodynamic system and its environmental context. That means that information is not any intrinsic property of the substrate that embodies or conveys these constraints. Although one of the crucial properties of an information-bearing medium is that it can serve as a template for copying and propagating constraints, this simple physical quality is not what defines it. The general theory of information that we explored in the two previous chapters demonstrated that information is identified with the transmission of constraints, exemplified by some physical medium linking a teleodynamic system with its environment. Information does not stand apart from this relationship, nor does it preexist the teleodynamics that it informs. Another way to say this is that teleodynamic organization is primary, and information is a special feature of some teleodynamic processes.

What does this mean for the role of genetic information in the origin of life? Basically, it suggests that genetic information is not primary, but is rather a derived feature of life. Although a molecule that has the unusual property of serving as a template for producing a precise replica of itself is without doubt potentially useful for propagating constraints, the process of structural replication by itself does not constitute information. A DNA molecule outside of an organism does not convey information about anything, and is mostly just sticky goo. And gene sequences transplanted from one sort of organism to another sort are likely to be noise in that new context.7 So, even if DNA and RNA were abundantly synthesized and replicated in the merely geochemical environment of the early Earth, it would not under those circumstances be information about anything. It is not the template replication that is the basis for the information-conveying capacity of DNA and RNA in organisms; it is the integration of the patterns that they can exhibit into the teleodynamics of the living process that matters.

To state this claim more forcefully, DNA is just another—albeit very useful—adaptation, that itself must have evolved this function by natural selection. This should not surprise us, because these molecules are remarkably well suited for the purpose. The almost identical bonding energies of any given adjacent nucleotides, the nearly unlimited size of a given DNA strand, and the precision of template specificity, among other attributes, give the impression of a molecule that was honed by natural selection in response to its information-carrying function. More important, replication of a molecule like DNA is not essential for either reproduction or evolution, since something as simple as an autogen can reproduce and evolve. Calling it the “secret of life” is thus hyperbole. And considering genetic information to be the defining character of life is also a bit hasty. It is without question critical to the evolution of all higher-order forms of life, including all that are currently available to biologists. An account of how biological information emerges from more basic teleodynamic processes is the first step to explaining the nature of all higher-order ententional properties.

This view of information poses a challenge to a widely accepted account of the origin of life, and of evolution in general. This is the belief that life is fundamentally just a complex kind of copying process. The most well known version of this is replicator selection theory. The term replicator was coined for this use by Richard Dawkins in 1976 in his influential book The Selfish Gene. Though Dawkins gave it a name, as we will see, the core assumptions of this theory—that the essential feature of reproduction is the copying of template molecules—is in some form or other characteristic of nearly all modern conceptions of the evolutionary process. Like Darwin’s account of the necessary conditions for natural selection, replicator selection also begins by assuming some unspecified and highly non-trivial kinds of processes. But unlike Darwin, who refused to speculate about these, replicator theories often assume that this process is so ubiquitous and uncomplicated that it can be accepted as a defining attribute of life.

A replicator is something that gets copied. More precisely, this something is a pattern embodied in a physical substrate. In biological systems, this is most commonly taken to be DNA or RNA, but Dawkins suggested that certain cultural artifacts and habits could also be replicators, and coined the term memes to refer to them. Critics of replicator theories have often argued that the concept is too narrowly reserved for genetic information, and that other features of organisms must also be included as replicators, such as the membrane of the cell and many organelles. These are not created entirely anew in cell division, but physically inherited from the progenitor cell when it divides. In both views, however, whether there is only one kind of replicator or many at different levels, it is copying that is assumed to be the defining principle.

Although it is generally believed that polynucleotide chains like DNA and RNA molecules constitute life’s replicators, even by Dawkins’ own description, based on a characterization of DNA “replication,” these molecules fail the crucial criterion. They do not replicate themselves. To be more explicit: polynucleotide A cannot directly produce another exact duplicate of polynucleotide A.8 Instead, with the assistance of special contextual conditions (e.g., in company of a molecular complex made up of a number of supportive transcription molecules, or within an operating PCR machine, and including critical component molecules as raw materials), polynucleotide molecule A can produce a complementary polynucleotide molecule B, which in turn under the same conditions can produce polynucleotide molecule A.

Whereas viral, bacterial cell, and eukaryotic cell division do produce replicas (with slight variation), this involves the replication of both strands of a DNA molecule to produce two duplicated double strands. On more careful inspection, then, we can see that the idea of a replicator, which Dawkins has identified with DNA, is instead an oversimplified projection of cellular reproduction onto the process called DNA replication. Indeed, we can now easily recognize that polynucleotide “replication” is in fact a special case of what is often described as autocatalysis (also a misnomer for similar reasons). As we noted in our discussions of autogenic chemistry, the chemical process described in both cases might more accurately be called reciprocal catalysis, or even reciprocal indirect catalysis, since it always involves at least two and sometimes more complementary catalysts, each catalyzing another member of the set. So, DNA replication in a PCR machine—ignoring the role of the supportive machinery and mediating molecules—is a two-step, reciprocally catalytic loop.

Perhaps the closest analogue (though not a true example) to what can be called direct molecular replication is found in the special case of prion replication. In this process, there is no new molecular synthesis or lysis involved to form the new molecule. The precursor molecule, the so-called pre-prion protein, is made up of the same component amino acids arranged into the same polymeric sequence as the prion protein. It’s just that the three-dimensional conformation of the two proteins is different. Prion formation simply involves the prion molecule binding with the pre-prion molecule in such a way as to cause the latter to deform into the prion conformation, and thus become capable of similarly deforming other pre-prion proteins. Pre-prion proteins require the molecular machinery found in mammalian brains (including the DNA code for this pre-prion sequence) in order to be synthesized. In this respect, prion “replication” does not actually generate any new material. It is merely “damage” done to proteins synthesized in mammalian brains, which subsequently propagate this damage to others.

If we return to the actual case of bacterial cell replication and try to capture its minimal logical structure, we must take into account that it is made up of a complex of reciprocally interdependent molecules. The crucial factor is the complex reciprocities that enable each part to be both end and means in forming the whole integrated organism. Specifying these details is critical to fully account for the process of self-replication. There is no subset of molecules that suffices. Ultimately, all essential components need to get replicated, if for no other reason than to replace those that have become damaged. In this sense, the nucleic acid sequences have no special claim to be the replicators. They are merely more central because many other molecular replication processes depend on them.

But assuming for the moment that naked nucleic acids could serve as templates for replicating identical copies, we still wouldn’t be any closer to understanding the relationship between replication and genetic information. Although a replicated molecule is literally a re-presentation of its “parent” molecule’s form, there is nothing but this form (or its complement) copied over and over. There is no information about something else that is copied in this process, just the molecular structure. If inserted into a living cell, this sequence might be capable of producing a protein product or some other sort of biological effect, as can be achieved by artificially generated DNA sequences, but the best we could say of this is that this sequence is “potential information” (or misinformation). It is the cellular machinery that determines that a DNA sequence has this potential, and the sequence only inherits this potential because of the existence of cells that have used similar molecules to their advantage in the past. Randomly generated DNA sequences are parasitic on this potential in the same way that a randomly mutated gene can be.

There is a significant conceptual gap to be bridged between the replication of DNA and its role as a medium of information. Although Dawkins often speaks as though a given base sequence on a DNA molecule is intrinsically a form of information (so that copying it is transmitting information), it is only information in the minimalistic Shannonian sense. As we have seen, the Shannonian conception of information is an abstraction that only considers the most minimal criteria for the possibility of carrying information. Although no molecular biologist would consider the structure of a DNA molecule to be information were it not for the fact that it contributes to the operation of other cellular-molecular processes, they may still be willing to bracket this from consideration when thinking of evolution. In life, DNA molecules do not provide information about other replicas of themselves, but rather about the molecular dynamics of the cell in relation to its likely environmental milieu. And yet many theories of the origins of life are based on the assumption that molecular replication is a sufficient defining property of living information.

Probably the most influential of the scenarios explaining the origin of life based on molecular replication is known as the RNA-World hypothesis. In this scenario, it is argued that RNA replication is the core process distinguishing the first lifelike process from other chemical processes. This view has grown in influence over recent decades because of discoveries of RNA functions in addition to its role in mediating between DNA sequences and the amino acid sequence specifying a protein. Single-stranded RNA molecules can coil back on themselves to form complex, cross-linked hairpin forms and coils, producing a complex three-dimensional structure. In the form of transfer RNA, this structure plays the critical role in binding to amino acids and aligning them with respect to a messenger RNA molecule within a ribosome. But also due to this structure, some RNA molecules are also capable of catalytic action. More recently, RNA polymer fragments have been found to play a wide variety of regulatory roles in the cell as well. These many diverse functions have suggested that RNA molecules could serve all the essential functions assumed to be requisite for an early life form. RNA can thus serve both a synthetic role and a template role. However, such scenarios treat the template-copying capacity as primary.

But does being a replicable pattern constitute information? Without the elaborate system of molecular machines that transcribes DNA or RNA sequences into amino acid sequences, without the resulting protein functions, and without the evolutionary history, there would be no information about anything in its base sequence structure. There is a special case that makes this obvious: so-called junk DNA. Over the course of the past decades, it has become clear that only a small fraction of the DNA contained in a eukaryotic cell actually codes for a protein or a regulatory function. Although there are reasons to suspect that at least some of this is nevertheless retained for other functions, it is almost certain that vast lengths get replicated in each cell division simply because they are linked to useful sections. These still qualify as replicators in Dawkins’ analysis (though he would probably call them passive replicators), but it is less easy to justify calling these sequences information, precisely because they do not play any role in organizing the cellular dynamics that makes their persistence more probable.

This suggests that the information-bearing function of nucleic acids is dependent on their embeddeness in the metabolism of a cell that is adapted to its context. This means that nucleotide information is not primary. It is an adaptation, not the ultimate basis of adaptation. It is an evolutionarily derived feature, and not a primitive one. This also suggests that we should be able to trace an evolutionary path from a pre-DNA world to a post-DNA world, from protolife to life. In this respect, autogens don’t merely provide an heuristic model of the transition to teleodynamics; they also offer a context in which to investigate how the structure of one molecule (e.g., DNA) can become information about certain patterns of chemical interaction that obtain between other molecules. DNA structure effectively represents, in concrete form, the dynamics of the chemical system that contains it and replicates it. This something that DNA is about is the source of natural selection that maintains the relatively conserved replication of certain sequences as opposed to others. The information function is thus in an evolutionary sense dependent on this prior dynamics, and so is an indirect adaptation for stabilizing the form of this molecular dynamics.

In this way, we may be able to reconstruct the steps from teleodynamics to information that constitutes the most unprecedented feature of life.





AUTOGENIC INTERPRETATION



The dependency of information on involvement in a teleodynamic process can be demonstrated by a slight complexification of the autogen model. In a discussion with two of my colleagues, Chris Southgate and Andrew Robinson, concerning the semiotic status of autogens, they proposed a modification that we all could agree involved a semiotic aspect. They argue that an autogenic system in which its containment is made more fragile by the bonding of relevant substrate molecules to its surface could be considered to respond selectively to information about its environment. Although our discussion concerned a slightly more subtle question (whether autogenic theory can help decide if iconicity or indexicality is more primary), its bearing on the nature biological of information is more illuminating.

If an autogen’s containment is disrupted in a context in which the substrates that support autocatalysis are absent or of low concentration, re-enclosure and replication will be unlikely. So stability of containment is advantageous for persistence of a given variant in contexts where the presence of relevant substrates is of low probability. If, however, the surface of the containing capsule has molecular features to which the relevant substrate molecules tend to bind, and in so doing weaken its structural stability, then the probability of autogenic replication will be significantly increased. The process will tend to be more stable in environments lacking essential substrates and less stable in environments where they are plentiful. Sensitivity to substrate concentrations would likely also be a spontaneous consequence of this bonding, because if binding of substrates to container molecules weakens the hydrogen bonds between containment molecules, it would follow that weakness of containment would be a correlate of the number of bound substrates. Higher substrate concentrations would make disruption more probable, and subsequent use of local substrates would deplete their concentration and make the replicated autogens more stable and more likely to diffuse to new environments.

In evolutionary terms, this is an adaptation. Autogen lineages with this sensitivity to relevant substrates will effectively be selective about which environments are best to dissociate and reproduce in. Though such “sensitive” autogens would not exactly initiate their own reproduction—that is still a matter dependent on extrinsic disruption—their differential susceptibility to disruption with respect to relevant context is a move in this direction.

It seems to me that at this stage we have introduced an unambiguous form of information and its interpretive basis. Binding of relevant substrate molecules is information about the suitability of the environment for successful replication; and since successful replication increases the probability that a given autogenic form will persist, compared to other variants with less success at replication, we are justified in describing this as information about the environment for the maintenance of this interpretive capacity. Using terms introduced by the father of semiotic theory, Charles Sanders Peirce, we can describe these consequences as interpretants of this information. Peirce introduced this way of talking about the process of interpretation in terms of interpretive consequences in order to more fully unpack the somewhat opaque notion of sign interpretation. Specifically, he would have termed the decreased integrity of containment provided by bound substrates the immediate interpretant of the information, and he would have termed the support that this provides to the perpetuation of this interpretive habit via the persistence of the lineage the final interpretant. We can now unpack the notion of information in semiotic terms as well. The sign in this case is the binding of substrate, and its object is the suitability of the environment. Or again to use Peirce’s more specific terminology, we might describe the presence of substrate in the environment as the dynamical object of the binding (that physical fact that is indicated by the sign), and the general suitability of the environment as the immediate object (that general property of the dynamical object that is significant for the process).9

What is the difference between the sensitivity in this simple molecular system and the sensitivity of a mechanical sensor, such as a thermostat used to control room temperature or a photodetector in a doorway used to detect the entrance of someone into a store? In the absence of the human designer/user, I would describe the action of these mechanical devices as providing Shannonian information only. Certain of the physical constraints embodied in these mechanisms provide the basis for potential information about particular kinds of events. But the rate of drying of a wet towel has the capacity to indicate room temperature and the tracking of dirt in from the street has the capacity to indicate that a person has entered a room. All are potential information about particular sorts of events. But there are also numerous other things that these physical mechanisms and processes could indicate as well, probably a nearly infinite number depending on the interpretive process brought to bear. That is the difference. A person focused only on those aspects deemed relevant to some end they were pursuing would determine what it is information about. There is no intrinsic end-directedness to these mechanisms or physical processes.



FIGURE 14.1: A speculative depiction of the possible evolutionary stages that could lead from a simple autogenic system to full internal representation of the normative relationship between autogen dynamics and environmental conditions. Though somewhat fanciful, this account provides a constructive demonstration that referential normative information is supervenient on (and emergent from) teleodynamics.



A. Depiction of a tubular autogen with a simple modification that provides the capacity to assess information indicating the presence of favorable environmental conditions. This is accomplished because the exposed structure of the autogen surface includes molecular surface structures that selectively bind catalytic substrate molecules present in the environment, and where increasing numbers of bound substrates weaken containment. This increases the probability that containment will be selectively disrupted in supportive versus non-supportive environments and thus provides information to the autogenic system about the suitability of the environment for successful reproduction.



B. Depiction of a tubular autogen that produces free nucleotides as byproducts. This might evolve in environments with high concentrations of high-energy phosphate molecules as a protection against oxidative damage, and could subsequently be exapted as a means of extracting and mobilizing energy to drive exothermic catalytic reactions.



C. Within the inert state of an autogen-diverse nucleotide, molecules could be induced to polymerize as water is excluded. This would both render phosphate residues inert and conserve nucleotides for future use. Although the spontaneous order of nucleotide binding will be unbiased, the resulting sequence of nucleotides can serve as a substrate onto which various free molecules within the autogen (e.g., catalysts) will differentially bind due to sequence-specific stereochemical affinities.



D. In this way, catalysts and other free molecules can become linearly ordered along a polynucleotide template, such that relative proximity determines reaction probability. Thus, for example, if this template molecule releases catalysts according to linear position (e.g., by depolymerization) they will become available to react in a fixed order. To the extent that this order correlates with the order of reactions that is most efficient at reconstituting the autogenic structure there will be favored template sequences. So long as one strand of this template is preserved, as in DNA, sequence preservation and replication are possible. Since the optimal network of catalytic reactions will be dependent on the available resources provided in the environment, this template structure is at the same time a representation of this adaptive correspondence. Although this scenario has been described using a nucleotide template in order to be suggestive of genetic information, the molecular basis of such a template could be diversely realized.





This is what is provided in the most minimal sense by the autogen’s tendency to reconstitute or reproduce itself after being disrupted. The autogenic process not only tends to develop toward a specific target state, it tends to develop toward a state that reconstitutes and replicates this tendency as well. So the interpretation of substrate binding is a self-constituting feature. It is a dynamical organization that is present because of its propensity to bring itself into existence. Of course, each interpretation is a unique event, so it is more accurate to say that the general type of this specific dynamical constraint (or organization) that we have identified as an interpretive process is self-constituting. It is only the form of this dynamical constraint that will be perpetuated by being passed on, not any specific collection of molecules, and so on. To again describe this in terms that resonate with Peirce’s semiotics, the ultimate ground of interpretation is a self-sustaining habit.

There is also a necessary intrinsic normative character to this interpretive process. If by virtue of structural similarity, other molecules that are not potential catalytic substrates also tend to bind to the autogen surface and also weaken it, this would, in effect, be misinformation, or error. Sensitive autogens, which tend to respond in this non-specific way, would be less successful reproducers than those that were more selectively and appropriately sensitive. This would provide a selective influence favoring an increase in specificity. Although individual autogens and autogen lineages themselves would not detect this as error, the autogen lineage would. Over the course of evolution, such error-prone autogens will tend to be eliminated from the population. This exemplifies the fact that as soon as there is information (in the full sense of the term), there is also the possibility for error. Because aboutness is an extrinsic relationship, it is necessarily fallible. Detection of error within an individual involves an additional level of information about the information, and thus an additional level of interpretive process. Autogens are too simple to register anything about the interpretation process. An interpretation of the interpretation processes is a higher logical type relationship. This is why it only arises at the level of autogen lineage selection. As we saw in the last chapter, this implies that natural selection is a form of distributed error detection; and as we will see in the next chapter, only when some analogue of natural selection is internalized within the interpretive process itself—in physiology, say, or brain function—does error detection become intrinsic to the system that does the interpreting.





ENERGETICS TO GENETICS



This use of the autogen model to explore the necessary and sufficient conditions to constitute a minimal interpretive capacity does not, however, address the most compelling issue: the nature and origin of genetic information. The above demonstration of how autogenic teleodynamics can provide the basis for an interpretive dynamic offers a recipe of sorts, showing how a molecular relationship (binding of substrate molecules to capsule molecules) can come to be interpreted as information about some relevant extrinsic state of affairs. Whereas this is a reciprocal coupling between this one molecular relationship and the extrinsic requirements of the teleodynamic system in which it has come to be incorporated, genetic information (and its precursor analogues) must in effect involve an additional level of referential relationship. It must be in relationship to the teleodynamics of the organism (or autogen) as this substrate-binding relationship is to the environment. Genetic information is about some aspect of this teleodynamic organization with respect to certain environmental factors. So our question now becomes: How can this infolding of reference arise?

Obviously, as there are innumerable molecular details in the autogen story that I have merely assumed to be plausible without actually investigating the chemistry involved, when we complicate this account, there are exponentially more to be faced. These constitute the critical science that must be undertaken before any of this can be said to actually apply to the origins of life, or protolife, much less to the origins of genetic information. My purpose, however, is not to explain the origin of life, but rather to get clear about the principles that must be understood in order to focus this research on the most relevant details. What I intend is only to provide what might be described as a proof of principle. Neither protolife nor genetic information may have arisen in the specific ways that I describe; but I believe that the principles exemplified in these scenarios also apply to whatever specific molecular processes actually took place at the dawn of life on Earth.

With this caveat in mind, let’s explore a somewhat fanciful—but not in any sense magical or homuncular—scenario for how a simple form of genetic information might arise in an autogenic context.

The intuition behind this imaginative scenario is motivated by noticing a curious coincidence that appears to be common to all organisms: some of the building blocks of the information-conveying molecules of life (DNA and RNA) are also the principal energy-conveying molecules (e.g., ATP and GTP) and so-called second-messenger molecules (e.g., cAMP and cGMP) of the cell. All of these molecules and their DNA-RNA monomeric counterparts have a three-component structure. This includes a purine double-ring molecule at one end (A = adenine, G = guanine), one or more phosphate molecules (PO4) forming a sort of tail at the other end, and a five-carbon (pentagonal ring) sugar molecule in the middle (ribose). In their non-informational roles, these three-component molecules are transferred or diffused from place to place to serve energy delivery or “switching” functions with respect to other molecular systems. In contrast, their role as bearers of genetic information is only realized in a polymeric form, in which each nucleotide is linked to another by having its phosphate linked to its neighbor’s sugar, one after another, to produce a long sugar-phosphate-sugar-phosphate- . . . “backbone,” with base residues linked alongside. In polymeric form, the purine-containing nucleotides (homologous to AMP and GMP) are joined by pyrimidine (single-ring)-containing nucleotides (that can for comparison be designated CMP, TMP, and UMP, where C = cytosine, T = thymine, and U = uracil). In their roles as information conveyors, it is the sequence of these dangling purines and pyrimidines that matters, aided by the preferential binding of A with T, C with G, and U with A (the interchangeability between U and T distinguishes RNA from DNA; RNA substitutes U for T in DNA and has a slightly modified ribose sugar), that makes replication and translation possible.

Why this coincidence? My hypothesis is that the monomeric functions (energy transfer and switching functions) came first, and the information-conveying functions evolved as an afterthought, so to speak. Again, this suggests that information is not primary.

To begin, I need to postulate the (unexplained) presence of nucleotide molecules serving one or more of these basic energetic functions. Though the spontaneous inorganic synthesis of some of these nucleotide monomers has been recently demonstrated, and claimed as support for an RNA-World origins scenario, all that matters for the scenario proposed here is for there to be some means for their synthesis. Important for this argument is that their synthesis by catalytic processes of a complex autogenic system must be plausible—which for the sake of this scenario I will take as unproblematic. The starting assumption, then, is that some aspect of autogen catalysis or self-assembly is potentiated by these phosphate-ferrying molecules, as is the case in living cells. This might involve picking up an additional phosphate molecule or two in the high-energy context of a volcanic vent; but again, for the sake of the principle being explored, this chemistry is unimportant. During the reconstitution and replication phases of the “life cycle” of these more complex energy-assisted autogens, the presence of captured energy in the form of triphosphates could make up for the need for energy-rich substrate molecules to fuel the catalytic reactions involved. So, where simple autogen catalysis is parasitic on specific energy-rich substrates, the availability of a more generic energy source, in the form of phosphate-phosphate bonds, would both offer a sort of jump start for catalysis and a freedom from such specificity of substrates. Such augmentations of the autogenic reconstitution and replication process would give lineages that generated and incorporated nucleotides the ability to capture and deliver energy, a significant evolutionary advantage.

As I have surveyed the literature on the origins of life, I have found two other authors who have independently proposed this evolutionary direction from energetic to informational use of nucleotides: the evolutionary biologist Lynn Margulis and the theoretical physicist Freeman Dyson.10 Dyson’s argument is that the polymerization of these molecules might be a sort of garbage-collection trick, to remove those monomers that have given up their extra phosphates and might otherwise compete for the extra phosphate residues still available to do work carried by other nucleotides. My speculation is vaguely similar, but specific to the context of autogenic “metabolism.” Recall that unlike most living organisms, autogens do not actively maintain non-equilibrium conditions. They are not continually in a dynamic state, but may spend vastly more time as inert structures. Phosphate-mediated molecular chemistry would therefore only be important during those brief, rare periods when containment has broken down and catalysis and self-assembly processes are critical for reconstituting this stable form. Polymerization of nucleotides—binding the phosphates between sugars—would make them unavailable for interacting with other molecular components while still maintaining a store of them, available for the next replication cycle. This might further be aided if autogen enclosure tended to exclude water, increasing the dehydrating conditions that facilitate polymerization. Disruption of autogen containment would thus inversely increase exposure to water, allowing rehydration to facilitate depolymerization of the nucleotides, making them again available to capture new high-energy phosphates.

So far, this scenario offers an interesting augmentation of the autogenic logic in which the addition of energy capture and management is a significant evolutionary advantage. But it also offers something in addition—a new potential source of constraint and constraint propagation. To see this possibility, we need to consider certain functionally incidental physical properties of such a polymer. First, as a means of molecular storage, the relative positions of different nucleotides along the polymeric chain are irrelevant. If many different nucleotides are all capable of serving some phosphate-carrying function, their polymerization order will tend to occur at random, only reflecting the degree of their relative prevalence. This unconstrained ordering of nucleotides is, of course, a critical property of nucleic acid information-conveying capacity (its Shannonian entropy). If the nucleic acid sequence were to strongly favor certain bonds or combinations over others, then this would introduce a bias, and thus redundancy and a reduction of the information-bearing capacity. Second, precisely because to be useful in autogen metabolism requires that phosphate-bearing nucleotides bind selectively to the catalytic and other constitutive molecules of the autogen, there will be a tendency for these other molecules to also bind to the polymer; and if there is some specificity associated with the various nucleotide sequence variants, then this binding will have some degree of specificity.

Together, these two properties can serve as the basis for the recruitment of the polymeric form to serve a function other than nucleotide collection and phosphate inactivation; it can act as a template.



FIGURE 14.2: Depiction of an autogen thought experiment, demonstrating how a component molecule might spontaneously evolve to provide information about the production of the autogenic system of which it is a part. In this example it is assumed that variant nucleotide molecules are generated as side products of autocatalysis. In the dynamic phase of autogenesis these nucleotides could serve to capture free energetic phosphate molecules to provide generic energy for catalytic reactions (left). Assuming additionally that during the inert phase of the autogenic cycle free nucleotides were induced to polymerize into a randomly arranged linear molecule, different nucleotide orders would tend to provide differential substrates onto which free catalysts might tend to bind (center). The binding order of catalysts along the nucleotide polymer would incidentally bias interaction probabilities between catalysts by virtue of proximity and timing of release. In this way different sequences of nucleotides could come to be selected with respect to the catalytic interaction biases most conducive to autogen reproduction. The selectively favored order in this way re-presents the constraints that constitute the specific teleodynamic reaction network.





There are a number of serious limitations affecting the autogenic form of evolution. One of the most significant has to do with the size of the network of catalytic interactions that is sufficient to complete autogen replication. While an increasingly complex autocatalytic set might provide autogens with some flexibility with respect to variable environments, as the number of catalysts and the complexity of the interaction patterns increase, an upper limit to evolvability will be quickly reached. For every catalyst that is added to an autocatalytic network, the number of possible non-productive molecular interactions between them and other molecules increases exponentially. The larger and more specific the interaction network necessary for autogen replication, the slower and less efficient the process. What is required is some source of constraint on the possible molecular interactions, besides that which is intrinsic to their structures. A mechanism that constrains interactions to significantly favor those that are appropriate to autogen formation, and to significantly inhibit those that are not, would be a significant aid in overcoming this explosion of possible side reactions.



FIGURE 14.3: The living fossil remnants of the major pre-life stages of Morphota evolution may still be exhibited in living systems. Some possibillities are depicted here.





The probability of interaction between molecules is, in large part, a function of relative proximity. Molecules in low concentration are thus on average seldom close enough to interact because of the vast numbers of molecules in between. An autocatalytic process is for this reason significantly sensitive to the relative proximity of any catalyst molecules capable of interacting chemically with any other catalysts. And where autocatalysis involves more than just a few interacting catalysts, and where some reactions between the catalysts in the set are relevant, the differential proximity of catalysts becomes much more important. In living cells, where molecular “machines” may involve sometimes as many as a dozen different molecules working precisely together, the different components are often bound to substrates in a specific configuration, or sequestered in different cellular partitions, or assembled by sequential availability of components to produce multipart molecular complexes (such as a ribosome), in order to avoid irrelevant interfering molecular interaction. An autogen that utilizes more than a small number of interacting components would likewise require similar constraints.

Without constraints on the relative probabilities of molecular interactions within an even modestly complex autogen, that is, with an autocatalytic set of say more than about four or five catalysts, there would be a tendency for side reactions to impede reproduction by generating inappropriate products and reducing the rates of relevant reactions. Moreover, this would rapidly grow out of control as autogenic chemistry became even modestly more complex and added new components. With respect to this limit-to-complexity problem, the availability of a randomly constructed nucleotide polymer could make a significant difference.

An important factor determining chemical reaction rate is the relative probability that the relevant molecules will interact with one another compared to the probability that competing interactions will take place. So, for example, the relative concentrations of diverse molecules will decrease the probability of any specific molecules interacting. At a molecular level, this is effectively a problem of relative proximity. One of the ways that catalysts can increase reaction rates, then, is to increase the probability that certain molecules will be near enough to interact. But in an analogous way, a large linear polymer with irregular structure can bias proximities and reaction rates of other molecules. Presuming that the various proteinlike catalysts enclosed in the inactive autogen will have slightly different affinities to bind to the linear sequence of the nucleotide polymer, this binding order will provide proximity constraints affecting the probability that any two bound catalysts will interact. Molecules bound nearby one another on the same polymer will have a higher probability of interacting than those bound far apart.

To the extent that molecules bound nearby one another are also those whose immediate interaction is conducive to autogen formation, rather than a side reaction, this reaction bias will facilitate preservation of this feature, because more of this variant will get produced as a result of their more efficient chemistry. In other words, the degree of correlation between catalyst binding order and the topology of the optimal autocatalytic reaction network will provide a source of selection favoring preservation of certain nucleotide sequences over others. Selective preservation and transmission of this correlation between nucleotide sequence and catalytic interaction sequence can thus become the crude equivalent of genetic information. It would now be accurate to describe the structural features of a given nucleotide sequence as conveying information about an advantageous chemical reaction sequence. A molecular structure would thereby inherit constraints from the more functional autocatalytic dynamics and transfer those constraints to future dynamics, as some autogen lineages out-reproduced others.

Many more details are required to complete this simple scenario. They include the preservation of advantageous nucleotide sequences, the means by which they can be replicated along with autogen replication, and the maintenance of their linear form. Most of these difficulties can be answered by assuming a double-stranded DNA-like form of these earliest nucleotide polymers, rather than a single-stranded RNA-like form. This of course contradicts RNA-World assumptions, but in part the RNA advantage is reduced in this case because catalytic functions are already assumed irrespective of nucleotide functions. The point of this sketchy scenario is not, of course, to make any claim about the relative plausibility of any particular molecular process, but simply to show how a teleodynamic process can offload certain critical constraints that it must preserve onto a separate physical substrate, and in so doing endow this substrate with semiotic functionality—in other words, aboutness.

This vision of a DNA molecule with proteins bound to it in locations determined by nucleotide sequence has a living parallel. Molecular biologists are already familiar with a number of classes of DNA-binding proteins. These play diverse roles in living cells—from merely protective and structural packing and maintenance to a variety of regulatory roles. The binding of these various proteins and protein complexes to the DNA molecule is likewise determined by various stereochemical properties, including the structural correspondence between protein structure and the distinctive “twist” of the double helix that correlates with nucleotide sequence at that point. These slight differences in twist are due to the slightly variant properties of the cross-linked bases and slightly different energetic configurations in the way the molecule “relaxes.” The regulatory functions of DNA-binding proteins are also mediated by the protein-protein interactions they precipitate or block, as these will determine what other protein complexes will bind to adjacent segments. Analogously, the scenario just sketched effectively reverses what we might normally imagine the priority of genetic functions to be. What in contemporary molecular genetics we take to be a secondary supportive function of DNA-bound proteins, in service of regulating the expression of the genetic code, is in this scenario taken to be the primordial “coding” function of DNA: a substrate for organizing the interactions among various catalytically interacting proteins.

Any number of additional modifications to this scenario could be suggested to give it increased plausibility for an origins theory. For example, we might speculate that the significant temperature differences found in regions near volcanic vents could act like natural PCR machines, causing DNA-like chains to separate and re-aneal to form replicas. For the purpose of this discussion, explaining how these mechanisms evolved may improve the plausibility of this as a theory of life’s origins, but it adds little to the constructive definition of biological information that results. What questions we may be predisposed to ask about the origins of these biological functions will however be quite different as a result.

It may be a disappointment to some that I have not also attempted an account of the origins of the triplet genetic code that determines protein structure. That is a far more complex problem, which I am not equipped to speculate about. So this is far from an account of the so-called code of codes that matches nucleotide sequences to the amino acid residue sequences constituting proteins. But to the extent that this scenario provides a general model demonstrating how a teleodynamic molecular processes can facilitate the transfer of critical constraints onto other substrates, then it may provide hints to help reconstruct the likely large number of incremental evolutionary steps that could lead from a reaction sequence template to a molecular code.

If we step back from the specifics of the molecular code problem and ask only how a molecule’s structure could come to play a critical role in the organization of the dynamical properties of life, autogenic theory provides such an account. Interestingly, one implication is that it demotes DNA replication to a supporting role, not the defining feature of information, as in replicator theories. What must get preserved and replicated are certain constraints which are critical to the teleodynamic process that generates them, and these constraints can be embodied in many different ways. Molecular information is not, then, intrinsic to nucleic acid sequences, or to the process of replication, but to these constraints in whatever form or substrate. Which also means that there is no reason to assume, even in contemporary organisms, that the only information transmitted generation to generation is genetic. In whatever form it occurs, biological information is not an intrinsic attribute of that substrate. As this entire enterprise has been at pains to demonstrate, it is precisely this non-intrinsic character of information (and of all ententional phenomena) that must be accounted for. Only when this general principle is grasped will we be able to avoid importing cryptic homuncular properties into our theories of evolutionary genetics.

This scenario demonstrates that a given component attribute of a teleodynamic system becomes informational because it comes to embody and propagate constraints relevant to the preservation of the dynamical organization that it is a part of. These constraints had to already be an implicit feature of the teleodynamics of that system, prior to becoming re-presented in this additional form. But once redundantly offloaded onto a component substrate, the maintenance of these constraints by features intrinsic to the global teleodynamic organization of the system can degrade without loss of their preservation. This will subsequently decrease the constraints on specific molecular dynamics, allowing a kind of evolutionary exploration of alternative forms that would not be possible otherwise. The highly specific dynamical and chemical features that were previously maintaining these constraints can now become multiply realized.

Thinking of biological information in these dynamical and substrate-neutral terms reframes how we think about the function of biological inheritance. In this scenario, genetic information arises from the shifting of dynamically sustained constraints onto structurally embodied constraints that have no direct dynamical role to play. The localized informational function of this structure is thus secondary to, and parasitic on, these prior, more holistically distributed constraints. In the above scenario, for example, the nucleotide sequence is initially merely redundant with certain favored dynamical constraints. However, the dissociation of this molecular pattern from the dynamics that it influences additionally protects these constraints from the thermodynamic unpredictability of the dynamical context.

Dynamically embodied constraints are probabilistic, and will vary to a greater or lesser degree by chance and with respect to such variables as the relative concentrations and distributions of catalysts and substrates in an autogenic context. The critical teleodynamic constraints will persist within an autogen lineage only because their probability of expression in this diverse milieu is just sufficient to stay slightly ahead of the increase in their thermodynamic degradation. Constraints that are, instead, redundantly embodied in a molecular structure are comparatively insulated from these sources of unpredictability, as well as being more thermodynamically stable. Moreover, both the reduction of constraints on properties that must be embodied in dynamical components and the re-embodiment of critical organizational constraints in structural form opens up new opportunities for incidental physical features to become functional features. This is because there will be an increased tolerance for interchangeable dynamical components and a structural means to “explore” distinct and reproducible variants of global dynamical organization (e.g., via structural modification of the template). In this way, molecular structure changes can give rise to organizational changes and organizational regularities can give rise to new forms of molecular information. So the capacity of a teleodynamic system to generate and transfer constraints from substrate to substrate is the key to open-ended evolution, involving ever more complicated dynamics and ever more diverse substrates.





FALLING INTO COMPLEXITY



Pursued as an origins-of-life scenario, autogenic theory leads us to ask very different sorts of questions than those typically considered by the origins-of-life research community. For example, elsewhere11 I have argued that the large, inorganically formed polymers that are required to be available for autogen processes to emerge might be more likely to arise on colder planets in non-aqueous conditions, and consist of polymers formed from hydrogen cyanide monomers. Also, because of the generic nature of the autogenic mechanism, I suspect that this type of not-quite-living teleodynamic system would be able to form from a diverse range of molecular substrates. Thus the generic nature of the chemistry, the simplicity of the process, and the diversity of conditions that such a system could evolve within should make this sort of replicating molecular system far more prevalent in the universe than anything as complicated and delicate as life.12

The shift from simple autogen replication to information-based reproduction, though it might be a rare evolutionary transition in a cosmic sense, is one that would make a fundamental difference wherever and whenever it occurred. The capacity to offload, store, conserve, transmit, and manipulate information about the relationship between components in a teleodynamic system and its potential environmental contexts is the ultimate ententional revolution. It marks the beginning of semiosis as we normally conceive of it, and with it a vast virtual representational universe of possibilities, because it marks a fundamental decoupling of what is dynamically possible from immediately present dynamical probabilities—the point at which the merely probable becomes subordinate to representational possibility. This is the source of the explosive profligacy of biological evolution.

This account of the derivative origin of genetic information from teleodynamic processes does not therefore diminish its fundamental role in biological evolution. It does, however, help us to better understand the complex underpinnings of the natural selection process—“life’s several powers”—and specifically the importance of morphodynamic processes in development, and the way this contributes to the evolution of complexity and the generation of new biological information. Though it is beyond the intention of this analysis to explore the implications of these ideas for evolution more generally, it is worth concluding this discussion of the nature of the evolutionary process and its role in the generation of information with a few comments about how this perspective illuminates certain recent issues in evolutionary theory.

First, consider the logic of the transfer of constraints from chemical dynamics to a nucleic acid substrate, thus imbuing the latter with information-conveying capacity. In the autogenic model presented, this originally developed from a redundancy relationship. The sequence structure of the nucleic acid polymer became correlated with the dynamical constraints conducive to efficient autogen replication by a process of natural selection because of the way this redundant source of constraint increased the probability of favorable versus unfavorable reaction networks. This redundancy decouples genetic information from metabolic dynamics, effectively re-presenting constraints on interaction probabilities as constraints on the stereochemistry of the interacting molecules. In this way, both forms of constraint can vary separately, and so novel synergies between these dynamical and structural constraints can be explored by natural selection.

An analogous role for redundancy in the creation of new genetic information occurs via the serendipitous duplication of genes. Gene duplication is an error or mutation that causes a length of DNA to be copied and spliced back into the chromosome, often just adjacent to the original. There are some instances where the extra product produced by a duplicate is beneficial and other instances where it is harmful or just neutral. Duplication, like redundancy in Shannon’s information theory, is an important hedge against error. In the case of a duplicated gene, this means that the functional degradation of one copy, such as might be caused by mutational damage, might not produce any degradation of function, much less catastrophic failure. And in general, even the damaged copy will not become entirely non-functional. Point mutations that change only one amino acid residue in a large protein will usually have the effect of only modestly altering its structure. Thus its change of properties will also tend to be modest, if noticeable. By unlucky chance in a protein composed of hundreds of amino acids, it is nonetheless possible for a single substitution to affect a critical structural feature of the protein, and it is also possible for a point mutation that inserts or deletes a nucleotide to cause a “frame shift” which alters how every subsequent codon is read, and thus produces an entirely different protein, if any at all. So long as there is redundancy and no additional deleterious effect produced by the altered copy, natural selection is relaxed on this duplicate; its copies in various progeny can continue to accumulate mutations and thereby “explore” variations on the original functional theme, so to speak, without significant cost in viability.

Because even a single molecule’s function is seldom simple, and is often the result of various “chemical compromises,” this “exploration” can often produce synergistic effects with respect to the original. This occurs if the slightly divergent duplicate happens to contribute a useful variant version of the original function, and in so doing frees the original form from the constraints of compromises that may have been necessary to operate in multiple contexts. Randomly hitting upon such a synergistic interrelationship is made more likely in sexually reproducing organisms, because constant recombination generation-to-generation effectively samples the combinatorial options that are potentially available in a population with many different independently varying versions of the duplicate. This process of duplication, degradation variation, random recombination of variants, and selective stabilization of the most synergistic combinations can happen repeatedly in the evolution of a species’ genome. The result can be a whole family of related genes, working collectively or separately to achieve a complex result.

Probably the classic example of this sort of synergy due to gene duplication is duplication of the hemoglobin genes in mammals. Bloodborne hemoglobin is a tetrameric complex in which four hemoglobin molecules—two alpha and two beta hemoglobins—fit together into a tetrahedral shape, with each hemoglobin’s oxygen-binding region facing outward. A gene duplication event resulted in the separate alpha and beta forms diverging in shape over evolutionary time, allowing for the evolution of their current synergistic fit. Independent variations in the shapes of the non-oxygen-binding surfaces of the alpha and beta variants over the course of their evolution made it possible for recombination to “sample” their different tendencies to self-assemble into larger complexes, and to favor the replication of those complexes with improved self-assembly, stability, and oxygen-carrying capacity. Even more interesting is the fact that further duplications of the beta hemoglobin gene in evolution have resulted in a number of variants of beta hemoglobin, each with slightly different oxygen affinities. These appear to have been recruited by analogous recombination and selection processes to serve the changing oxygen-transfer demands of the developing mammalian fetus, whose hemoglobin needs to be able to extract oxygen from its mother’s hemoglobin and deliver it to its own body. Moreover, the different variant fetal beta hemoglobins are produced in different amounts at different stages of gestation, and appear to correspond to the changing oxygenation demands of a growing fetus, thus achieving a sort of temporal synergy.

Probably the most dramatic example of the effect of gene duplication, and subsequent complementation of function, produces the theme-and-variation structure of multicellular plant and animal bodies. This turns out to be the effect of a class of genes that play regulatory roles by producing protein products which bind to other regions of the genome and act to effect the expression of large constellations of other genes. The family of genes that was found to be responsible for the segmentation of animal bodies is named the homeobox family of genes (“Hox genes,” for short, in vertebrates). These are named for a coding region they share in common that constitutes the critical DNA-binding domain of the proteins they code for. They were discovered in fruit flies because mutations of these genes produce bizarre but systematic modifications of whole body segments, such as a duplicated thoracic region or a leg where an antenna should have developed.

It was found that different variant duplicates of these genes orchestrate the expression of large numbers of “downstream” genes, but in slightly different ways; a bit like two orchestra conductors with slightly different styles. Because each variant duplicate gene is also confined to be expressed only within particular segments of the developing body, the structures they produce are both similar to one another in each segment and slightly different as well. This results in what can be described as a theme-and-variation pattern of body parts—like the slightly different legs in the different positions on an insect body, or the slightly varying pattern of digits on human hands and feet. Somewhere back in evolutionary time, prior to the point where we shared a common ancestor with flies—probably in the range of half a billion years ago—there was a single ancestral homeobox gene. It regulated the expression of many other genes. But as it was duplicated, and the duplicates came to vary in their region of expression and the ways they controlled expression of the same downstream genes, a corresponding redundancy of slightly varying body segments resulted. Analogous to the hemoglobin duplicates, combinatorial sampling allowed different combinations of these variant body structures to be “tested” within a single body, and selectively favored or disfavored by how their interaction effects affected reproduction. In this way, variant versions of duplicate genes became the means that the evolutionary process could stabilize synergistic functional relationships between different body structures. Whole repeated organs (legs or mouthparts) have thus evolved in complementary ways with respect to one another, by partially shielding each other from selection by virtue of their redundancy. So, a distant cousin to the offloading of constraints redundantly onto alternative substrates has also been the secret to the generation of new genetic information, as well as the theme-and-variation logic that is the hallmark of all complex multicellular animals.

This duplication and complementation process in evolution—like the transfer of constraints from autogen molecular dynamics to nucleotide sequence structure described in the scenario above—is a morphodynamic effect, a progressive propagation of constraints. The synergy that results at each step, under the influence of selection, introduces further constraints that differentiate each duplicate unit with respect to the other, as some fraction of their functional load is reduced reciprocally. In effect, the new higher-order synergistic relationship that results is an expression of the morphodynamic processes that are implicit in the teleodynamics of the whole. Although natural selection is a process that decreases variety, and thus maintains or increases constraint on organism form and function, the production of this redundancy provides a partial shielding from natural selection, allowing new forms of variety to emerge in parallel. In informational terms, this is an increase in the entropy of what might be called the “evolutionary channel capacity,” and the means by which new information can emerge, as new higher-order combinatorial possibilities become subject to the constraint increasing influence of the natural selection process.

A whole new subfield of evolutionary research is opening up as we begin to pay attention to the contribution of the morphodynamic features of the genetic and epigenetic processes that generate organism structures and functions. On reflection, we can now see that “life’s several powers” include and depend on the underlying morphodynamic processes that synergistically support and generate one another. When natural selection weakens its limiting grip on various adaptive functions—as happens in the case of gene duplication—this constraint-propagating, form-generating tendency that generates living organization can become the means by which higher-order forms of functional information can emerge. Such back-and-forth interplay between selection and morphodynamics thus opens the door to indefinite complexification and ever higher-order forms of teleodynamic organization.
