16



SENTIENCE



. . . sentience—without it there are no moral claims and no moral obligations. But once sentience exists, a claim is made, and morality gets “a foothold in the universe.”



—WILLIAM JAMES, 18971





MISSING THE FOREST FOR THE TREES



Do you ever worry that turning off your computer, or erasing its memory, or just replacing its operating system could be an immoral act? Many serious scientists and philosophers believe that brains are just sophisticated organic computers. So maybe this should be a worry to them. Of course, maybe turning off the machine is more analogous to sleep or temporary anesthesia, because no data need be lost or analytic processes permanently disrupted by such a temporary shutdown. But erasing data or corrupting software to the point that it is unusable does seem to have more potent moral implications. If you do sometimes contemplate the moral implications of these activities, it is most likely because you recognize that doing so could affect someone else who might have produced or used the data or software. The morality has to do with the losses that these potential users might suffer, and this would be of little concern were all potential users to suddenly disappear (though “potential” users might be an open-ended class). Aside from the issue of potential harm to users, the nagging question is whether there is “someone” home, so to speak, when a computation is being performed—something intrinsically subjective about the processing of data through the CPU of the mechanism. Only if the computer or computational process can have what amounts to experiences and thus possesses sentience is there any intrinsic moral issue to be considered.

Indeed, could your computer’s successful completion of a difficult operation also produce algorithmic joy? Does your computer suffer when one of its memory chips begins to fail? Could a robotic arm in a factory take pride in the precision with which it makes welds? If possible, would such a normative self-assessment require a separate algorithm, or would it be intrinsic to successful or unsuccessful computation of the task? One might, for example, create an additional algorithm, equipped with sensors to assess whether a given task was accomplished or not. In the case of failure, it could modify the operation to more closely approach the target result next time around. In fact, this is the way many “neural net” algorithms work. One such approach, called back propagation, incrementally modifies connection strengths between nodes in a network with respect to success or failure criteria in “categorizing” inputs. In such a computation, is there anything like intrinsic feeling? Or is this just an algorithm modifying an algorithm? The normative value that comes into existence with sentience is special. No other physical process has intrinsic ethical status, because no other type of physical process can suffer. Explaining the emergence of sentience thus must at the same time be an explanation of the emergence of ethical value. This is a tall order.

When it is carefully distinguished from any specific content that is the focus of mental experience, the background “feeling of being here” is sometimes just described in terms of a distinctive quality to experience—or quale, to use the technical jargon of philosophers. This quality has a perspective, an internal and private locus, a self-reference frame with respect to which non-self content is discriminated. Following William James, I will refer to this core feature of conscious experience as sentience. The term sentience derives from the Latin, and literally means “feeling.”

In what follows, I will argue that the sentience of human experience is only one highly differentiated form of a far more widespread and diverse phenomenon, and that it has its roots in far simpler processes that only dimly resemble mental experience. I will argue that this applies even to the way that organisms are sensitive to influences from their environment, but not just in the way that most material objects can be modified by interaction with other objects and forces. Because organisms are teleodynamic systems, they do not merely react mechanically and thermodynamically to perturbation, but generally are organized to initiate a change in their internal dynamics to actively compensate for extrinsic modifications or internal deficits. Feeling is in this most basic sense active, not passive, and is a direct consequence of teleodynamic organization because of its incessant end-directed nature. Since there can be higher-order forms of teleodynamic processes, emergent from lower-order teleodynamic processes, we should not be surprised to find that there are higher-order emergent forms of sentience as well, over and above those of the simpler cellular components of the body and nervous system.

The core hypothesis of this book is that all teleodynamic phenomena necessarily depend upon, and emerge from, simpler morphodynamic and homeodynamic processes. This implies that the complex intentional features that characterize our thoughts and subjective experiences must likewise emerge from a background of neurological morphodynamic and homeodynamic processes. Moreover, these lower-order subvenient dynamical features must also inevitably constitute significant aspects of our mental lives. I believe that it is impossible to even approach issues of sentience without taking the necessary contributions of homeodynamic and morphodynamic aspects of mental experience and brain function into account. Once we do so, however, we will discover new ways of asking old questions about the relationship between minds and brains, and perhaps even find ways to reintegrate issues of subjective value into the natural sciences.

Reframing the concept of sentience in emergent dynamical terms will allow us to address questions that are not often considered to be subject to empirical neuroscientific analysis. Contrary to many of my neuroscience colleagues, I believe that these phenomena are entirely available to scientific investigation once we discover how they emerge from lower-level teleodynamic, morphodynamic, and thermodynamic processes. Even the so-called hard problem of consciousness will turn out to be reconceptualized in these terms. This is because what appeared to make it hard was our predisposition to frame it in mechanistic and computational terms, presuming that its intentional content must be embodied in some material or energetic substrate. As a result, the vast majority of descriptions of brain function tend to be framed in terms that not only fail to make the connection between the cellular-molecular processes at one extreme and the intentional features of mental experience at the other; they effectively pretend that making sense of this relationship is irrelevant to brain function. Descriptions of psychological and neurological processes remain unequivocally on one side or the other of this classic divide—inescapably Cartesian.

Whether we imagine that we can reduce all intentional properties of mind to the “syntactic” features of neural “computations” and avoid directly addressing issues of mental content (e.g., the computational theory of mind), or describe them only in qualitative phenomenal terms (e.g., phenomenological theories) that merely assume the existence of what we hope to explain, we still end up ignoring a fundamental step in the ladder joining material and intentional properties. And although dynamical systems approaches do a better job of accounting for the non-mechanistic features of brain function, they too are at base founded on the assumption that the content of mental representations must be physically embodied by some specific neural substrate or else be epiphenomenal.

Current techniques for correlating mental experience with brain activity using in vivo imaging technologies (fMRI, PET, and MEG) have recently enabled us to correlate local metabolic levels with experiential phenomenology (i.e., performing a mental task). But precisely because these tools only provide an assay of the regional thermodynamics of neuronal signaling activity, they must ignore the necessary contribution of any supervening levels of dynamics. In previous discussions of life—and of information more generally—we have outlined principled reasons to think that there can be no simple mapping between ententional and mechanistic (teleodynamic and thermodynamic) properties, even though whatever is ententional has emerged from a statistical mechanistic base. Analogously for neurological processes, it will turn out that these ignored levels of emergent dynamical processes are essential for bridging between brain processes and mental experiences.

The ententional features of life cannot be directly mapped to specific physical substrates or chemical processes, and yet they nevertheless dynamically supervene on processes involving these physical correlates. The dynamical requirements for generating ententional phenomena turn out to be highly constrained by the need to both generate and preserve the constraints essential to maintain these processes. So the functional properties of life only emerge when homeodynamic and morphodynamic processes are organized in precisely complementary and completely reflexive ways with respect to one another. If, as I believe, an analogous emergent dynamic infrastructure is necessary to produce any ententional property, then it must also apply to the generation of mental intentionality. Moreover, traces of this hierarchic dynamical dependency should be reflected in the very structure of the experience of perceiving, thinking, or acting. In other words, we should be able to find the signature of these emergent dynamical levels in the details of brain process and in the very quality of subjective experience. The ultimate goal of this chapter, then, will be to trace the relationships between neurally embodied forms of homeo-, morpho-, and teleodynamic processes and various aspects of mental experience.

As in the case of organism evolution, it is only by examining the dynamics of these lower-level emergent processes that we will be able to adequately explain the sentience, representation, perspective, and agency that are the hallmarks of mental experience. By reframing the problem in these dynamical terms, I believe we will discover that rather than being the ultimate “hard problem” of philosophy and neuroscience, the subjective features of neural dynamics are the expected consequences of this emergent hierarchy. The so-called mystery of consciousness may thus turn out to be a false dilemma, created by our failure to understand the causal efficacy of emergent constraints.

Before we can attempt this reframing, however, we need to get beyond the idea that we might be able to explain mental processes in computational or simple dynamical terms. This is not a trivial demand, since the computational approach to mental processes and neuronal interactions has been enormously successful at clearing away many prejudices and confusions about the mind/brain relationship. The analytic tools it provided heralded a veritable quantum leap in experimental and theoretical sophistication in cognitive neuroscience. And dynamical systems approaches have begun to attract serious attention as well, especially as researchers struggle to deal with the enormously complex dynamics of signal processing in a richly connected network of billions of nodes. So, before we even begin a reframing of neural and mental processes in emergent dynamic terms, it is necessary to understand why the presumed direct correspondence between neural algorithms, signal dynamics, and cognitive operations inevitably fails to even address issues of intentionality, much less the mysteries posed by sentient experience.

The point of such a critique is not to argue that we should abandon the physical modeling of brain processes—indeed, careful analysis of the details of brain processes is of critical importance to an emergent dynamic approach as well—but rather to overcome the desire to directly map mental phenomena onto neuronal phenomena. As the logic of emergent dynamics has repeatedly shown, the physical constituents of living process are only relevant to ententional phenomena insofar as they contribute to the generation of teleodynamic processes. To make sense of conscious intentionality, and ultimately subjective sentience, we need to look beyond the neuronal details to explore the special forms of teleodynamic constraints they embody and perpetuate. I believe that only by working from the bottom up, tracing the ascent from thermodynamics to morphodynamics to teleodynamics and their recapitulation in the dynamics of brain function, will we be able to explain the place of our subjective experience in this otherwise largely insentient universe.





SENTIENCE VERSUS INTELLIGENCE



Do computers think? Indeed, one still sometimes hears computers being called “thinking machines.” The idea that cogitating is a form of computing has a long history, stretching back to the first half of the twentieth century. In fact, the term computer used to designate a person whose job it was to do the calculations supporting the accounting needs of large companies. Slowly, over the course of the last century, mechanical aids were supplied to take the drudgery out of this work, including mechanical adding machines, slide rules, and eventually digital computers. The mathematician who ultimately began the revolution that replaced people with machines was Alan Turing. The so-called Turing test—which he suggested in a paper in 1950,2 and which now bears his name—embodies the conjecture that if mechanized operations produce indistinguishable results from human operations on the same tasks, then the two are functionally identical. In the idealized test, we assess whether a computer can produce responses that are indistinguishable from those that a normal thinking person might produce under similar circumstances—for example, by posing questions for the computer to answer. If it can, then, presumably we have no justification to claim that these are fundamentally different processes.

While superficial operational identity may not be sufficient to prove that the two processes are ultimately identical in some deeper sense, it nonetheless is sufficient to question the assumption of difference. Thus a Turing test questioner might not be able to tell if she is being answered by an algorithm or by another person. It also provides a way to assess cognitive power, because there are good reasons to believe that algorithmic complexity and reasoning difficulty are correlated. If some task requires more operations to complete, it should take more time and resources to complete, whether by computer or person. However, whether or not one accepts this as a test of machine intelligence, it is inadequate for testing sentience. Intelligence and information-processing power are probably not irrelevant, but they appear to be assessing something quite distinct from sentience. This suggests that a very different causal architecture is likely involved in the production of intelligent versus sentient processes.

With the explosive growth of computing power in the past few decades, we have come to take for granted that quite complicated and intelligent behaviors can be simulated by computation. Assume, for example, that we had the support of massive computational power and had compiled a massive database of human mental and behavioral responses to all manner of adaptive challenges and cognitive tasks, and with a level of minute detail never before imagined. Using these data and some powerful predictive inferential tools, it should be possible to create algorithms capable of recreating in exquisite detail the kinds of responses characteristic of people adapting to normal life situations and solving difficult cognitive tasks. In other words, it is not an unrealistic thought experiment to imagine a computational system able to produce an output that can fool even the most sophisticated Turing tester: a Turing test analogue to Deep Blue, the IBM chess-playing computer that matched the world chess grand master (described in chapter 3). Whatever problem-solving domain such a computing system faced, it would do as well or better than any human. Of course, this context could not differ too much from the domains from which its reference data were derived. But in these conditions, this golem would act as savvy as any human counterpart; and yet, I would argue, it would be completely insentient.

This is effectively an elaboration of an argument presented by the philosopher John Searle with his well-known “Chinese room” thought experiment.3 Both help to demonstrate the difference between merely intelligent behavior and sentient (or conscious) behavior. In Searle’s imaginative scenario, a man who is unfamiliar with the Chinese language sits in a room that only gives him access to pages of Chinese characters, which are slipped in through a slot. His task is to match these to an identical string of characters in a book (or massive database) that prescribes what characters to send back out, given that specific input. To those on the outside, the characters he produces constitute a very sensible response to a question posed in Chinese by the characters fed to him; but to the man inside, it is a simple pattern-matching task. Searle argues that this shows how such a simulation can be produced in the absence of any cognizance or subjective involvement with the meaning of the task. If a man can produce such behavior “mindlessly,” then when a machine does it in an analogous way, we can reasonably assume that it is not aware of what it is doing either. Of course, the man’s pattern-matching behavior is accomplished consciously; but since we can more easily imagine that pattern matching can be automated without any reference to the meaning or purpose of these activities, we intuitively appreciate the force of Searle’s argument.

In this sense, a machine, or any highly sophisticated algorithm plus database that captures vast quantities of useful isomorphisms between inputs and outputs required to perform a given task, might rightly be described as exhibiting intelligence, irrespective of making any claim about whether it is sentient. Intelligence is about making adaptively relevant responses to complex environmental contingencies, whether conscious or unconscious. In this sense, we can analogously describe the increasing complexity, flexibility, and fittedness of evolved adaptations as a kind of embodied intelligence. And, of course, many of our most reliable adaptive capacities are produced with only limited, if any, awareness and forethought. The dissociability of intelligent and sentient functions does not imply that a Turingesque assessment of sentience is impossible, however. It only suggests that it would be a very different sort of assessment than a Turing test of intelligence. So how might it differ?

Consider the possibility that we could extend the “test” to give us access to the “behavior” of the constituent operations that are used to perform the task, and not just the input-output relationship. What additional insight could be gained from access to the details of how the operation was performed? Searle’s Chinese room scenario implicitly suggests that this should make a difference. It is precisely by reflecting on how the process is accomplished by the man in the room that Searle argues that we know that the apparent “interpretation” of the symbols is illusory, and that it is instead accomplished without an awareness of what is being done. Our knowledge of how the man in the room is performing the task clues us in to the fact that it can be done “mindlessly,” so to speak—such as by a simple computer pattern-matching algorithm and look-up table linked to a large database. But if we can discern that this process has the structure of a blind mechanism, and can confidently conclude from this that it is not a sentient process, shouldn’t there also be some criterion that would allow us to determine when the task is being accomplished with awareness of what is being done?

Possibly. Critics might argue that even if we can determine when the process is mindless, this does not guarantee that we could recognize what a sentient organization of the process looks like, or that the process could ever be done otherwise. Nevertheless, it seems reasonable to assume that if we can recognize the ways that the process can be performed mindlessly, at least we should be able to eliminate cases that are non-sentient, if they are not too complicated. It could be the case, however, that there will be ambiguous examples. Actually, I think that we need not worry about the issue of sentient processes being too complex to assess. I believe that it is not so much complexity that matters, but dynamical architecture. For the same reason that we were able to judge that a system as simple as an autogen exhibits ententional properties (and thus were not forced to deal with the complexities of living organisms), I believe that we will be able to distinguish the emergent dynamical architecture which produces the intentional properties of mental processes. Not only do I believe that we can discern whether a process is sentient, but once we understand the basic criteria for making such a judgment, I believe that we will also be able to make an assessment about how sentient this process is! The challenge is, of course, to develop a clear model of this emergent dynamical architecture.

The first step will be to outline the ways that current computational and dynamical systems models of mental processes exemplify mechanistic and morphodynamic models of living processes, respectively. As with the understanding of the deep logic of life, we will find that these ways of conceiving of cognition fall short of explaining or even acknowledging the reality of intentional properties. Ignoring the emergence of teleodynamic processes, such properties can only have epiphenomenal status in these theories. I will argue that we lack a naturalistic account of sentience because of a similar failure to understand how the teleodynamics of sentience emerges from morphodynamic and thermodynamic/homeodynamic processes of nervous system function. A final challenge of this analysis will be to show how higher-order levels of sentience emerge from, and depend on, these lower levels.





THE COMPLEMENT TO COMPUTATION



Although there is little debate about whether the operations of human thinking and feeling involve physical processes taking place in the brain, the question that divides the field is whether the physical account as framed in terms of computation, even in its widest sense, is sufficient to explain mental experience. The computational (machine) analogy has been undeniably useful. Besides providing a methodology for formulating more precise models of cognitive processes that offer testable empirical predictions, it offered a clue to the resolution of the classical paradox concerning the bifurcation of the mental and physical realms. Computation assumes that information processes correspond to the manipulation of specific physical tokens. As a model of cognition, it implies that the processes of perceiving and reasoning about the world are also constituted by algorithms “instantiated” as physical processes, whether in symbolic or subsymbolic form. And if mental processes can be fully understood in terms of the organized manipulation of physical tokens, then the operations of thought will inherit whatever physical consequences these manipulations might be capable of. Simply stated: If computation is a mechanical process and thought is computation, then thoughts can be physically efficacious. The mind/body problem disappears. Or does it?

I take this to be an invaluable insight. However, there are two problems that it leaves us with. First, it does not in itself commit us to any specific theory concerning the nature of the physical process that constitutes the representational and sentient capacities of the brain. It applies quite generally to any account of cognition that is based on a physical process, not merely what is usually meant by computation. If what we mean by computation is any physical process used for sensing, representing information, performing inferences, and controlling effectors, then it would seem that to deny that brains compute is to also deny the possibility of any physical account of mental processes. If all that was meant was that thought is a physically embodied process, there would be little controversy, and little substance to the claim. But the concept of computation, even in this most broadly stated form, is not as generic as this. Implicit in this account is the assumption that computation is constituted by a specific physical process (such as a volley of neuronal action potentials or the changes in connection weights in a neural net) that corresponds to a specific teleological process (such as solving a mathematical operation or categorizing a physical pattern).

This assumption is the basis for a second, even more serious problem. What constitutes correspondence? And what is the difference between just any physical correspondence (the swirling of the wind and the rotation of a merry-go-round) and one that involves representation? In all computational theories—including so-called neural net theories—representation is understood in terms of a rule-governed mapping of specific extrinsic properties or meanings to correspondingly specific machine states. Although this may at first sound like an innocuous claim, it actually begs the fundamental question: How is representation constituted? Simply asserting the existence of a mapping between properties in the word and properties of a mechanistic process presumed to take place in the brain implicitly frames the relationship in dualistic terms. There are two domains: the physical processes, and whatever constitutes the representational relationships between them. Everything depends on the nature of the correspondence, and specifically, what makes it different from either an isomorphic or an arbitrary one-to-one mapping between components or phases of two distinct processes. Computation is merely a way of describing (or prescribing) machine processes. It is not an intrinsic property of any given machine process.

There is an instructive parallel between the logic of computation and the logic of natural selection, as we described it in the previous chapter. As we’ve seen, although natural selection in any form requires processes that generate, reconstitute, and reproduce these selectively favored traits, the specific details of these processes are irrelevant to the logic and the efficacy of the process. Natural selection is in this sense agnostic with respect to how these adapted traits are physically generated. It is an abstraction about certain kinds of processes and their consequences. Similarly, the logic of computation is defined in a way that is agnostic to how (or whether) representation, inference, and interaction with the world are implemented. These issues are bracketed from consideration in order to define the notion of an algorithm: an abstract description of a machine process that corresponds to a description of or instructions for performing a semiotic process, such as solving a mathematical equation or organizing a list. This agnosticism is the source of the power of computation. As Alan Turing first demonstrated, a generic machine implementation can be found for any reasoning process (or semiotic process in general) that can be precisely described in terms of a token-manipulation process. This generic description, an algorithm, and its generic mechanistic assumptions, guarantee its validity in any of an infinite number of possible physically manifested forms.

As we discovered in the case of biological evolution, however, there is only a rather restricted range of dynamics that can actually fulfill the criteria required for natural selection to occur. Analogously, in the case of mental processes, we will find that only a very restricted form of dynamics is capable of constituting mental representation. So it cannot be merely assumed to exist by fiat without ignoring what will likely turn out to be important restrictions. Further, without representation, computation is just machine operation, and without human intentionality, machine operation is just physical change. So, while at one time it was possible to argue that the computational conception of the mind/brain relationship was the only viable game in town, it now appears that it never really addressed the problem at all, but only assumed that it didn’t matter.

Whether described in terms of machine code, neural nets, or symbol processing, computation is an idealized physical process in the sense that the thermodynamic details of the process can be treated as irrelevant. In most cases, these physical details must be kept from interfering with the state-to-state transitions being interpreted as computations. And because it is an otherwise inanimate mechanism, there must also be a steady supply of energy to keep the computational process going. Any microscopic fluctuations that might otherwise blur the distinction between different states assigned a representational value must also be kept below some critical threshold. This insulation from thermodynamic unpredictability is a fundamental design principle for all forms of mechanism, not just computing devices. In other words, we construct our wrenches, clocks, motors, musical instruments, and computers in such a way that they can only assume a certain restricted number of macro states, and we use inflexible metals, regularized structures, bearings, oil, and numerous thresholds for interactions, in order to ensure that incidental thermodynamic effects are minimized. In this way, only those changes of state described as functional can be favored.

A comparison with what we have learned in previous chapters about living processes can begin to remedy some of the limitations of this view. Although living processes also must be maintained within quite narrow operating conditions, the role that thermodynamic factors play in this process is basically the inverse of its role in the design of tools and the mechanisms we use for computation. The constituents of organisms are largely malleable, only semi-regular, and are constantly changing, breaking down, and being replaced. More important, the regularity achieved in living processes is not so much the result of using materials that intrinsically resist modification, or using component interactions that are largely insensitive to thermodynamic fluctuation, but rather due to using thermodynamic chemical processes to generate regularities; that is, via morphodynamic organization.

Generally speaking, these two distinct design strategies might be contrasted as regularity achieved by a means of thermodynamic isolation in machines, and regularity achieved by a means of thermodynamic openness in life. In addition, there is a fundamental inversion with respect to the source of constraints that determine the critical dynamical properties. In machines, the critical constraints are imposed extrinsically, from the top down, so to speak, to defend against the influence of lower-level thermodynamic effects. In life, the critical constraints are generated intrinsically and maintained by taking advantage of the amplification of lower-level thermodynamic and morphodynamic effects. The teleological features of machine functions are imposed from outside, a product of human intentionality. The teleodynamic features of living processes emerge intrinsically and autonomously.

But there is more than just an intrinsic/extrinsic distinction between computation and cognition. Kant’s distinction between a mere mechanism and an organism applies equally well to mental processes. To rephrase Kant’s definition of organism as a definition of mind, we could describe mind as possessing a self-amplifying, self-differentiating, self-rectifying formative power. A computation exhibits merely motive power but a mind also exhibits formative power. Or to put this in emergent dynamical terms: computation only transfers extrinsically imposed constraints from substrate to substrate, while cognition (semiosis) generates intrinsic constraints that have a capacity to propagate and self-organize. The difference between computation and mind is a difference in the source of these formal properties. In computation, the critical formal properties are descriptive distinctions based on selected features of a given mechanism. In cognition, they are distinctive regularities which are generated by recursive dynamics, and which progressively amplify and propagate constraints to other regions of the nervous system.

Like the mechanistic conception of life, the computational theory of mind, even in its most general form, assumes implicitly that the physical properties that delineate an information-bearing unit are only extrinsically defined glosses of otherwise simple physical mechanics. It also assumes that the machine operations that represent semiotic operations of any given type (e.g., face recognition or weather prediction) are also merely externally imposed re-descriptions of some extrinsically assessed correspondence relationship. Thus the mapping from computer operation to some interpreted physical process is nothing more that an imposed descriptive gloss. In the same way that Shannonian information, prior to interpretation, is only potentially information about something, the operations of a computing device before they are assigned an interpretation are also just potential computational operations. What we need is an account where the relevant interpretive process is intrinsic, not extrinsic.





COMPUTING WITH MEAT



In a now famous very short story about explorers from an alien planet investigating the source of a radio broadcast from Earth, the science fiction writer Terry Bisson portrays a conversation they have about the humans they’ve discovered. Taking their dialogue from a midpoint in the discussion:



“They’re meat all the way through.”

“No brain?”

“Oh, there is a brain all right. It’s just that the brain is made out of meat!”

“So . . . what does the thinking?”

“You’re not understanding, are you? The brain does the thinking. The meat.”

“Thinking meat! You’re asking me to believe in thinking meat!”

“Yes, thinking meat! Conscious meat! Loving meat. Dreaming meat. The meat is the whole deal! Are you getting the picture?”

“Omigod. You’re serious then. They’re made out of meat.”4



With exaggerated irony, Bisson points out that we humans are pretty sloppy computing devices. It may be tongue-in-cheek, but it hints at an important challenge to the computer theory of mind: the design principles of brains just don’t compute! Consider the basic building blocks of brains compared to those necessary to build devices with the formal properties that are required to produce computations. Neurons are living cells. These cells have been adapted, over the course of evolution, to use some of their otherwise generic metabolic and intercellular communication capabilities for the special purpose of conveying point-to-point signals between one another over long (in cellular terms) distances. Because they were not “designed” for this function, but recruited during the course of evolution from cells that once had more generic roles to play, they tend to be a bit unruly, noisy, and only modestly reliable transducers and conveyors of signals. Additionally, they still have to perform a great many non-signal transmission tasks that are necessary for any cell to stay alive, and this too constrains their capacity to perform purely signaling functions.

But how unruly? It would probably not be too far off the mark to estimate that of all the output activity that a neuron generates, a small percentage is precisely correlated with input, while at least as much is the result of essentially unpredictable molecular-metabolic noise; and the uncorrelated fraction might be a great deal more.5 Neurons are effectively poised at the edge of chaos, so to speak. They continually maintain an ionic potential across their surface by incessantly pumping positively charged ions (such as the sodium ions split from dissolved salt) outside their membrane. On this electrically unstable surface, hundreds of synapses from other neurons are tweaking the local function of these pumps, causing or preventing what amount to ion leaks, which destabilize the cell surface. As a result, they are constantly generating output signals generated by their intrinsic instability and modified by these many inputs.

In addition, neural networks, in even modestly large brains (such as those of small vertebrates), are quite degenerate in the sense that precise control of connectivity is not obtained by the minimal genetic specification that comes from embryogenesis, and from the remarkably limited number of molecular signals that appear to be determining cell phenotypes and connections, when compared with the astronomical number of precise connections that are in need of specification. In fact, contrary to what might be expected, large mammalian brains (such as our own) do not appear to use significantly more genetic information for their construction than the smallest mammalian brains (such as mouse brains), even though the numbers of connections must differ by many orders of magnitude. This is a humbling thought, but it is not the whole story. The specification of brain architecture is highly conserved across the entire range of animal forms, and in vertebrate brains connection patterns are also significantly dependent upon body structure and environmental information for their final specifications. The point of bringing this up in the present context is simply to make it clear that brains are not wired up in point-to point detail. Not even close. So we could hardly expect neuronal connection patterns to be the biological equivalent of logic gates or computer circuits.

In summary, it doesn’t appear on the surface that brains are made of signal-processing and circuitry components that are even vaguely well suited to fill the requirements for computations in the normal sense of this word.

So what is minimally required to carry out computations in the way a computer does them? In a word, predictability. What about messy neural computers? What happens if the circuits in a computer happen to garble the signals—as one should expect would happen in a biocomputer? The “virtual machine” breaks down, of course. Sort of like damaging a gear in a real machine, it will at the very least fail to function as expected, fail to compute, and it may even cease to operate altogether: it might crash. Now imagine that all the connections and all the logic elements in your computer were a little unpredictable and unreliable. Certainly, computing in the typical way would be impossible under these conditions. But this infirmity doesn’t by itself rule out biological computing in brains.

The first computer designers had to take this problem seriously, because at the time, in the late 1940s and early fifties, the tens of thousands of logic elements needed for a computer were composed of vacuum tubes and mechanical relays, and tended to be somewhat unreliable. To deal with this, they employed a technique long used for dealing with other forms of unreliable communication, and which had been mathematically formalized only a few years earlier by another pioneer of information technology, Claude Shannon. As we saw earlier, the answer is to include a bit of redundancy in the process—send the message many times in sequence, or send multiple messages simultaneously, or do the same computation multiple times, and then compare the results for consistency. So, even if brains are made of messy elements, it is at least conceivable that some similar logic of noise reduction might allow brains to compute, if with some inefficiency due to the need for redundant error-correcting processes. At least in principle, then, brains could be computers, provided the noise problem wasn’t so bad that error correction doesn’t get too far out of hand.

Unfortunately, there are a number of reasons to think that it would get out of hand. The first is that brains the size of average mammal brains are astronomically huge, highly interconnected, highly re-entrant networks. In such networks, noise can tend to get wildly amplified, and even very clean signal processing can produce unpredictable results; “dynamical chaos,” it is often called. But additionally, many of the most relevant parts of mammal brains for “higher” cognitive functions include an overwhelmingly large number of excitatory connections—a perfect context for amplifying chaotic noisy activity.

We are forced to conclude from this list of computationally troublesome characteristics of brains that they appear to be organized according to a very different logic than one would expect of a computing device in any of the usual senses of the word. Indeed, if we turn the question around and ask what these structural features seem to suggest, we would conclude that noise must be a “design feature” of brains, not a “bug” to be dealt with and eliminated. But does this make any sense? Is it a realistic possibility that a major function of brains is to generate and communicate and amplify noise, such as is produced by the random variations of molecular metabolic processes in nerve cells? Is it even possible to reconceive of “computation” in a way that could accommodate this sort of process? Or will we need to scrap the computational model altogether for something else? And if something else, what else?

In fact, there is another approach. It is suggested by the very facts that make the computational approach appear so ill-fitted: by the significant role played by noise in living brains, and by a neural circuit architecture which should tend to amplify rather than damp this noisiness. We need to think of neural processes the way we think about emergent dynamic processes in general. Both self-organizing and evolutionary processes epitomize the way that lower-order unorganized dynamics—the dynamical equivalent of noise—can under special circumstances produce orderliness and high levels of dynamical correlations. Although unpredictable in their details, globally these processes don’t produce messy results. This is the starting point for a very different way to link neuronal processes to mental processes.

Life and sentience are deeply interrelated, because they are each manifestations of teleodynamic processes, although at different levels. Sentience is not just a product of biological evolution, but in many respects a micro-evolutionary process in action. To put this hypothesis in very simple and unambiguous terms: the experience of being sentient is what it feels like to be evolution. And evolution is a process dependent on component teleodynamic processes and their relationships to the environment on which they in turn depend, and on the perturbing influence of the second law of thermodynamics—noise, and its tendency to degrade constraint and correlation.

The presumption that we can equate the information constituting mental content to the patterns produced by specific neuronal signals or even groups of signals, as suggested by the computer metaphor, is in fact an order of magnitude too low. These signals are efficacious, and indeed control body functions, though in vertebrate nervous systems the efficacy of neural signals is almost certainly a product of activity statistics rather than specific patterns. These are sentient at the level of these cells and their relations to other cells, but do not reach the level of whole brain sentience. That is a function of dynamical regularities at a more global level. The activity of any single neuron is no more critical to the regularities of neuronal activity that give rise to experience than are the movements of individual molecules responsible for Bénard cell formation. Focusing on the neuronal level treats these individual processes as though they are computational tokens, when instead they are more like individual thermodynamic fluctuations among the vast numbers of interacting elements that contribute to the formation of global morphodynamic effects.

Focusing on the way that the activity of individual neurons correlates with specific stimuli is a seductive methodological strategy. Indeed, as external observers of these correlations, neuroscientists can even sometimes predict the relevant stimulus features or behaviors that individual neurons are responding to. So the search for stimulus correlations with neuronal activity in experimental animals has become one of the major preoccupations of neurophysiology. In this respect, large brains are not as stochastic in their organization as many non-biological thermodynamic systems. Interactions between neurons are not merely local, and are far more complex and context-sensitive than are simple dynamical interactions. The highly plastic network structures constituting brains provide the ground for a vast range of global interaction constraints which can be effected by adjustments of neuronal responsiveness, and which cycles of recursive neuronal activity can amplify to the point of global morphodynamic expression.

But neurophysiologists are extrinsic observers. They are able to independently observe both the activity of neurons and the external stimulus presented to them, whether these stimuli are applied directly in the form of electrical stimulation or indirectly through sensory pathways. Yet this in no way warrants the inference that there is any intrinsic way for the nervous system to likewise interpret these regularities, and indeed, there is no independent way to compare stimuli with their neuronal influences. The computational metaphor depends on such an extrinsic homunculus to assign an interpretation to any given correlation, but this function must arise intrinsically and autonomously in the brain. This is another reason to expect that the phenomena which constitute sensory experiences and behavioral intentions are dynamically supervenient on these neuronal dynamics and not directly embodied by them. Since morphodynamic regularities emerge as the various sources of interaction constraints compound with one another, they necessarily reflect the relationship between network structural constraints and extrinsic constraints. And different morphodynamic processes brought into interaction can generate orthograde or contragrade effects, including teleogenic effects.

Another important caveat is that correlations between neuronal activity patterns in different brain regions, and between neuronal activity and extrinsic stimuli, are not necessarily reflections of simple causal linkages. They may be artifacts of simply being included in some higher-order, network-level morphodynamic process, in the same way that causally separated but globally correlated dynamics can emerge even in quite separated regions in non-biological morphodynamic processes. For example, recall that molecules separated by many millimeters in separate Bénard cells within a dish can exhibit highly correlated patterns of movement, despite being nearly completely dynamically isolated from one another. So, in accord with the classic criticisms of correlation theories of reference (such as those discussed in chapters 12 and 13), neural firing correlation alone is neither a necessary nor sufficient basis for being information about anything. Interpretation requires something more, something dynamic: a self, and a self is something teleodynamic.

A focus on correlative neuronal activity as the critical link between mental and environmental domains has thus served mostly to reinforce dualism and to justify eliminative materialism. When the neurophysiologist making these assessments is excluded from the analysis, there is no homunculus, only simple mechanistic causal influences and correlations. The road to a scientific theory of sentience, which preserves rather than denies its distinctiveness, begins with the recognition of the centrality of its dynamical physical foundation. It is precisely by reconstructing the emergence of the teleodynamics of thought from its neuronal thermodynamic and morphodynamic foundations that we will rediscover the life that computationalism has drained from the science of mind.





FROM ORGANISM TO BRAIN



Organisms with nervous systems, and particularly those with brains, have evolved to augment and elaborate a basic teleodynamic principle that is at the core of all life. Brains specifically evolved in animate multicelled creatures—animals—because being able to move about and modify the surroundings require predictive as well as reactive capacities. The evolution of this “anticipatory sentience”—nested within, constituted by, and acting on behalf of the “reactive (or vegetative) sentience” of the organism—has given rise to emergent features that have no precedent. Animal sentience is one of these. As brains have evolved to become more complex, the teleodynamic processes they support have become more convoluted as well, and with this the additional distinctively higher-order mode of human symbolically mediated sentience has emerged. These symbolic abilities provide what might be described as sentience of the abstract.

Despite its familiarity, however, starting with the task of trying to explain first-person human conscious experience, even with all the wonderful new tools of in vivo brain imaging, cellular neuroscience, and human introspection at our fingertips, is daunting. We scarcely have a general theory of how the simplest microscopic brains operate, much less an understanding of why a human brain that is just slightly larger and minimally different in its organization from most other mammal brains is capable of such different ways of thinking. Although it may not address many questions that are of interest to those who seek a solution to the mystery of human consciousness, I propose to take a different approach than is typical of efforts to understand consciousness. I believe we can best approach this mystery, as we have successfully approached other natural phenomena, by analyzing the physical processes involved, but doing so in terms of their emergent dynamics. As with the problem of understanding the concept of self, we must start small and work our way upward. But approaching human subjectivity as an analogue of the primitive ententional properties of brainless organisms offers only a very crude guide. It ignores the fact that brain-based sentience is the culmination of vastly many stages in the evolution of sentience built upon sentience. So although we must build on the analogy of the teleodynamic processes of autogens and simple organisms, as did evolution, in order to avoid assuming what we want to explain, we must also pay attention to the special emergent differences that arise when higher-order teleodynamic processes are built upon lower-order teleodynamic processes.

But can we really understand subjective experience by analyzing the emergent dynamical features of the physical processes involved? Aren’t we still outside? Although many philosophers of mind have argued that the so-called third-person and first-person approaches to this problem are fundamentally incompatible, I am not convinced. The power of the emergent dynamic approach is that it forces us to abandon simple material approaches to ententional phenomena, and to take account of both what is present and what is absent in the phenomena we investigate. Although it does not promise to dissolve the interior/exterior distinction implicit in this problem, it may provide something nearly as useful: an account of the process that helps explain why such an inside (first-person) and outside (third-person) distinction emerged in the first place, and with it many of the features we find so enigmatic.

By grounding our initial analysis of ententional phenomena on a minimal exemplar of this emergent shift in dynamics—an autogen—we have been able to demystify many phenomena that have previously seemed outside the realm of natural science. Perhaps starting with an effort to explain the most minimal form of sentience can also yield helpful insights into the dynamical basis of this most personal of all mysteries. At the very least it can bring these seemingly incompatible domains into closer proximity. So let’s begin by using the autogen concept, again, this time as a guide for thinking about how we might conceive of a Chinese room–like approach for claims about sentient processes.

This suggests that as a first step we can compare conscious mindful processes to the teleodynamic organization of a molecular autogen and compare the mindless computational processes (such as Searle envisions) to the simple mechanistically organized chemical processes that autogens are supervenient upon. In other words, understanding and responding in Chinese may be different from merely matching Chinese characters, the way autogenesis is different from, say, the growth of a crystal precipitating from a solution. The analogy is admittedly vague at this point, and the Chinese room allegory also besets us with an added human factor that could get in the way.6 But considered in light of emergent dynamics, Searle intends to illuminate a similar distinction: the difference between a mechanistic (homeodynamic) process and an ententional (teleodynamic) process. If, as we have argued, autogenic systems exemplify precisely how ententional processes supervene on and emerge from non-ententional processes, then it should be possible to augment the Chinese room analogy in similar ways to precisely identify what it is missing. To do so would provide a useful metric for determining whether a given brain process is merely computational or also sentient.

Indeed, this analogy already suggests a first step toward resolving a false dichotomy that has often impeded progress in this endeavor: the false dichotomy between computation and conscious thought. This is not to say that conscious thought can be reduced to computation, but rather that computation in some very generic sense is like the thermodynamic chemistry underlying autogenic molecular processes. It is a necessary subvenient dynamic, but it is insufficient to account for the emergent dynamic properties we are interested in. And just as it was necessary to stop trying to identify the teleodynamics of life with molecular dynamics alone, and instead begin to pay attention to the constraints thereby embodied, it will be necessary to stop thinking of the computational mechanics as mapping to the intentional properties of mentality. In this way, we may be able to develop some clear criteria for a Turing test of sentience.

Of course, we will need to do more than just identify the parallels. We need to additionally understand how these teleodynamic features emerge in nervous systems, and what additionally emerges as a result of the fact that these teleodynamic processes are themselves emergent from the lower-level teleodynamic characteristic of the neurons that brains are made of.

In the following chapter, I offer only a very generic sketch of an emergent dynamics approach to this complex problem. Once we begin to understand how this occurs, and why, there will still be enormous challenges ahead: filling in the special details of how this knowledge can be integrated with what we have learned about the anatomy, physiology, chemistry, and signal-processing dynamics of brains. If this approach is even close to correct, however, it will mean that a considerable reassessment of cognitive neuroscience may be required. Not that what we’ve learned about neurons and synapses will need to change, or that information about sensory, motor, or cognitive regional specialization will be rendered moot. Our growing understanding of the molecular, cellular, connectional, and signal transduction details of brain function is indeed critical. What may need to change is how we think about the relationship between brain function and mental experience, and the physical status of the contents of our thoughts and expectations. What awaits is the possibility of a hitherto unrecognized methodology for studying mind/brain issues that have, up to now, been considered beyond the reach of empirical science.
