EPILOGUE



All sciences are now under the obligation to prepare the ground for the future task of the philosopher, which is to solve the problem of value . . .



—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE1





NOTHING MATTERS



Have we now arrived at where we started? Is this where we thought we were when we began? Let’s take stock.

The laws of physics have remained unchallenged. The sense that I have of being a sentient and efficacious agent in the world, of being able to change things in ways that resemble my imagined ends, of recognizing beauty upon hearing a Chopin nocturne or sensing the tragedy of being part of a civilization unable to turn away from a lifestyle destroying its own future; all these have not changed. But something I now know about these experiences is different. I know something more and am something less as a result. At the very least, my experiences must be understood differently. This “I” from which I start, and from the perspective of which the whole physical world often seems alien, now appears in a different light. I am not the same I. On the one hand, I have somehow lost the solidity that I once took for granted, me-the-physical-body is no longer so certain; and yet on the other hand my uncertainty about my place in the world, the place of meaning and value in the scheme of things, seems more assured with the realization that I may be more like the hole at the wheel’s hub than the rim of the wheel itself.

We began this exploration with an analogy between the challenges posed by the mathematics of zero and the challenges posed by the ententional properties of living and mental processes. We then explored the many ways that modern science has, like the mathematics of the Middle Ages, attempted to exclude a role for the mark of absence in the fabric of legitimate explanation. Then, accepting the challenge of explaining how it could be that absent phenomena might be causally relevant, we began to reconceptualize some of the most basic physical processes in terms of the concept of constraint: properties and degrees of freedom not actualized. This figure/background reversal didn’t undermine any known physical principles, nor did it introduce novel, unprecedented physical principles or special fundamental forces into contemporary science. It didn’t even require us to invoke any superficially strange and poorly understood quantum effects in our macroscopic explanations in order to account for what prior physical intuition seemed unable to explain about meaning, purpose, or consciousness. Rather, it merely required tracing the way that two levels of self-organizing, constraint-creating processes could become so entangled as to result in a dynamical unit—an autogen or teleogen—that enables specific constraints to create, preserve, and replicate themselves with respect to the given constraints in their physical context. But being able to trace in detail each step that is required to cross from the realm of simple mechanical processes into the realm of ententional relationships changes everything. Even such basic concepts as work and information have taken on new meaning, and previously esoteric notions like self and sentience can be given fairly precise physical definitions.

When Western scholars finally understood how operations involving zero could be woven into the fabric of mathematics, they gained access to unprecedented and powerful new tools for modeling the structure and dynamics of the physical world. By analogy, developing a scientific methodology that enables us to incorporate a fundamental role for possibilities not actualized—constraints—in explaining physical events could provide a powerful new tool for precisely analyzing a part of the world that has previously been shrouded in paradox and mystery. The mathematical revolution that followed an understanding of the null quantity in this way may presage a similarly radical expansion of the sciences that are most intimately associated with human existence. It is time that we overcame our confused Zeno’s paradox of mind, which makes it appear that represented purposes can never reach the finish line of causal consequences. It’s time to recognize that there is room for meaning, purpose, and value in the fabric of physical explanations, because these phenomena effectively occupy the absences that differentiate and interrelate the world that is physically present.





THE CALCULUS OF INTENTIONALITY



It is with teleodynamic organization, I have argued, that for the first time one physical system is capable of influencing other physical systems via something that is merely virtual—that which is specifically absent, missing, displaced, potential, or merely abstract. In the simple thought experiment that exemplifies the core architecture of this argument—the emergence of an autogenic process—it is the premature halting of the component morphodynamic processes, a tendency that is spontaneous and would otherwise run to self-extinction, that makes self, information, and life possible. This preserves the preconditions necessary to iterate this process again and again. These preconditions are self-reconstituting and thus self-referential constraints. This failure to continue makes possible the capture, preservation, and potential propagation of the constraints that are thereby created—a process that I have also called an entropy ratchet because it prevents the decay of secondary constraints generated as a side product of an otherwise entropy-increasing, constraint-destroying process. It is the possibility of briefly building up constraints by morphodynamic action, and then halting the process before there is any dissipation of those constraints, that is the secret of this distinctive form of causality. In principle, it allows the generation of constraints to continually reconstitute this intrinsic potential endlessly. It also provides the capacity to remember and reproduce information, because self-rectifying constraint preservation is the defining criterion of referential information. This property is the foundation for all higher-order intentional processes.

To put this in somewhat enigmatic terms, teleodynamics enables the potentially indefinite to enable something intrinsically incomplete to bring itself into existence. Consider again the analogy between ententional phenomena, on the one hand, and zero and infinity in mathematics, on the other. Purposes and functions have what amount to infinitesimal vectors. If, as the philosopher Ruth Millikan asks us to imagine, a lion suddenly and miraculously came into existence due to some amazing quantum accident, with all the living physiological detail of any living lion, its heart could still be said to function to pump its blood, its eyes could still be described as functioning to guide its movements, and its sexual urges could still be described as existing for the purpose of reproducing.2 Even though none of these phenomena arose by natural selection, at the very moment this lion popped into existence, before even one beat of its heart, at that instant these tendencies were present and the entention was present as well, if these processes are poised to begin and proceed in a way that preserves the whole lion.

Similarly, though my fingers never evolved for linguistic communication, the moment I began to use them to type words on a keyboard, they came to function for this end. This is because the function was not implicit in fingers or computer keys but in how the constraints of linguistic communication by computer fit with the constraints of finger movement control. The potential of my fingers to assume this function was simply not excluded by the constraints they acquired due to natural selection. In this respect, even their grasping function can’t be attributed to natural selection. Any acquired constraints that were valuable to grasping were simply maintained preferentially down the generations. It didn’t require work to bring this function into existence for the simple reason that this convergence of constraints wasn’t excluded, though in the course of evolution many other possibilities were. In this respect, function is effectively a geometric or formal relationship, not a material efficient one, a dynamical alignment or symmetry of some structure or process with respect to the teleodynamic system of which it is a part. Because of this, functionality can arise the instant that this potential becomes an actualized tendency, and even if in its implementation it is impeded from achieving this end.

This is the analogue to an infinitesimal velocity. Being able to ascribe a velocity to a projectile at a specific point along its trajectory, even though actual velocities are defined by finite distances and durations, was one of the powerful capabilities provided by the invention of calculus. So being able to specify an analogous basis for the assessment of ententional properties provides a way to solve the Zeno’s paradox of the mind that has held up our understanding of these phenomena for millennia. Specifying a function or representation is, in this respect, like the operation of differentiation in calculus: specifying an intrinsic (instantaneous) telos.

Similarly, the value of these physical attributes to the overall teleodynamics of the accidental lion can also be estimated, as can the value to it of objects in his surroundings. Food, water, appropriate levels of oxygen in the air, ambient temperature—all can be assigned some potential value with respect to their ability to support the ends served by the tendencies of this teleodynamics. Each behavioral option with respect to each environmental attribute can now be assigned some relative value in terms of its correspondence or not with physiological requirements for this incipient persistent tendency. And means to estimate these qualities will be recapitulated cognitively, translated into tendencies to mobilize neural work to obtain or avoid them with respect to this evaluation. This valuation, likely weighted with respect to many interdependent functional factors, is the analogue of the operation of integration in calculus.

So, by analogy, one might be justified in claiming that it is with the emergence of teleodynamics that nature finally discovered how to operate with the dynamical equivalent of zero. None of the dynamical properties associated with life and mind—such as function, purpose, representation, and value—existed until the universe had matured sufficiently to include complex molecules capable of forming into autogenic configurations. The explosive growth in dynamical complexity and causal possibility that arose with the emergence of teleodynamic processes on Earth, beginning with the origin of life, was a revolution of physical processes far more extravagant than the revolution of mathematics that followed the taming of zero. But these teleodynamic properties, whether embodied in the constraints affecting molecular dynamics or the constraints organizing neuronal signal dynamics, are the analogues of zero in what might be called the formal operations of matter—the dynamics of physical change. Life and mind are in this sense the embodied calculus of these physical processes; and with each leap from one teleodynamic level to another—from life to brain processes to the symbolic integration of millions of human minds extending over millennia—that physical calculus has now expanded in expressive power to the point it is able to fully represent itself.





VALUE



Perhaps the most tragic feature of our age is that just when we have developed a truly universal perspective from which to appreciate the vastness of the cosmos, the causal complexity of material processes, and the chemical machinery of life, we have at the same time conceived the realm of value as radically alienated from this seemingly complete understanding of the fabric of existence. In the natural sciences there appears to be no place for right/wrong, meaningful/meaningless, beauty/ugliness, good/evil, love/hate, and so forth. The success of contemporary science appears to have dethroned the gods and left no foundation upon which unimpeachable values can rest. Philosophers have further supported this nihilistic conception of scientific knowledge by proclaiming that no assessment of the way things are can provide a basis for assessing how things should be. This is the ultimate heritage of the Cartesian wound that severed mind from body at the birth of modern science. The removal of any approach to value from a scientific perspective is the ultimate expression of having accepted the presumed necessity of that elective surgery.

As I lamented in the opening chapter of this book, the cost of obtaining this dominance over material nature has had repercussions worldwide. Indeed, I don’t think that it is too crazy to imagine that the current crisis of faith and the rise in fundamentalism that seems to be gripping the modern world is in large part a reaction to the unignorable pragmatic success of a vision of reality that has no place for subjectivity or value. The specter of nihilism is, to many, more threatening than death.

By rethinking the frame of the natural sciences in a way that has the metaphysical sophistication to integrate the realm of absential phenomena as we experience them, I believe that we can chart an alternative route out of the current existential crisis of the age—a route that neither requires believing in magic nor engaging in the subterfuge of ultimate self-doubt. The universe is larger than just that which we can see, and touch, or manipulate with our hands or our cyclotrons. There is more here than stuff. There is how this stuff is organized and related to other stuff. And there is more than what is actual. There is what could be, what should be, what can’t be, what is possible, and what is impossible. If quantum physicists can learn to become comfortable with the material causal consequences of the superposition of alternate, as-yet-unrealized states of matter, it shouldn’t be too great a leap to begin to get comfortable with the superposition of the present and the absent in our functions, meanings, experiences, and values.

In the title to one of his recent books, Stuart Kauffman succinctly identifies what has been missing from our current blinkered metaphysical worldview. Despite the power and insights that we have gained from this powerful way of conceiving of the world, it has not helped us to feel “at home in the universe.” Even as our scientific tools have given us mastery over so much of the physical world around and within us, they have at the same time alienated us from these same realms. It is time to find our way home.
