Interlude: The Prehistory of Computing
Computing may be fundamental to life, intelligence, and everything, but
its history is tortuous, full of false starts and misunderstandings. To better
understand our conceptions and misconceptions about computing, we’ll
need to begin well before Turing and von Neumann, connecting their work
to its roots in mathematics, industrial engineering, and neuroscience. We’ll
also need to take stock of the social context surrounding its development.
This will be a short and curated, rather than definitive or comprehensive,
account. Its goal is to reassess our received wisdom about what computing
is (or isn’t), and its relationship to brains and minds, labor, intelligence, and
“rationality.”
Our prehistory of computing begins[175] during the European Enlightenment,
with Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716), the co-inventor of calculus,
among many other achievements. His “stepped reckoning machine” was the
first mechanical calculator that could perform all four basic arithmetic
operations, but this was only a baby step in his far more ambitious agenda.
[176]

At age twenty, Leibniz asserted that one day, we’d be able to formulate and
answer any question—not just in math, but in politics, economics,
philosophy, even in ethics or religion—using pure logic: “If controversies
were to arise, there would be no more need of disputation between two
philosophers than between two accountants. For it would suffice to take
their pencils in their hands, to sit down with their slates and say to each
other [...]: Let us calculate [calculemus].”[177]
In imagining that accountants—human computers, really—could work out
the right answer to any question once properly formulated, Leibniz
presumed the existence of universal truth, both factual and normative: a
Platonic world of pure, timeless, and axiomatically correct ideas. He only

needed to devise—or discover—a formal language for expressing any
proposition symbolically (he called this a characteristica universalis, or
“universal notation”), and an algebra for manipulating such propositions (a
calculus ratiocinator or “calculus for reasoning”).[178] The existence of God,
the right of the Habsburgs to rule Austria, and the legitimacy of same-sex
marriage could all boil down to logical proofs, just like the value of pi. And,
if so, a descendant of the reckoning machine could eventually compute such
proofs mechanically.
This grand idea died a slow death over centuries, though, in a sense, the
entire field of computer science grew out of its moldering remains, like a
sapling out of a nurse log. Remember that the theoretical foundations of
computing were laid by Turing in his attempt to solve the
Entscheidungsproblem in the 1930s—the problem of finding a general
algorithm for deciding on the truth value of a mathematical statement.[179]
This was Leibniz’s problem, albeit restricted to math. The bad news: even
in that purely abstract, formal domain, Turing proved that no such algorithm
existed. The good news: in the process, he invented (or discovered)
universal computation.
Although Leibniz worked on many other problems throughout his long
career, he never gave up on the quest for a universal symbolic language. It
was his Holy Grail. In a New Year’s letter to the Duke of Brunswick in
1697, Leibniz excitedly explained some progress toward this goal: numbers
could be represented in binary, using only the digits 0 and 1.[180] The letter
sketched a design for a medallion to commemorate this insight featuring an
image of divine creation, noting that it would be “difficult to find a better
illustration of this secret in nature or philosophy [...] that God made
everything from nothing.”

Because it was both a minimal representation for numbers and a natural
notation for yes/no logic, binary seemed the obvious basis for Leibniz’s
characteristica universalis. George Boole (1815–1864), the self-taught
nineteenth-century mathematician who formalized the Boolean logic at the
heart of virtually all digital computing, independently arrived at the same
conclusion more than a century later.[181]
In practice, though, the earliest “human computers” didn’t use any special
notation or work out the answers to weighty questions on slates; in short,
they didn’t resemble Leibniz’s philosopher-accountants. They were out-ofwork hairdressers employed by a civil engineer, Gaspard de Prony (1755–
1839), to crank out books of logarithmic and trigonometric function tables
for land surveyors to use after the French Revolution.[182] (The hairdressers
were out of work because many of their former customers, Ancien Régime
aristocrats, were losing their towering hairdos, along with their heads, to the
guillotine. Survivors, rich and poor alike, were wisely opting to keep their
hair short and plain.[183]) These hairdressers may not have known higher
math, but they were used to working carefully and methodically. They had
no trouble performing the elementary operations into which each
calculation had been decomposed: addition and subtraction.[184]

Prony framed his project in industrial terms, boasting that division of labor
allowed him to “manufacture logarithms as easily as one manufactures
pins.” The reference to pin manufacture came straight out of Adam Smith’s
The Wealth of Nations, the founding document of industrial capitalism.[185]
Leibniz had complained that “it is beneath the dignity of excellent men to
waste their time in calculation when any peasant could do the work just as
accurately with the aid of a machine.”[186] Although Prony’s hairdressers
were not (yet) using machines, they were organized to work like one.[187]
And, of course, machines had already been invented for adding and
subtracting.

Prony’s project greatly impressed Charles Babbage (1791–1871), designer
of the first general-purpose computer, the “Analytical Engine,” in the
1830s. Entirely mechanical, the Analytical Engine would have been steampowered and would likely have taken about three seconds to perform an

addition—far slower than any electronic computer, but still faster than
doing it by hand.[188]
Although known today as a hapless inventor too far ahead of his time
(neither the Analytical Engine nor its more modest predecessor, the
“Difference Engine,” were built in his lifetime), Babbage was no idle
dreamer. He was in fact one of the Industrial Revolution’s great architects
and theorists; his most important book, On the Economy of Machinery and
Manufactures, was all about factory automation. It was full of down-toEarth engineering and entrepreneurial advice, gleaned through close
observation and obsessively backed up with productivity data.

Steampunk computing engines are just one (uncharacteristically
speculative) idea among many in Babbage’s book. He introduced automatic
computing in a chapter about the division of labor, noting: “The proceeding

of M. Prony, in [his] celebrated system of calculation, much resembles that
of a skilful person about to construct a cotton or silk mill, or any similar
establishment.”[189] In short, like Prony, Babbage sought to “manufacture
logarithms.” Mechanical calculation was simply a means to automate the
jobs of Prony’s hairdressers.
The parallel Babbage drew to textile mills is telling, for his other great
inspiration was the Jacquard loom, patented by Joseph Marie Jacquard in
1804. Jacquard’s machine made the mass reproduction of complex
patterned fabrics possible by encoding their designs as holes punched into a
sequence of cards. Similar punched cards were to be the data input and
storage mechanism for the Analytical Engine.[190]

In 1833, Baroness Anne Byron, an educational reformer and philanthropist,
took her seventeen-year-old daughter Ada, the future Countess of Lovelace
(1815–1852), to a soirée at Babbage’s house.[191] As Lady Byron wrote soon
afterward, “We both went to see the thinking machine (for such it seems)
last Monday. It raised several No.’s to the 2nd and 3rd powers, and
extracted the root of a quadratic equation. [...] There was a sublimity of the
views thus opened of the ultimate results of intellectual power.” They had

witnessed a demonstration of a working prototype of the Difference Engine
—as sophisticated a computer as anyone then alive would ever see in
operation.[192]
Despite her youth, Ada Lovelace (as she is usually called today) understood
the far-reaching implications of the machine. Over the following years, she
became Babbage’s intellectual collaborator as the incomplete Difference
Engine gave way to grander (and even less complete) plans for its fully
programmable successor, the Analytical Engine.

In 1842, Lovelace translated a lecture on the Analytical Engine given by
Italian military engineer Luigi Menabrea, appending to it a series of notes
far lengthier and more insightful than the lecture itself. Note G includes the
first published computer program for the Analytical Engine—hence the first
published program, period. It calculated Bernoulli number sequences,
which turn up often in mathematical analysis. As Lovelace famously wrote,
“The Analytical Engine weaves algebraic patterns, just as the Jacquardloom weaves flowers and leaves.”[193] This observation was even sharper
than it first appears, for she likely understood that the algebraic patterns in
real flowers and leaves are themselves woven computationally, producing

the mathematical regularities of petals, veins, leaves, and branches
discussed in chapter 1.[194]
To what degree, though, should one think of a computer as a mere “loom”
for the mass production of mathematical tables? Babbage’s computing
engines included a beautiful design for a printer capable of creating
stereotype plates of whole finished pages. But there is a notable difference
between the labor involved in printing tables (or manufacturing pins, or
weaving cloth) and actually calculating those tables: the former kind of
labor is physical, while the latter is mental.
This suggests a functional (not just metaphorical) analogy between
computers and brains. The analogy has been used liberally by journalists
over the years; for instance, in 1946, the Surrey Comet described Turing’s
Automatic Computing Engine (ACE) as an “Electric Brain to be Made at
Teddington.”[195] When the long-delayed ACE was finally completed in
1950, the newspapers once again referred to it as an “electric brain,”
“electronic brain,” or “‘brain’ machine.”[196] We tend to dismiss such
headlines as old-timey clickbait, but this glosses over the genuine insight
behind Lady Byron’s characterization of the Difference Engine as a
“thinking machine.”

Nowadays, we prefer terms like “information processing” to avoid the
baggage of consciousness and subjective experience implied by words like
“thinking” and “mental,” but we should keep in mind that, to a committed
industrialist like Babbage, subjectivity simply wasn’t relevant. As far as we
know, he didn’t give the question of “what it was like to be” a mechanical
computer a moment’s thought; then again, neither did he trouble himself
with “what it was like to be” a human computer. Factory work was purely
functional, operating at a level of abstraction above the individual—hence
the substitutability of workers on a production line. As Babbage put it,
“[D]ivision of labor can be applied with equal success to mental as to
mechanical operations.”[197]
Lady Byron was excited by the “sublimity of the views thus opened of the
ultimate results of intellectual power,” but, for others, the idea of machines
doing mental labor sparked an early glimmer of the unease some feel about
AI today. In 1832, a year before Lovelace and Babbage met, the London
Literary Gazette had referred to Babbage, perhaps only half in jest, as a

“logarithmetical Frankenstein.”[198] Information work may not have been a
significant sector of the labor market yet, but the prospect of machines
thinking still induced a certain agitation.
Just how far could a mechanical monster’s mental functions advance?
According to Menabrea, the Italian engineer, “The [Analytical Engine] is
not a thinking being but simply an automaton which acts according to the
laws imposed on it.” Lovelace agreed, writing in her Note G, “The
Analytical Engine has no pretensions whatever to originate anything. It can
[only] do whatever we know how to order it to perform.”[199] This zombielike picture recalls the golem of medieval Jewish folklore: a clay figure
animated by a powerful rabbi using magical incantations—that is, code. The
golem may follow commands, but without understanding or discernment.
George Boole may have thought otherwise. Recall that, like Leibniz, Boole
believed in binary logic as a universal calculus for reasoning. Boole went
further, asserting that it is the way the mind reasons; hence the title of his
great treatise, An Investigation of the Laws of Thought, published to wide
acclaim in 1854.[200] Presumably, he meant that understanding and
discernment were themselves products of logic, for while Boole was
religious, he (again, like Leibniz) thought of logic and rationality as
inherently divine.[201] The human soul was a “rational soul,” and our
subjectivity followed from, rather than existing in spite of, our rationality.
In the beginning, this neuroscientific aspect of Boole’s thesis remained
largely unacknowledged. A notable exception was Boole’s friend and
colleague Augustus De Morgan (author of the “Great fleas have little fleas”
rhyme in chapter 1), who had himself been working on the foundations of
logic.[202] The Victorian intelligentsia was a small world: De Morgan was
also Ada Lovelace’s mathematics tutor, and had taught her calculus and the
Bernoulli numbers.
Unlike her contemporaries, though, Lovelace was not content to choose
between logic-based brains, on one hand, and mystical non-explanations of
mental processes, on the other. In an 1844 letter to a friend—a decade prior
to Boole’s Laws of Thought—Lovelace wrote, “I have my hopes [...] of one
day getting cerebral phenomena such that I can put them into mathematical
equations; in short a law or laws, for the mutual actions of the molecules of
brain [...]. The grand difficulty is in the practical experiments.”

Lovelace undoubtedly knew about the sensational experiments of Luigi
Galvani (1737–1798). Galvani had discovered that the application of
electrical current to the nerves of freshly killed frogs caused their legs to
twitch. Galvani’s nephew, Giovanni Aldini (1762–1834), carried on the
work, legitimizing his studies with claims—not wholly implausible—that
“galvanic” shocks could sometimes revive the drowned and treat the
mentally ill. Twentieth-century defibrillation paddles and electroconvulsive
shock therapy are heirs to these early experiments.
Still, Aldini appears to have been more of a showman than a scientist. In
1803, he rushed the hanged body of convict George Foster from London’s
Newgate Prison to the Royal College of Surgeons for an anatomical
demonstration.[203] According to the lurid (and wildly popular) Newgate
Calendar, “On the first application of [electricity] to the face, the jaws of
the deceased criminal began to quiver, and the adjoining muscles were
horribly contorted, and one eye was actually opened. In the subsequent part
of the process the right hand was raised and clenched, and the legs and
thighs were set in motion.”[204] The beadle of the Surgeons’ Company
reportedly died of fright soon after returning home.

Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein[205] was probably inspired by this account.
Perhaps likewise inspired, Lovelace wrote, underlining words with her
customary enthusiasm: “I must be a most skillful practical manipulator in
experimental tests; & that, on materials difficult to deal with; viz: the brain,
blood, & nerves, of animals. [... N]one of the physiologists have yet got on
the right tack; I can’t think why. [...] It does not appear to me that cerebral
matter need be more unmanageable to mathematicians than sidereal &
planetary matters & movements, if they would but inspect it from the right
point of view. I hope to bequeath to the generations a Calculus of the
Nervous System.”[206]
In drawing a parallel between neural activity and Newtonian laws of
motion, Lovelace implied that cerebral “calculus” would not be founded on
abstract logic like that of Boole and the Analytical Engine, but rather should
be grounded in experiment, and, in this, she was indeed on the right tack.

Unfortunately, Lovelace’s health, always fragile, soon worsened. She began
taking opiates for chronic pain, and died a few years later, at age thirty-six,
of uterine cancer. We will never know what she might have achieved as a
neurophysiologist or as the first computational neuroscientist.
When real experiments with nerve tissue finally got underway, they at first
seemed to confirm the “digital” intuitions of Leibniz and Boole. In the
1920s, pioneering English neuroscientist Edgar Adrian was electrically
recording “all-or-nothing” action potentials, or “spikes,” in the sensory
neurons of dissected frogs at his lab at Cambridge.[207] Adrian’s colleague
and predecessor, Keith Lucas, had already established that impulses in
motor-nerve fibers were similarly all-or-nothing.[208]
With neural inputs and outputs thus seemingly binary electrical signals, the
idea that the brain is a logic machine carrying out a kind of calculus
ratiocinator gained powerful support. In particular, if every neuron has
inputs corresponding to Boolean ones and zeros, and produces a Boolean
output in response, it’s a logic gate—that is, a Boolean operator.[209] And, if
so, the activity of the brain as a whole would amount to a vast logical
calculation.
Two pivotal figures in modern neuroscience, Warren McCulloch and Walter
Pitts, brought these ideas together in a legendary 1943 paper, “A Logical
Calculus of the Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity.” It seemed to be the
realization, ninety-nine years after Lovelace’s letter, of her envisioned
“Calculus of the Nervous System”:
To psychology, [...] specification of the [neural] net would contribute
all that could be achieved in that field—even if the analysis were
pushed to the ultimate psychic units or ‘psychons,’ for a psychon can
be no less than the activity of a single neuron. [...] The ‘all-or-none’
law of these activities, and the conformity of their relations to those of
the logic of propositions, insure that the relations of psychons are
those of the two-valued logic of propositions. Thus in psychology [...]
the fundamental relations are those of two-valued logic.[210]
This paper was at once an end, a beginning, and a turning point—but not in
any way its authors could have foreseen. As an engineering manifesto, it
proved highly influential. John von Neumann read McCulloch and Pitts’s

1943 paper as a blueprint for how to perform general-purpose computation
using electronic logic gates in place of biological neurons (as mentioned in
chapter 1). In the right configurations, these gates—first made using
vacuum tubes, and later transistors—could implement a Universal Turing
Machine, and could therefore compute anything. The Boolean architecture
was more minimal and elegant than that of the Analytical Engine and its
successors, which relied on complex mechanical components and used
base-ten arithmetic.[211]
One can think, then, of digital computers as Universal Turing Machines
built of hand-crafted neural networks of McCulloch-Pitts-type neurons. The
symbols used today to represent logic gates are cribbed directly from the
graphical representations McCulloch and Pitts drew of “pyramidal neurons”
(which were, as the name implies, pyramid-shaped). We still draw a little
circle at the tip of the pyramid for logical negation (turning an AND gate
into NOT-AND or NAND, an OR into a NOT-OR or NOR, etc.). Originally,
that circle represented an inhibitory synapse, which McCulloch and Pitts
believed to implement the NOT operator.[212]

Despite its powerful influence on computer engineering, as a
neuroscientific theory, the 1943 McCulloch-Pitts paper was a false start. It
marked the endpoint and high-water mark of the notion that individual
neurons work by carrying out logical operations. Postwar neuroscientists
quickly established that while all-or-none voltage spikes are indeed a key

signaling mechanism in the brain, they don’t correspond to logical
propositions, and neurons don’t work like logic gates.[213]
Larger-scale electrical fields and oscillations matter too; neither is electrical
signaling the whole story. A wealth of neurotransmitters and
neuromodulatory chemicals operate at a variety of scales, from local
signaling with specialized “neuropeptides”[214] to hormones secreted into the
bloodstream that affect the entire body. These play major roles in our
mental states, emotions, and drives. The emerging picture remains
computational, but more in the spirit of Turing’s models for morphogenesis
and “unorganized” neural networks rather than anything like a calculus
ratiocinator.
Turing understood this, as he made clear in a 1951 BBC Radio address.[215]
He agreed with Lovelace’s assertion that writing a program in the usual way
could only produce a predefined golem-like result—indeed, traditional
programming involves writing code whose function is fully understood by
the programmer in advance, foreclosing any possibility for subsequent
machine behavior we could reasonably call “creative” or “intelligent.”
However, the universality of computing makes it possible to implement any
computable model of neural function, including Lovelace’s “calculus of the
nervous system,” on any Universal Turing Machine. Thus, Turing said, “it
will follow that our digital computer, suitably programmed, will behave like
a brain.”
Although, like Turing, neuroscientists understood long ago that the brain is
not a classical logic machine, the message took a long time to sink in
among computer scientists and AI researchers. Recall that, throughout the
twentieth century, repeated attempts at hand-writing algorithms to carry out
the most basic of everyday tasks, like image and speech recognition, robotic
control and common-sense reasoning, had failed utterly, bringing on the AI
winters mentioned in the introduction.[216]
For many decades, then, computers were able to perform logic-based tasks
that had been deemed purely “mechanical” with superhuman speed, yet
seemed unable to get anywhere at everyday “human” tasks. They failed
even at tasks that many other animals with much smaller brains find easy. It
began to seem that, despite Turing’s ideas about universal computation,
computers might have little to do with either biology or brains after all.[217]

The popular culture of AI throughout the twentieth century navigated this
apparent mismatch between brains and computers by imagining that when
—or if—AI finally arrived, it would be stellar at “rational” thinking and
logic but poor at human emotion, creativity, or common sense. HAL 9000,
[218]
or Data from Star Trek, are prime examples.[219]
The message was: computers can perform rote calculations today, and may
eventually exceed humans at “book smarts” too, but, being golem-like, they
aren’t remotely like us; the human spirit is neither logical nor rational. We
can’t be reduced to mere computation.
This trope seems especially irresistible to Hollywood, resurfacing over and
over in franchises like The Terminator, Robocop, and The Matrix. If Boole
was an Enlightenment thinker living in the Romantic period, Hollywood
remains full of closet Romantics living in a Postmodern era.
What attracts us to this kind of human exceptionalism? Partly, the question
answers itself; of course we like thinking of ourselves as fundamentally
different, better in some non-quantifiable way, possessing some je ne sais
quoi that will remain forever out of reach of the encroaching “other.”
Nationalities and ethnic groups play this identitarian game all the time.
Beyond the obvious, though, the “incomputably human” narrative is
comforting because the Industrial Revolution established a computational
hierarchy wherein the soulless, rote, mechanical stuff is done at the lowest
tier of the org chart of its time—first by calculating women, then by the
machines that replaced them—so that upper class gentlemen-scholars could
be freed for the more varied, creative, and intellectual pursuits they deemed
worthy of being called “intelligent.”[220]
As historian of science Jessica Riskin puts it, “Not only has our
understanding of what constitutes intelligence changed according to what
we have been able to make machines do but, simultaneously, our
understanding of what machines can do has altered according to what we
have taken intelligence to be. [...] [T]he first experiments in automation
were devoted to determining its uppermost limits, which simultaneously
meant identifying the lowest limits of humanity.”[221]
Today we not only face the problem that those limits have continued to
shift, but also that they have stubbornly refused to fall into the right

sequence, according to our class-based preconceptions. It’s easier nowadays
to imagine a doctor replaced by an AI model than a nurse. We probably
won’t have AI plumbers anytime soon, but AI physicists (at the very least
AI physics research assistants) may arrive imminently. When large
language models can read and summarize complex arguments, write essays
and poems, create software, and so on, there ceases to be any obvious
hierarchy of information tasks where a computer can only substitute for the
work of the poorly paid or uneducated. AIs are no longer, as Leibniz would
have it, “artificial peasants” manufacturing logarithms.
Neither is AI the purely book-smart supernerd envisioned by twentiethcentury media. Real AI isn’t necessarily overly logical; in fact, its failures at
solving logic puzzles, or even simple arithmetic problems, featured
prominently in AI critique during the early 2020s. Now, not acting enough
like a computer is interpreted as a lack of intelligence!
As an engineering discipline, too, modern AI is disruptive; it has little to do
with the programming languages, data structures, and paradigms that were
the mainstay of computer engineering departments a scant few years ago.
AI models may run on Universal Turing Machines, but they aren’t
algorithms in any classical sense. Instead, they tackle the problem of
modeling probability distributions directly from data.
So where did the new approach to computing and AI come from? As it turns
out, it has been here all along, just not in the mainstream. Understanding
this alternative vision, and its relationships with other disciplines, requires
following a different path from that of Leibniz, Boole, and traditional
computer science—one that, inspired by living systems, conceived of
computation less in terms of logic than in terms of learning and prediction.
This was the path of cybernetics, an idea developed as far back as the
1940s, in wartime, and already falling into disrepute by the ’60s.

