3. Cybernetics
Love and War
We have seen how even simple life forms, like bacteria, evolve to predict
their environment, their internal states, and their actions. Both normativity
(good versus bad) and basic feelings (like hunger, satiety, and pain) arise as
consequences of prediction. However, the discussion so far has been framed
in terms of a single-player game: how a “self” can evolve to enhance its
dynamic stability in a world that is, if not hostile, at least indifferent. The
food molecules a bacterium chases during chemotaxis are not running
away; nor are chemorepellent molecules active aggressors. Chemotactic
bacteria are modeling molecular concentration, but those small molecules
they’re modeling (probably) aren’t modeling the bacteria in turn.
When it comes to wolves and rabbits, though, multiple agents are at work
modeling each other—whether in skittish alarm (the rabbit) or with
murderous intent (the wolf). Big-brained animals like us (and wolves, and
rabbits) have detailed models of themselves, too, as well as of kith and kin
—hopefully, with neither skittish alarm nor murderous intent. Such rich
social, subjective, and “intersubjective” experiences seem far removed from
the simple machinery of bff programs or bacteria. Yet I will argue that
minds like ours are a natural consequence of the same evolutionary
dynamics. In particular, minds arise when modeling other minds becomes
important.
The need for such modeling goes a long way back. It relates to two major
evolutionary transitions: the emergence of sexual reproduction, likely about
two billion years ago, and of hunting, which became prevalent during the
Cambrian explosion, 538.8 million years ago.
Because sexual reproduction is so ancient, first arising among our distant
single-celled ancestors, its origins remain obscure. Sex may have been an
integral part of the eukaryotic revolution, two billion years ago.[222] Since
eukaryotes are the canonical instance of symbiogenesis, it seems fitting that
sex is itself symbiotic: the female and male forms of a species depend on
each other to reproduce, mutually benefitting through faster evolutionary
learning.[223] (Hence, under most circumstances and all other factors being

equal, a sexually reproducing species will outcompete one that reproduces
asexually, even though each individual member of the asexual species faces
fewer barriers to reproduction.)
For our purposes, though, sexual reproduction is relevant because it
requires an organism to recognize one of its own, and, usually, to
distinguish male from female and modulate its behavior accordingly. This is
a big deal: when reproduction requires sex-selective cooperation or
competition, others of the same species (and subtle differences between
individuals) become an obligate part of one’s umwelt.

Now, let’s fast-forward a billion and a half years. While many aspects of the
ancient fossil record remain controversial, there is broad consensus that preCambrian life was dominated by soft-bodied organisms with a wide range
of body plans and symmetries, from tubular to quilted to more amorphous.
We can only guess how those ancient Ediacarans moved, but it seems likely
that the behavioral boundary between plants and animals would have

seemed indistinct, with many organisms either drifting on ocean currents or
anchored to rocks, their fronds or appendages waving languidly in search of
nutrients. Nervous systems during this period, when present at all, may
have looked much like the distributed nerve nets of Hydra or comb jellies.
[224]

Then, the Cambrian explosion occurred: a sudden great diversity of marine
creatures with protruding eyes, armored plates, fearsome claws, and sharp
teeth. It’s impossible not to imagine them moving quickly and actively,
hunting, escaping, killing and being killed. An arms race ensued, featuring a
cascade of innovations and counter-innovations in the arts of attack and
defense. For the first time, complex, centralized nervous systems would
have been required to intelligently coordinate rapid, perceptually guided,
purposive movement.[225] The (one-sided) joys of predation had been
discovered.

In light of the earlier discussion of thermodynamics and its relationship to
dynamic stability, it’s worth pausing to spell out the Darwinian motive for
predation, even though it may seem intuitively obvious. Why do we eat,
anyway?
Recall that life requires computation to reproduce (per chapter 1) and to
respond to changes in its environment or internal state (per chapter 2).
Computation, in turn, requires free energy—though recall also that this term
is deceptive. Energy can neither be created nor destroyed; we don’t “use it
up.”[226] Free energy really means a source of order, or low entropy.
Recall that in thermodynamics, the classic low-entropy system is a
pressurized piston: a cylinder of air in which most of the gas molecules are
concentrated on one side of a partition, leaving a partial vacuum on the
other side. It would be extremely unlikely for this situation to arise
spontaneously—like randomly bouncing billiard balls suddenly forming a
triangle at one end of the table—but with the piston locked in place to
prevent the gas from redistributing itself more randomly, the pressure
differential can be maintained.
This low-entropy configuration is like a loaded spring, or a cocked gun. The
moment that piston is allowed to move, it will do so with force, until the
pressures on both sides equalize—that is, until entropy is again maximized.
That would “use up” the free energy, even though the total amount of actual
energy in the system (proportional to the summed squared velocities of all
of the gas molecules) has remained constant. When Newcomen and Watt
harnessed the piston’s movement to work a pump, or spin a loaded
crankshaft, the molecules would slow down accordingly, cooling the gas.
Now, remember that once life takes hold, it creates predictability and order;
its entropy plunges. That, too, requires work. It also means that an organism
itself is a kind of pressurized piston—or loaded spring, or cocked gun. A
wonderful source, in other words, of free energy. (The fatty bits, especially;
all those delicious carbon-hydrogen bonds!) Thus, predation: a life form
using the order, or “negative entropy,” stored in the body of another life
form to do the work of maintaining or increasing its own order or negative
entropy.[227]
There are conflicting interests here. In the best case (for the victim), the
predator will just take a harmless little nip or sip—that’s how fleas, ticks,

flies, and mosquitoes work. We still resent them; grooming behaviors
among primates, and the swishy tails on horses, evolved to discourage such
micro-predation. (And partly in response, flies have become lightningquick, mosquitoes have evolved to inject anesthetics, and ticks have
become tenacious flesh-burrowers.) As for predation of the kind that comes
in larger, life-ending bites—well, avoiding it at any cost immediately rises
to the top of any prey animal’s to-do list.
At first blush, the two great revolutions I’ve just described—sex and
predation—seem to have as little to do with each other as love and war.
However both love and war require that you recognize and form internal
models of other living things in the pursuit of dynamic stability. They
require, in other words, effective prediction of something that is itself a
predictor.[228]
We’ll get to love later in the book. Here, though, we’ll focus on warfare—
the original “killer app”—from a computational perspective. Let’s return
briefly to nineteenth century London.

Killer App
Babbage struggled to drum up financial backing for his Analytical
Engine. The market for Jacquard-woven textiles was obvious, but who
needed industrially mass-produced “analytical formulæ”? To sell the idea of
mathematical tables as a popular commodity, he resorted to folksy
examples, such as “the amount of any number of pounds from 1 to 100 lbs.
of butchers’ meat at various prices per lb.”[229]
Price tables for the village butcher? Hardly. A moment’s reflection will
make it clear that small tradesmen wouldn’t have been a viable customer
base for a hulking industrial machine like the Analytical Engine.
State administration, which Prony had bet on, was closer to the mark; the
information needs of bureaucratic governments were on the rise.[230] Still, it
was too early. The French government defunded Prony’s project long before
it was complete.
The real killer app was warfare. The British Army and Navy would have
been Babbage’s obvious backers, and ultimately it was their lack of
investment that doomed his enterprise.

The artillery table was already a paradigmatic product of human
computation by the turn of the nineteenth century. A new table was needed
for every big gun, including corrections for factors like altitude, wind, and
barometric pressure. With every major world conflict from the Napoleonic
Wars (1803–1815) onward, gunnery became increasingly important, and,
with it, tabulation. And doing the calculations by hand took a long time.
By World War I, the first fully industrialized large-scale conflict, both the
Allies and the Central Powers were making extensive use of complex
tables. Artillery fire was often planned days in advance, and its accuracy
became crucial for supporting infantry advances. Computation had become
a bottleneck in warfare, and, more than any other single factor, this was
what finally motivated serious investment in automatic computing between
the World Wars.
As weapons production for World War II began ramping up, the University
of Pennsylvania’s Moore School of Electrical Engineering hired at least two
hundred women to work on artillery tables. Their methods would have been
largely familiar to Babbage or Prony. But, spurred by the war effort,
technology was advancing at breakneck speed. Six of the Moore School’s
women were selected to become the programmers of the ENIAC.[231] This
first fully general, programmable computer had been designed to automate
artillery tabulation.[232]
By the time the ENIAC became operational, in December 1945, priorities
had changed. The Germans and the Japanese had been defeated, but Cold
War brinkmanship picked up right where World War II had left off. The new
computer’s first substantial program was a simulation of the “Super
Problem,” exploring the feasibility of a hydrogen bomb.[233] The math
required was a lot harder than calculating ballistic trajectories, and the
machine’s thousands of vacuum tubes burned out frequently, requiring neardaily repair. This incentivized rapid improvements in the hardware,
kickstarting what would later be known as Moore’s Law.[234]
The early computers were a long way from anything we have today. It’s
sobering to consider how many years of capital-intensive incubation within
the military-industrial complex were needed before the technology had
become sufficiently cheap, reliable, and miniaturized to rouse real interest
from the private sector, let alone the village butcher.

IBM’s 701 mainframe, announced to the public on May 21, 1952 and
originally dubbed the “Defense Calculator,” became the first computer
commercially available in the US. There’s an apocryphal quote, usually
attributed to Thomas J. Watson Jr., IBM’s president, from a stockholders
meeting in 1953, to the effect that he believed there was a worldwide
market for only five computers. This isn’t quite true; Watson really said
that, when IBM had drawn up the plans for the 701 and toured them across
the country to “some twenty concerns” that they thought “could use such a
machine,” they had assumed they’d only get five orders and were
astonished to get eighteen.[235]
At first, general-purpose computers were not designed to work in real time.
Like the human computers they replaced, they supported the war effort
using batch processing. Such computing was a stately, offline affair. You
submitted your job, and went to get a coffee … or, more likely, take a nap
while technicians nursed the job along, replacing tubes, clearing punchcard-reader jams, and swapping out spools of magnetic tape. Running on
the ENIAC, bff would have taken centuries to achieve full-tape replication.
By 1952, on the IBM 701, it would still have taken years, running nonstop,
at a cost of millions of (today’s) dollars.[236]
The ’50s did see some early experiments in interactive architectures. Project
Whirlwind, operational in 1951, was initially designed for flight simulation,
and later became the heart of the US Air Force’s SAGE air-defense system.
[237]
Real-time computing had become important due to the development of
radar and related radio-signaling technologies, effectively allowing one
machine to physically detect another machine—at least one of which might
be moving through space at high speed and with lethal intent.
Identify Friend or Foe (IFF) systems soon followed, using encrypted
signaling to allow radar dots to be annotated when a bogey was “one of
ours.” This in turn created an incentive to hack an enemy’s IFF system,
spoofing the “friend” signal to sneak into enemy territory. A game of
technical one-upmanship ensued, not unlike that of the Cambrian explosion.
Still more Cambrian was the rapidly increasing speed, precision, and
deadliness of the military hardware. Jet fighters, missiles, and anti-missile
defenses proliferated. GPS was invented in large part to make autonomous
weapons guidance possible, as it was obvious that high-speed warfare

would soon render keeping a human “in the loop” impossible; the precision
and response time needed were superhuman. Even the G-forces incurred by
aerial maneuvers soon began to exceed human endurance.[238] Robots would
need to close the sensorimotor loops of these new weapons systems.

Behavior, Purpose, and Teleology
Thus, the field of cybernetics was born, so named in 1947 by MIT
mathematician Norbert Wiener, physiologist Arturo Rosenblueth, and their
colleagues.[239] Unlike batch computing, cybernetics was all about real-time
feedback loops involving continuous time-varying signals like position,
velocity, and thrust. Early proto-cybernetic technologies included
electromechanical gun turrets and automatic bomb-sighting engines used to
correctly time the dropping of munitions from a plane to hit a target, often
using analog cams and gears.[240]
The cyberneticists took on the challenge of generalizing such systems to
aerial dogfighting, in which the target is not stationary.[241] In the presence
of noise and uncertainty, such problems can be formulated using
information theory, a field where Wiener made important early
contributions. Under the assumption that the “brain” of a targeting system is
linear, meaning that its outputs are weighted sums of its inputs, he also
derived elegant theoretical results in optimal filtering and control. (Bacterial
chemotaxis, described in chapter 2, can be modeled using the same math.
[242]
) These optimal linear theories are both useful for building weapons
systems and, under many real-life conditions, can be hard to improve on:
when the goal is clear and unchanging, everything is happening very fast,
and measurements are noisy, there isn’t time for nonlinearity to matter so
much.
In high-speed, goal-directed, and similarly adversarial natural contexts,
such as a bat or dragonfly closing in on prey, animal brains can also carry
out something close to cybernetically optimal linear modeling.[243] The same
holds when you reach for an object or catch a ball.[244]
Balls don’t actively try to escape you—at least outside the Harry Potter
universe. A moth, however, behaves like a real-life “golden snitch” when a
bat is closing in for dinner.[245] It can’t fly as fast as a bat; its brain and

sensory apparatus are outmatched too. But it can try evasive action. The
evasions must be genuinely unpredictable, because randomness is the
moth’s only cybernetic advantage. The bat, with its much larger brain,
would preempt any more coherent plan the moth could dream up. So, while
the bat applies something close to optimal prediction tailored to the moth’s
flight statistics, the moth takes advantage of its low mass to flutter around
chaotically, rendering those statistics as blurry as possible. Instead of a
smooth, predictable curve, the resulting flight pattern is a tortuous “random
walk” occupying a volume in space known affectionately as the “Wiener
sausage.” (For real.[246])
As you will know if you’ve ever tried—and failed—to catch a seemingly
not-that-fast moth, these Wiener-sausage tactics work, at least up to a point.
The moth implements them with a biological random-number generator,
likely based on a combination of mechanical instability in the wings and
random neuronal activity. If you’re wondering how neuronal activity can be
random, keep in mind that it always is, a little bit. The biochemical events
leading to neural firing include ion channels opening and closing in the cell
membrane, and the release and capture of synaptic vesicles containing
neurotransmitters. The timing of these events is never quite precise, because
they’re contingent on the same random molecular interactions that drive all
cellular activity. If a neural circuit is wired to amplify that noise, then, like
the random-number instruction of Turing’s Ferranti Mark I computer, the
result will be a computationally usable random signal.[247]
Ample evidence suggests that prey species like moths use such circuits to
generate chaotic behavior; startled cockroaches, similarly, use them to
scurry at random.[248] If randomness is the low road to cybernetic
unpredictability, though, there is also a high road: becoming smarter than
the entity trying to predict you, and predicting that entity’s predictions.
We’ll explore this brainier strategy in chapter 5.
But first, let’s take the full measure of cybernetics—what it got right, what
it got wrong, its untimely demise, and its enduring influence. As formulated
by Wiener, cybernetics was the field we now call Artificial Intelligence, and
more—it was the hallmark of all complex systems, a grand unifying theory
of the biological, the technological, and even the sociological.[249]

The simplest cybernetic system is something like a humble thermostat, a
feedback mechanism that turns the heat (or air conditioning) on and off to
maintain a constant temperature. Warm-blooded animals, of course, do just
that, and living systems in general must use feedback to “homeostat” (that
is, to regulate) their internal state. Construed broadly, homeostasis is what
being alive is all about. The point of eating, for example, is to maintain the
body’s store of free energy, and similar purposive arguments can be made
for all of our primary drives. Our secondary drives, such as the desire for
praise or prestige, can in turn be formulated as “instrumental” to those
primary drives. Homeostasis is thus our old friend, dynamic stability,
implemented purposively.
Complex animal behaviors may seem a long way from those of a
thermostat, but consider that a truly optimal thermostat will not only switch
on or off in response to fluctuations in the temperature now, but also on the
basis of its prediction of the future. If, for instance, the sun is about to rise
and start rapidly warming your house, this ought to affect your home
thermostat’s strategy.
Generalizing this observation in a 1943 essay entitled “Behavior, Purpose,
and Teleology,”[250] Wiener, Rosenblueth, and computer pioneer Julian
Bigelow perfectly articulated the “predictive brain” hypothesis in
cybernetic terms (though they did not coin the word for several more
years):
All purposeful [or “teleological”] behavior may be considered to
require negative feed-back [which] may be extrapolative (predictive)
[...]. A cat starting to pursue a running mouse does not run directly
toward the region where the mouse is at any given time, but moves
toward an extrapolated future position. [...] The cat chasing the mouse
is an instance of first-order prediction [...]. Throwing a stone at a
moving target requires a second-order prediction [...]. It is probable
that limitations of [...] the central nervous system [...] determine the
complexity of predictive behavior [...]. Indeed, it is possible that [...]
the discontinuity [between] humans [and] other high mammals may
lie in that the other mammals are limited to predictive behavior of a
low order, whereas man may be capable potentially of quite high
orders of prediction.

The authors also pointed out that, from this behavior-focused perspective
(that is, without worrying about how the predictive computation is
implemented), purposive machines and living systems are alike, “regardless
of the complexity of [their] behavior,” adding that “examples [...] are
readily found of manmade machines with behavior that transcends human
behavior.”
This was true of machines even in 1943, before general-purpose computing;
it was even true in 1843, or there would have been no Industrial Revolution,
though few machines back then were teleological or purposive in the
cybernetic sense. A notable exception is the centrifugal governor, first
invented by Christiaan Huygens in the seventeenth century, then adapted by
James Watt in 1788. Watt’s version controlled the amount of steam going
into a steam engine using a valve coupled to whirling weights driven by the
engine, creating a negative (or homeostatic) feedback loop to regulate the
engine’s speed.

In invoking teleology, Wiener and colleagues were playing with fire, both in
the philosophical and scientific communities. Materialism and reductionism
had given teleology a bad name, relegating it to a quasi-religious belief.
After all, if, given initial conditions, the (entirely knowable) dynamical laws
of physics fully determine what will take place at the next moment in time,
what role could teleology or purposive action possibly play?[251]
Beyond stipulating goals and purposes, cybernetics posited agents that
predict the future and bring that future about—the same apparent reversal of
causality we encountered in chapter 2. The cyberneticists’ insight, both
trivial and profound, was that predictive negative-feedback loops are
sufficient to give an apparatus (or organism) purposiveness … without
violating the laws of physics. The Huygens-Watt centrifugal governor, for
instance, is a simple machine whose workings are fully described by
Newtonian physics. Yet it also has a goal: it manipulates a steam engine’s

intake valve to regulate the engine’s speed. In doing so, it “creates” causes
in order to bring about future effects.
The apparent paradox of backward causality resembles the apparent
paradox of an apparatus (or organism) building a copy of itself. In that case,
von Neumann realized that the solution lay in the apparatus having an
internal model of its own structure, and using that model to guide
construction. Wiener and colleagues realized that the solution to their
problem lay in the apparatus having an internal model of (part of) the
world, and using that model to guide behavior.
These are flip sides of the same coin. In both cases, the models are
computational; and in both cases, their purpose is to continue to exist
through time, whether by growing, by preserving the integrity of the self, or
by replicating.
Von Neumann and Wiener published their insights within a year of each
other, though, at the time, the intellectual kinship between them may not
have been fully appreciated.

Negative Feedback
Cybernetics got many things right, especially as compared with the
symbolic, programming-based approach to AI championed by Wiener’s
detractors. For starters:
● It embraced continuous values and random processes.
● It was based on learning (that is, modeling) probability distributions,
rather than executing hand-engineered code reflecting a programmer’s
intuitions.
● It advanced the idea that agency (or purposiveness, or teleology) is
fundamental to intelligence, and to life more broadly.[252]
● It was consistent with the neuroscientific consensus that emerged
soon after McCulloch and Pitts’s 1943 paper, when it was understood
that neurons do not implement propositional logic using Boolean
values.
● It focused on the continuity between intelligence and living systems
more generally, rather than imagining that intelligence is a purely
logical construct in the Leibnizian tradition—and therefore the
exclusive province of symbolically minded humans. As a corollary,

cybernetics presumes that bats, dragonflies, and even bacteria are also
intelligent.
● It emphasized the importance of behavior over mechanism, noting
that the same models could be computed in radically different ways—
for instance, in standard Turing Machine–like computers, “largely by
temporal multiplication of effects” given “frequencies of one million
per second or more,” or in biological systems, by “spatial
multiplication,” that is, massive and non-deterministic parallelism.[253]
This last point may sound reminiscent of B. F. Skinner and radical
behaviorism, a school of thought that has been pilloried as brutally
reductionist, or as denying the existence of mental states.[254] A fair
assessment of behaviorism would take us too far afield, but suffice it to say:
Wiener and colleagues were making a point about the fundamentally
computational nature of the brain or mind. Hence, its multiple realizability,
or platform independence, is underwritten by the universality of
computation, per Church and Turing. This is the same kind of
“behaviorism” that led Turing to formulate the Imitation Game in terms of
behavior, rather than insisting on any specific brain mechanism.
Cybernetics also got some things wrong. Its greatest flaw was in
overpromising: there was a vast gulf between Norbert Wiener’s selfpromoting grandiosity and the engineering realities of his day. The theory
was so general that it was nearly tautological, yet practical demonstrations
using mid-twentieth-century technology were underwhelming. Neither was
Wiener much of an engineer; he was more at home at a blackboard than in a
machine shop. An idea for a cybernetic antiaircraft-gun controller, which he
had insisted would prove crucial to the war effort, remained vaporware.

In 1949, Wiener’s students at MIT cobbled together a motorized cart with
wheels driven by feedback loops involving two photocells. Wired up one
way, it was christened Palomilla, Spanish for “moth,” and could trundle
bumpily along a corridor, more or less following a flashlight beam.
Switching the wires turned it into a light-averse “bedbug.” Cranking up the
feedback gain made it oscillate with something like Parkinsonism or
intention tremor. But beyond the tight feedback loops of missile control
systems (which did what Palomilla did, marginally more reliably[255]), reallife applications were elusive. Why were these demos so lame?
Wiener could easily write down a feedback-response function that would
stand in for the totality of an organism’s behavior. He could then proceed to
expand that function formally into an infinite series of higher-order terms.
He could even derive closed-form solutions for the linear parts, given a
simple goal like playing an optimal game of chase with an opponent whose
movements could be analyzed statistically. Yet the higher-order terms
remained out of reach. Exploding numbers of parameters and the difficulty

of characterizing higher-order goals made it unclear how further progress
could be made—especially given the feeble computational power available.
Access to massive computation would not have immediately solved the
problem, either, because major conceptual gaps remained. Cyberneticists
had largely swept memory and learning under the rug, along with anything
resembling individual behavior. Lofty rhetoric aside, what cybernetics
offered in practice was a cartoon of the purely instinctual behavior of a
simple organism performing a single low-dimensional sensorimotor task in
an unchanging niche. A thermostat, basically.
Real moths and bedbugs have a vastly richer behavioral repertoire than the
Palomilla. Even chemotactic bacteria do. Those pesky feedback functions
were black boxes where seemingly infinite complexity hid. In theory, more
or less any function could be approximated with a series expansion, but, in
practice, it was hard to see how anything resembling thought, perception, or
action—let alone anything like psychology or a “self”—could arise merely
by adding more terms to the series.
Good Old-Fashioned AI or GOFAI, based on hand-written programs instead
of cybernetics, may have been cheating, but at least its canned responses
could be substantive. In one famous example, MIT professor Joseph
Weizenbaum created a chatbot called ELIZA, which, given a modest
collection of grammatical rules, could simulate a therapy session.
The year was 1964—the heyday of psychologist Carl Rogers’s “personcentered therapy.” Rogers believed in the power of patients talking
themselves through their problems, and avoided ever passing judgment; he
called this “unconditional positive regard.” Hence, his method consisted
mainly of listening empathically and encouraging the patient to carry on.
ELIZA could approximate this kind of engagement by using heuristics to
guess at key words or phrases in the dialogue and ask followup questions
about them, or, if stumped, to fall back on restatement or asking a more
general question.
As Weizenbaum put it, “This mode of conversation was chosen because the
psychiatric interview is one of the few examples of [...] communication in
which one of the participating pair is free to assume the pose of knowing
almost nothing of the real world. If, for example, one were to tell a
psychiatrist ‘I went for a long boat ride’ and he responded ‘Tell me about

boats,’ one would not assume that he knew nothing about boats, but that he
had some purpose in so directing the [...] conversation.”[256]
In a 1966 paper, Weizenbaum reproduced an ELIZA dialogue he described
as “typical”; the machine’s responses (in caps) are accurate, though the
exchange is cherrypicked to avoid bloopers:
Men are all alike.
IN WHAT WAY?
They’re always bugging us about something or other.
CAN YOU THINK OF A SPECIFIC EXAMPLE?
Well, my boyfriend made me come here.
YOUR BOYFRIEND MADE YOU COME HERE
He says I’m depressed much of the time.
I AM SORRY TO HEAR YOU ARE DEPRESSED
It’s true. I am unhappy.
DO YOU THINK COMING HERE WILL HELP YOU NOT TO BE
UNHAPPY
I need some help, that much seems certain.
WHAT WOULD IT MEAN TO YOU IF YOU GOT SOME HELP
Perhaps I could learn to get along with my mother.
TELL ME MORE ABOUT YOUR FAMILY
… and so on.[257]
It would be hard to argue that a few hundred stock responses with their
blanks filled in by echoing back user-supplied words really constitutes
“intelligence.” Still, the results looked far more impressive than anything on
offer from the cyberneticists. And GOFAI code like ELIZA ran efficiently,
even on the earliest general-purpose computers.
Many researchers and engineers didn’t care if programmed behaviors were
brittle; they were busy launching a trillion-dollar industry. When AI grants
stopped getting funded, they found plenty of other applications that didn’t
require anything like cognitive flexibility. Computer science began to
disentangle itself from AI to become a discipline in its own right, while
software engineering crossed the chasm from the military-industrial
complex to big business, and from there into home computers. Nobody
regarded their home computer as even remotely intelligent or brain-like,

though by 1977, it was easy enough to spend an hour or two typing the
ELIZA program into your Altair 8800, just for laughs.[258]
Meanwhile, cybernetic philosophy was going ever more meta, and was
ultimately embraced (sometimes as little more than a metaphor) by the
intellectually hip in fields as far-flung as government,[259] anthropology,[260]
ecology,[261] urban planning,[262] sexology,[263] feminism,[264] and poststructuralist critical theory.[265] Some cybernetically inspired period pieces
still make for great reading, some had the right idea, and some had
significant impact in their own fields. But unlike mainstream computer
science, none were accompanied by much technical progress in cybernetics
itself. The concept of a “cyborg,” a cybernetically inspired superhuman
fusion of man and machine (yes, usually man), went from a serious research
priority at advanced defense labs to a comic-book trope.[266]
In other words, cybernetics began to look like a fad. Even by the mid1960s, it had largely faded as an area of active research, though the name
has survived vestigially, and somewhat randomly, in terms like
“cyberspace,” “cybersecurity,” “cybercrime,” and “cyberwarfare.”[267]
Cybernetics fell victim not only to overreach, but also to the systematic
efforts of its detractors.[268] In 1955, computer scientist John McCarthy
coined the term “Artificial Intelligence” in the proposal for a summer
workshop at Dartmouth—precisely to distinguish the new symbolic (a.k.a.
GOFAI) approach from cybernetics. Despite promising “a significant
advance” over the two-month period, little headway was made at the
workshop proper, but its attendees, including Arthur Samuel, Allen Newell,
Herbert Simon, and Marvin Minsky, became the who’s who of AI over the
next several decades. Wiener was pointedly not invited.[269]

It’s ironic that we continue to use the term “Artificial Intelligence,” given
that today, virtually the entire field descends from the kind of work the
coiners of this phrase sought to discredit—especially, per philosopher
Hubert Dreyfus, “the perceptrons proposed by the group Minsky dismisses
as the early cyberneticists.”[270] These were the first artificial neural nets.

How We Know Universals
Inspired by the brain’s physical structure, pioneering American
psychologist William James (1842–1910) had envisioned something very
like neural networks as far back as 1890. In his magisterial textbook, The
Principles of Psychology,[271] James imagined that neural processes—the
minutely complex “wires” evident in stained tissue samples from the

cerebral cortex—might physically embody associations between cooccurring stimuli.

Shortly afterward, the great Spanish neuroanatomist Santiago Ramón y
Cajal (1852–1934) concluded that this wiring is not “reticular” (meaning
continuous), but consists of the branching outgrowths of individual neurons.
Influenced by James, Ramón y Cajal went on to suggest that the junctions
between neurons, which we now call synapses, were the sites of
neuroplasticity. Associations could be learned (or unlearned) through the
selective strengthening (or weakening) of synapses.[272]
The idea that mental associations are central to learned behavior has its own
long history. In 1897, Ivan Pavlov (1849–1936) published his classic
experiments in which dogs were taught to associate food with the sound of
a musical triangle. Once conditioned, they began salivating when the
triangle was struck.[273]
Learning associations is even more fundamental than behavioral
experiments like this suggest. Dogs aren’t born with individual neurons that

activate exclusively at the taste or smell of food, the sight of a particular
person, or the sound of a triangle. Associating these multimodal events with
each other is the easy part. Without being able to learn subtle, complex
associations among raw stimuli, a dog would be unable to recognize a
person or a ringing triangle at all.
McCulloch and Pitts formulated this problem in their 1947 paper, “How We
Know Universals: The Perception of Auditory and Visual Forms.”[274] Their
theory was (once again) wrong, but the question posed by the paper’s title is
a good one: How do we recognize categories, or “universals”? Four years
after the publication of “A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Immanent in
Nervous Activity,” experiments had convinced them that neurons were not
logic gates, although they did exchange excitatory and inhibitory signals.
The researchers had also realized that one of the hardest computational
tasks facing the brain is that of achieving “perceptual invariance”—the key
to performing what we now call “classification,” “recognition,” or, more
broadly, “generalization.” McCulloch and Pitts were trying to figure out
how anatomically plausible neural circuits in the sensory cortex might do
that.
Perceptual invariance is illustrated by an insightful short story, “Funes el
memorioso,” published by Jorge Luis Borges in 1942.[275] In Borges’s story,
a young man, Ireneo Funes, is thrown from a horse and suffers a crippling
brain injury. It leaves him with a perfect memory yet robs him of the ability
to generalize. After the accident, Funes can remember “not only every leaf
of every tree of every wood, but also every one of the times he had
perceived or imagined it”; yet he is described as “[...] almost incapable of
ideas of a general, Platonic sort. Not only is it difficult for him to
comprehend that the generic symbol dog embraces so many unlike
individuals of diverse size and form; it bothers him that the dog at three
fourteen (seen from the side) should have the same name as the dog at three
fifteen (seen from the front).”
For a long time, machines fared no better. Throughout the twentieth century
and well into the twenty-first, memory technologies improved
exponentially, but perceptual invariance seemed to remain an unsolved
problem. Attendees at the AI summer workshop in 1956 made no progress,
and when those who were still alive fifty years later returned to Dartmouth
for a reunion, little seemed to have changed. A computer could, like Funes,

“remember” the color of every pixel in a two-hour movie, yet be unable to
make any sense of those tens of billions of pixels. Hence bots could easily
be foiled by visual Turing Tests as simple as “click on the images below
containing a dog.”[276] The reconvening wizards, grizzled but as opinionated
as ever, were of various minds about what to try next, but they all agreed
that AI was a long way off.[277]

The year was 2006. They could not have been more wrong.

Perceptrons
The solution had lain hidden in plain sight for over a hundred years. At
the turn of the twentieth century, William James and Santiago Ramón y
Cajal had already accurately described how brains must learn associations.
As experimenters figured out how to move beyond dissection and tissue
staining to study the living brain at work, a clearer view of neural
information processing began coming into focus.

In a series of papers beginning in the 1950s, neuroscientists David Hubel,
Torsten Wiesel, and a rotating cast of collaborators reported on painstaking
investigations of the cat and monkey visual cortex.[278] While they presented
visual stimuli to animals under anesthesia, they recorded the activity of
individual neurons using tungsten electrodes. They found that the “retinal
ganglion cells,” which combine inputs from photoreceptors in the retina to
create local visual features, are only the first stage in a visual processing
hierarchy. In the brain, those features are in turn combined to form higherlevel edge-like features by “simple cells,” which are themselves combined
to form yet higher-level features by “complex cells,” which combine to
form “hypercomplex cells”—until eventually, the features in question may
be entire objects.
Margaret Livingstone, a neuroscientist at Harvard who did postdoctoral
work in Hubel’s lab, wrote, in an obituary of him in 2013, “Studying vision
is fun because you see what you show the animal, and when you cannot
figure a cell out, you show it everything you can think of; sometimes you
find surprisingly specific things that will make a cell fire, like a bright
yellow Kodak film box.”[279]
Hierarchical recognition is an elegant concept: any perceptual classification
task, no matter how complicated, can be built up as a combination of
features, which are themselves combinations of features—turtles all the
way down. This seemed to be the brain’s approach to generalization.
In 1957, Frank Rosenblatt, a young engineer at the Cornell Aeronautical
Laboratory, decided to build an apparatus to do what the visual cortex does.
He called it the “perceptron.” As he wrote in the introduction to his report,
“[I]t should be feasible to construct an electronic or electromechanical
system which will learn to recognize similarities or identities between
patterns of optical, electrical, or tonal information, in a manner which may
be closely analogous to the perceptual processes of a biological brain.”[280]

In a passage reminiscent of Borges, Rosenblatt noted that although “[t]he
recognition of ‘similar’ forms can be carried out, to a certain extent, by
analytic procedures on a [...] computer [...] it is hard to conceive of a
general analytic program which would [...] recognize the form of a man
seen from any angle, and in any posture or position, without actually storing
a large library of reference figures [...]. In general, identities of this sort
must be learned, or acquired from experience [...].”
Rosenblatt’s “identities” were the same as McCulloch and Pitts’s
“universals” a decade earlier. Unlike McCulloch and Pitts, though,
Rosenblatt created a real, working system.
The original Mark I perceptron was a three-layer neural net. Its first layer
consisted of a 20×20 array of photocells, or “sensory units,” the second had
512 “association units,” and the final layer had eight “response units.” Each
layer was wired randomly to the next, with a motor-driven potentiometer

(like the volume knob on a radio) modulating the strength of every
connection.

The response units also implemented “lateral inhibition,” a feature
commonly found in neural circuits: when one activated, it inhibited the
others, which in turn fed back inhibition to any competing association units.
Using a simple learning rule that exploited this feedback, Rosenblatt got the
device to distinguish among simple shapes—a square, a circle, a triangle. It
was a start.
More than a start: in retrospect, the perceptron was arguably the single most
important advance in AI in the twentieth century. Modern neural nets,

especially those most commonly used for visual recognition, are still
powered by “multilayer perceptrons” (MLPs), although they use different
learning rules and are typically much deeper—that is, they have many more
than three layers.
If perceptrons worked—and did so by taking an approach so much more
obviously brain-like than symbolic AI systems—then why did they lay
fallow for so long? Several narratives have merit:
1. Neural nets big enough to do practical work require large-scale
parallel computation, which didn’t become available to most
researchers until inexpensive GPUs (graphics processing units)
began flooding the market, around 2006.[281] This is true;
however, if, beginning in the 1960s, we had begun to seriously
engineer parallel neural computers, or special-purpose hardware
like the Mark I, we probably could have had powerful MLPs by
the 1980s. Engineers didn’t push much in this direction because
Moore’s Law advanced ceaselessly for six decades after the
invention of the transistor in 1947, shrinking their size,
increasing their maximum clock speed, and decreasing the power
the needed to operate. The industry was eager to reap the most
obvious benefits—making the whole computer smaller, faster,
cheaper, and lower-power—rather than sacrificing these benefits
to increase parallelism in the service of an unproven approach to
computing.[282]
2. Large neural nets require large datasets to train, which weren’t
available before the web took off. And labeled datasets, like
ImageNet (which researcher Fei-Fei Li began gathering in 2006
—that year again!), relied not only on internet-scale collections
of images, but also on online gig workers to apply labels, like
“chihuahua” and “blueberry.” All true, but let’s keep in mind that
Netflix began sending subscribers digital movies by DVD nearly
a decade earlier, and a modest collection of DVDs contains far
more imagery than ImageNet. There was no shortage of pixels.
We also now know that unsupervised learning works well,
rendering extensive labeling unnecessary (as will be discussed in
the next chapter). This would likely have been discovered

decades earlier had neural-net research remained mainstream in
the latter half of the twentieth century.
3. Rosenblatt’s original perceptron-training algorithm wasn’t
powerful enough to work for complex datasets or deep neural
nets; the suite of tricks required to do so has only been perfected
in recent years. The most important of these tricks, though—the
“backpropagation” algorithm, allowing the weights of synapses,
or “synaptic weights,” in an arbitrarily deep neural net to be
adjusted to minimize the output error—had already been worked
out by 1970, and was repeatedly reinvented by other researchers
over the years.[283] Like any technology, dedicated tinkering is
required to get the details right. For many years, there simply
weren’t enough dedicated tinkerers working on it, in part because
—
4. In 1969, Marvin Minsky and an MIT collaborator, Seymour
Papert, published a highly cited book entitled Perceptrons.[284]
Although dedicated to Rosenblatt, the book was a hatchet job,
implying that perceptrons could never approximate a number of
simple mathematical functions, and therefore perceptrons were
inherently far weaker, computationally, than GOFAI algorithms.
The book contained mathematical proofs of these assertions, but
the proofs only applied to simplified two-layer models. It can be
shown that with three or more layers (as even the Mark I
perceptron had) any continuous function can be approximated,[285]
as Rosenblatt himself appears to have intuited.[286]
Despite the protests of Rosenblatt and fellow travelers, the Perceptrons
book was highly effective in discouraging “connectionism,” as neural net
research was then called, for decades, diverting mainstream attention
instead to the GOFAI approaches favored by Minsky, Papert, and their
colleagues. In 1988, with interest in neural nets rising once again just as we
entered a final Good Old-Fashioned AI winter, Minsky and Papert reissued
Perceptrons. In a new prologue and epilogue, the updated edition doubled
down on their original critique, claiming that “little of significance has
happened in this field” and that, even by 1969, “progress had already come
to a virtual halt because of the lack of adequate basic theories.”

These claims seem bizarre, if not disingenuous. Just a year before the
second edition of Perceptrons, computational neuroscientists Terry
Sejnowski and Charles Rosenberg had trained a neural net, NETtalk, to
pronounce English text. They showed not only that it could effectively
master this notoriously unruly (that is, non-GOFAI-friendly) problem, but
that its performance exhibited many human-like characteristics.[287]
Minsky and Papert’s objections to connectionism make some sense, though,
in light of the theoretical grounding they had been hoping AI might offer.
They were uninterested in the rapid advances taking place in computational
neuroscience, machine learning, or general function approximation. Instead,
they focused on mathematical theories of knowledge representation,
manipulation, and formal proof in the tradition of Leibniz. This required
operating at the level of abstract concepts, more like the “psychons”
McCulloch and Pitts had speculated about in 1943 (but that neuroscience
had shortly thereafter abandoned, failing to find any evidence of them in the
brain). Per Minsky and Papert: “perceptrons had no way to represent the
knowledge required for solving certain problems. [...] No machine can learn
to recognize X unless it possesses, at least potentially, some scheme for
representing X.”
They wanted, in other words, for knowledge to be represented logically, in
terms of clear taxonomies and semantic relationships—just as Leibniz had
imagined. And such logical representations would, they believed, need to
look like Boolean, yes-or-no variables somewhere specific in the brain.
Without such “schematized” and “localized” knowledge representations,
Minsky and Papert did not believe that higher-order rationality, including
causal reasoning, self-reflection, or even consciousness, would be possible:
“[W]e expect distributed representations[288] to tend to produce systems with
only limited abilities to reflect accurately on how they do what they do.
Thinking about thinking, we maintain, requires the use of representations
that are localized enough that they can be dissected and rearranged. [...]
[D]istributed representations [...] must entail a heavy price; surely, many of
them must become ‘conceptual dead ends.’”[289]
Unlike the book’s proofs, these assertions were mere intuitions. To many,
they seemed reasonable at the time. Adherents of the GOFAI school of
thought, including many trained in linguistics (which is largely concerned

with schematized knowledge representations) continue to argue this
position today, though it seems increasingly disconnected from reality given
what modern neural nets can do, and how they do it.[290]

Deep Learning
Training multilayer perceptrons is difficult both because of the
dependencies between layers (fiddling with a synaptic weight affects
everything downstream) and because of the dramatically increased sizes of
these models. To get a sense of this, consider that a two-layer “fully
connected” perceptron classifying a 32×32 pixel image as one of ten digits
already has (32×32)×10=10,240 synapses—that is, a synapse connecting
every pixel with each of the ten output neurons. If we add in a single
additional 32×32 layer of neurons between the input layer and the output
layer, we now have (32×32)×(32×32) + (32×32)×10=1,058,816 synapses.
Each of these synaptic weights is a model parameter that must be learned
from data, and, roughly speaking, fitting a hundred times more parameters
requires a hundred times more data.[291]
Over time, though, researchers found ways around these problems. The
story of modern “deep learning” is just the story of these tricks
accumulating over time, with compounding gains and accelerating progress
as the field finally attracted serious time and investment. Here are a few
representative advances. A complete list would be much longer:[292]
1. Sparse connectivity, dating all the way back to Rosenblatt’s
perceptron, can greatly reduce the number of weights compared
to a “fully connected” layer as sketched above; this makes sparse
networks faster to train and more reliable. In the 1980s, Yann
LeCun, John Denker, and Sara Solla, then at Bell Labs, figured
out how to prune unneeded weights in a more principled way.[293]
2. Deep learning itself is a form of sparse connectivity, when you
consider that a truly fully connected neural network wouldn’t
have layers at all; every neuron would be connected to every
other neuron. In a multilayer perceptron, though, a neuron is only
connected to neurons in the previous layer and the next layer.
Hence, the deeper a network is, the sparser its connectivity
compared to a fully connected network with the same number of

neurons. In the mid-2010s, researchers pushed this form of
sparsity to extremes, exploring architectures with up to a
thousand layers.[294]
3. “Convolutional layers,” first conceived by AI researcher
Kunihiko Fukushima and further developed by LeCun and
collaborators,[295] implement yet another form of sparse
connectivity by wiring a neuron only to a small neighborhood of
neurons in the previous layer, rather than to all of them;
furthermore, an entire “channel” of neurons share a common
weight pattern within this local area, making the number of
parameters to train far smaller than the number of connections.
4. The backpropagation algorithm, as mentioned earlier, allows
minimization of an error, or “loss function,” to happen reliably
through many layers of neurons. It involves using calculus to
compute the total downstream effect of fiddling with any given
synaptic weight. Virtually all machine learning today uses
backpropagation.
5. The “softmax” function,[296] applied to a layer of neurons,
implements something analogous to lateral inhibition, picking out
the maximum activation and enhancing it while suppressing
competing neurons, while forcing the layer’s total activity to sum
to one. Softmax was originally used only for the output layer of
classifier nets, which are trained to be “one-hot” (a single neuron
on, all the others off). However, the suppression of competing
activations isn’t complete (hence the “soft”), allowing learning
through backpropagation to work.
6. “Max pooling”[297] can discard unneeded resolution, for instance
reducing a 32×32 layer of features to a 16×16 layer by picking
only the largest values within each 2×2 region to pass on. This
works because the presence of complex features is often more
important than their precise location.
7. Datasets can be “augmented”[298] by shifting, stretching, and
rotating training examples, then using these distorted copies as
additional training data. This helps strengthen the neural net’s
perceptual invariance.

It’s significant that researchers working at the intersection of computer
science and neuroscience pioneered many of these techniques. In recent
years, this confluence of disciplines has been called “NeuroAI,” and a
number of conferences and workshops have been convened under that
banner.
While the name is new, the phenomenon is not.[299] From the beginning,
machine learning and neuroscience have been continuous with one another,
as we’ve seen. For many years, the scientific value of this interdisciplinary
work was greater than its technological value, so it was often referred to as
“computational neuroscience.” With the technological side now ascendant,
it’s unsurprising to see the ordering reversed with “NeuroAI.” But the
conference attendees are largely the same. And while no practical machinelearning trick faithfully models any specific process or circuit in the brain,
many of the tricks are clearly biologically inspired, just as the original
perceptron was.[300]
Using such tricks in combination, researchers fully solved handwritten
single-digit visual recognition in the 1990s,[301] and moved on to
increasingly difficult visual-recognition problems over the following two
decades: objects, clothes, places, plants and animals, natural scenes, faces,
and ultimately nearly everything one might encounter while browsing
through the photos on a phone.[302] Although they were developed mostly
for the visual modality, convolutional nets also work well in many other
domains, from auditory recognition[303] to weather prediction.[304]
Surprisingly, they even work for classifying text,[305] but we’ll hold off on
exploring neural nets for language until chapter 8.

Closing the Loop
Before moving on, let’s consider neural networks through the cybernetic
lens. On one hand, the perceptron did generate discrete symbolic output—
per Rosenblatt’s 1957 report, “inhibitory feedback connections guarantee
that only one response out of a mutually exclusive set can be triggered at
one time.… [Response] units thus [act] like a multi-stable flip-flop.”[306] (In
modern neural nets, softmax layers serve the same purpose.)

Still, GOFAI partisans like Minsky and Papert understood that Rosenblatt
was working squarely within the cybernetic tradition, and, indeed, the
response layer and learning rule only approximated digital logic in the
output through the use of analog negative-feedback loops. The system
learned by example, and relied on this analog quality to do so. Neural
representations within the network were distributed and continuous, not
localized or symbolic. Synaptic weights were continuous, and the
perceptron as a whole evaluated a nonlinear continuous function specified
by those weights.
Rosenblatt’s perceptron made use of randomness too, both in the wiring and
in the learning process: “The penalty that we pay for the use of statistical
principles in the design of the system is a probability that we may get a
wrong response in any particular case....”[307] The perceptron worked
precisely because it was far from the world of cleanly represented
knowledge and exact logical inference.
Let’s boil down the main advance Rosenblatt and his successors made over
Wiener: while Wiener’s “black box functions” were expressed in terms of
“series expansions,” the function evaluated by a perceptron is instead
specified by a hierarchy of synaptic weights. A series expansion is a
weighted sum of increasingly high-order mathematical terms, typically
truncated after only a few terms. For the kinds of simple cybernetic systems
Wiener and colleagues were able to build (like thermostats, or, eventually,
antiaircraft-fire controllers), a single term, representing a linear
approximation, might suffice. Not so for a multilayer perceptron capable of
achieving visual perceptual invariance.
The problem isn’t theoretical, but practical. At bottom, a function is a
function. Both neural nets and series expansions are “universal function
approximators,” meaning that either one can approximate any function.[308]
However, Wiener’s more formal approach would have required vast
numbers of parameters to go beyond the linear or first-order regime.
Realistic nonlinearities (say, for object classification) couldn’t, in practice,
be learned from a limited number of training examples. By dispensing with
this kind of math and simply wiring together simplified neurons in multiple
layers, Rosenblatt had stumbled onto a far more learnable way of
representing the kinds of functions needed to transform images, sounds, and
other natural stimuli into invariant classifications. One could attribute that

to luck, intuition, or both, but, at some level, something like it had to work,
or our brains would all be like that of poor Funes, el memorioso.
Why perceptrons are so “learnable” relative to more traditional function
approximators is not yet fully understood.[309] Recent analyses suggest that it
may have to do with a “compositional prior,” meaning a bias[310] toward
learning functions that can be defined in terms of a hierarchical composition
of simpler functions. This kind of prior appears to be useful for all sorts of
cognitive tasks and generalizations, not just vision.[311] (Intriguingly, the
symbiogenetic view of evolution described in chapter 1 can also be
understood as a learning algorithm that favors hierarchical compositions of
functions.)
Although the perceptron is cybernetic in spirit, it doesn’t qualify as a
complete cybernetic system, at least not as usually deployed. An image
classifier has no obvious agency. It doesn’t act, it just is, like any other
mathematical function.
One notable exception, though, is a 2016 paper from researchers at Nvidia:
“End to End Learning for Self-Driving Cars,”[312] describing the DAVE-2
system (successor to DAVE, an earlier “DARPA Autonomous Vehicle”).
The authors trained a convolutional neural net to “map raw pixels from a
single front-facing camera directly to steering commands.”[313] Their
abstract continues, “This end-to-end approach proved surprisingly
powerful. With minimum training data from humans the system learns to
drive in traffic on local roads with or without lane markings and on
highways. It also operates in areas with unclear visual guidance such as in
parking lots and on unpaved roads.”

DAVE-2 appears to be a remarkably pure realization of Wiener’s cybernetic
vision, courtesy of the universal function-approximating power of a
convolutional net. One can think of it as a much more sophisticated version
of the Palomilla, with real eyes instead of photocells and twenty-seven
million synapses in place of a couple of vacuum tubes. (For rough
comparison, a honeybee probably has about a billion synapses and a mouse
has about a trillion, though biological synapses are not interchangeable with
model parameters.)
The nonlinearity of DAVE-2’s learned function allows for rich, contextually
dependent behavior without explicit “if/then/else” logic; lane markings,
guard rails, and other cars influence driving in all the ways one would hope.
Although the network’s only output is a steering wheel angle, if we were to

perform “neuroscience” on this network after training, we would
undoubtedly find neurons that respond specifically and selectively to all
such objects, much like the visual-system neurons Livingstone recorded
from during her work in Hubel’s lab.
This picture is still missing important elements, though. Notably, the input
to the convolutional net is only a single frame of video, and the output only
controls steering, not gas or brakes. It involves no prediction of the future.
Since the network is run at thirty frames per second, vehicle speed is kept
steady by a human copilot, and steering is forced to be reasonably smooth
by mechanical inertia, the system undoubtedly feels dynamic, but the
learned model has no dynamics. Nothing like planning or memory is
possible here, only instantaneous reflex-like response, fully determined by
prior offline training. Neither is the model modeling itself in any way; its
umwelt is purely external, just a view of the road at that moment in time.
Rosenblatt’s original (and cybernetically informed) vision was considerably
broader. He emphasized that what we now simply call the “perceptron” was
in fact only a “momentary stimulus photoperceptron, [...] the most
elementary device which could be built to demonstrate the general
principles of this type of system.” Not only could other sensory modalities
also be imagined, but “temporal pattern perceptrons” would also have the
ability to “remember temporal sequences of events, rather than transient
momentary images, such as would be obtained from a collection of isolated
frames cut from a strip of movie film.”[314]
Most of this remained on the drawing board, but, tellingly, even the Mark I
momentary stimulus photoperceptron had been implemented as a physical
device with real dynamics, able to learn by adjusting its parameters based
on feedback at any time. Today’s neural nets generally don’t share this
property. Even if they act as controllers in a feedback loop, as in a selfdriving car, they do not alter themselves in a feedback loop during
operation, the way we do. Instead, they are trained offline on static data
using batch processing, much the way ENIAC and the other early
computers crunched away on big problems overnight (or for many nights).
Thus, the field we call “machine learning” still doesn’t generally produce
systems that learn, but only systems that act. It may be hard to consider
something “alive” if nothing it experiences can durably affect it, and, for

many, calling something “intelligent” may also be hard if it can’t learn from
those experiences.[315] In these crucial respects, we’re still working toward
the ambitious vision laid out by Wiener, Rosenblatt, and the other early
cyberneticists in the 1940s and ’50s.

