4. Learning
Unkneading
It’s time to explore the inner workings of deep neural nets in more detail.
Consider a perceptron trained to recognize bananas on sight, in all their
variations and orientations, against any background. Normally this would
involve a final one-hot layer in the neural net containing a “banana neuron”;
since we need at least two neurons for such an output layer, let’s also
assume a “not-banana neuron” lights up in response to everything else.
Supervised training of this model would involve curating many images of
either bananas or something else, each labeled with a single bit specifying
which of the two neurons should activate. By the end of the training, we’d
have a banana detector.[316]
Recall from chapter 3 that in a convolutional net, higher-order features
emerge hierarchically as combinations of lower-level features. As
activations propagate to higher layers in the network, the features
represented become increasingly invariant—that is, more semantically
meaningful.
I think of the process as a bit like kneading dough. Every layer of a neural
net works its input data, turning it like a ball of dough in a certain direction
and then pressing it down, flattening it as if against a countertop. Then the
next layer does the same. Understanding how and why this “data kneading”
accomplishes anything will require deeper insight into how the successive
layers of a neural net transform the information flowing through them. Let’s
work backward from the output layer.
Suppose that the penultimate layer, just before the one with two neurons,
has 128 neurons. In this layer, input images are said to be “embedded” in
128 dimensions. One can think of the activations of those neurons as the
coordinates of a point in a 128-dimensional “embedding space.”
It’s a bit mind-bending to think about high-dimensional spaces, since we
live in only three dimensions, so let’s develop a bit of intuition. Specifying
a point on a 2D surface requires two numbers—such as x and y on a graph,
or latitude and longitude on a map. Specifying a point in 3D space requires

three numbers; in a rectangular room, for instance, it could be x and y
coordinates on the floor, and a height above the floor, z. So why not 128
numbers specifying a point in 128 dimensions? It’s like 3D, only … more.
Just pretend it’s 3D. (Everyone does, secretly.)
None of the 128 neurons in the embedding layer is itself a banana neuron—
or there would be no need for an additional output layer. Still, most of the
banana recognition work must already have happened by this point, since
the output neuron just receives a weighted average of those 128 neural
activations. The weights associated with the banana neuron’s 128 inputs can
be thought of as a “vector,” or direction, in the 128-dimensional embedding
space. Remember that every image corresponds to a point in this
embedding space. The farther out along the “banana direction” such a point
lies, the stronger the input to the banana neuron; so we can think of the
vector as pointing “bananaward.”[317]
Alternatively, we could imagine a “hyperplane” at right angles to the
banana vector. In 3D: think of the hyperplane as an ordinary plane, a big
flat sheet of paper. The “bananaward vector” can be visualized as an arrow
coming straight out of that sheet. Since the arrow points toward banananess, it follows that we ought to be able to slide the sheet of paper along the
arrow until the points representing banana images all lie on the far side,
while the non-banana points are on the near side. The hyperplane thus
defines a “banananess threshold.” The banana neuron will light up only
when the level of banananess exceeds this threshold; otherwise, thanks to
lateral inhibition, the “no banana” neuron will light up instead.

This “thresholding” transforms an embedding space that would otherwise
be continuous into a categorical yes or no. A banana is either there or it
isn’t. More precisely, if a banana is detected, that detection is invariant to
whether the image’s banananess was just over the threshold or far over it.
[318]
Conversely, if the “no banana” neuron is activated, it doesn’t matter
whether the banananess was just under the threshold, or far under it.
In summary, the transformation from the penultimate layer to the output
layer consists of two steps. First, each output neuron is looking for a pattern
in the previous layer (such as banananess), then the neuron applies a
threshold to make that pattern detection more invariant. These are like the
two kneading steps: rotating the ball of dough into a certain orientation,
then pressing it down against a hard surface.
The same basic steps take place in every earlier layer of a deep neural net,
too. All neurons calculate a weighted sum of activations in the previous
layer. And although softmax is typically only used for the output layer, all
neurons (artificial or otherwise) involve some form of thresholding or
“nonlinearity.”

One of the most commonly used nonlinearities is ReLU, which stands for
“Rectified Linear Unit”; such a neuron has zero response if the weighted
sum of its inputs is less than zero, and otherwise has activation equal to that
weighted sum. Like softmax (which, recall, approximates lateral inhibition
in real neurons), ReLU is inspired by basic neuroscience. Real neurons
either fire action potentials or don’t. Their firing rate is thus either zero or
positive; a neuron can’t have a negative response. ReLU is pretty much the
simplest nonlinear alteration one can make to the linear “identity function”
f(x)=x to avoid negative output in an artificial neuron.

Nonlinearities like ReLU are essential to deep learning; without them, there
would be little point in making a neural net more than one layer deep. A
weighted sum of weighted sums is just another weighted sum.[319] However,
with a nonlinearity, not only can successive layers no longer be replaced by
an equivalent single layer, but, as mentioned in the previous chapter,
virtually any function can be approximated, given enough neurons.[320]
More intuitively, nonlinearities like ReLU implement a limited form of
invariance. Every layer in a deep neural net is doing the same as the output
layer: looking for a pattern in the previous layer and lighting up if it’s
present. Single-neuron pattern detection is rudimentary, consisting as it does
only of a weighted average—a form of recognition sometimes called
“template matching.” Still, a neuron with a nonlinearity like ReLU turns the
presence or absence of a pattern into an approximate “yes” or “no.” This
allows the next layer to operate on higher-level, more abstract, and more
invariant patterns.

To lean into the dough analogy a bit further, template matching, or taking a
weighted average of the neural activations in a layer, is something like
rotating the dough ball into a particular orientation. In fact, mathematically,
it pretty much is a rotation—just imagine rotating the embedding space so
that the hyperplane is horizontal, like a countertop.[321] Applying the
nonlinearity then squishes the data down.
Without that squishing step, no useful work would get done by repeating
the process—we would just be rotating the dough ball first this way, then
that way, then the other way, which is equivalent to a single overall rotation.
The squish between every rotation is what transforms the dough. There is
no single rotation and squish that will produce the same result as a hundred
consecutive rotations and squishes: the dough develops gluten, the network
gets better at recognizing bananas.
The key difference is that when we knead dough, our rotations and squishes
are random. We may have started with flour, water, and salt, but, by the end,
these random operations have produced a uniform, glutinous output.
Through the magic of machine learning, though, a trained neural network
can do the opposite, starting with a “pixel dough” in which images of all
kinds are swirled together, then progressively unswirling them until they’re
cleanly separated by category. It’s as if, by orienting the dough just so
before pressing it down each time, you could “unknead” it until you’re left
with a big pile of flour, a little pile of salt, and a puddle of water.

Transfer
If we were to lop off the final softmax layer of our banana detector, its
new output would be a 128-dimensional point in the embedding space of
the previous layer. Given many varied input images, what kind of patterns
would those points make?
It’s possible to visualize such patterns, although we must use mathematical
tricks to reduce many dimensions down to something we can easily plot, in
3D or 2D. Many research papers have used such visualizations over the
years, though the most striking one I’ve seen was made by a TurkishAmerican artist, Refik Anadol.
Already an established artist, Refik got his start in AI art with the Artists +
Machine Intelligence (AMI) program my team and I founded in 2016, at the

dawn of generative AI. He has since become famous. One of his first largescale AI art commissions, Archive Dreaming, was a 2017 collaboration with
SALT, an art and research institution based in Istanbul. SALT houses a
major archive of photographs, architectural drawings, maps, posters,
correspondence, and ephemera dating from the last century of the Ottoman
Empire to the present, and they have been busily digitizing it. Refik used
neural nets to generate embeddings for 1.7 million visual documents in the
archive and created a room-size immersive visualization that allowed one to
swoop through all of these documents, each rendered as a thumbnail
hanging in the void. In that embedding space, visually similar objects
cluster together, allowing one to get a sense of the archive as if it were a
galaxy with 1.7 million stars, all arranged in space as if by a cosmic Dewey
decimal system.

Suppose Refik had used the banana-recognition net to generate his
embeddings, and the SALT archive had included a bunch of banana images.
(For all I know, it might.) We know that a hyperplane would separate those
banana images cleanly from the non-banana images; but what about other
fruits, or other objects altogether?[322]
Remember that the banana recognizer works by creating an increasingly
invariant hierarchy of visual features; the banana/no-banana output neurons
are just the visible tip of a submerged iceberg of features. Consider, for
example, that unripe and overripe bananas look very different. Therefore

different ensembles of features will likely have been combined to calculate
one or more “banana of a certain ripeness” neurons in the embedding layer,
but this ripeness information must be discarded to create the final ripenessinvariant banana neuron. The same will be true of bananas in different
orientations, or under different lighting conditions.
These observations explain “transfer learning”: the ability to retrain a
network to do a related task, using much less labeled data than would be
required to train from scratch.[323] If we wanted our banana network to
detect only ripe bananas, for instance, it would only take a bit of tweaking
of those final 128 weights to exclude the unripe cases.
More dramatically, the same trick will work nearly as well to turn the
banana detector into an apple detector. Apples are also fruits, though red
and round instead of yellow and long. The embedding layer will already
contain neurons representing apple properties that are either like or unlike
banana properties. Thus, apples could easily be detected simply by adding
an apple neuron to the output layer alongside the banana neuron.
We could even learn the weights for that apple neuron from a lone
exemplar, by setting them based on the activations of the embedding layer
in response to a single apple image.[324] (An average based on a few apples
would be better, but a single one will do.) The network will subsequently
recognize “another of those.”[325] This is more or less what we do in
adulthood when we learn about an unfamiliar object category from a single
exposure. It’s called “one-shot learning,” and can be thought of as a special
case of transfer learning.
The success of transfer and one-shot learning suggests that training a
banana detector mostly involves getting it to learn how to see generically—
that is, developing a general sense of perceptual invariance in the visual
world. This involves learning the correlations between pixels in images,
regardless of how those images are labeled.
Is it necessary, then, to start with a banana detector at all? More to the point,
do we really need to label a gajillion images with the banana/not banana bit
to learn generic visual invariance?
We don’t. A neural network can learn how to see without any labeling. This
simply means relying on unsupervised learning rather than supervised

learning.
One popular unsupervised method, known as “masking,” involves blacking
out random parts of the images and requiring the network to fill in, or
“inpaint,” the blacked-out parts as accurately as possible. Any neural net
that can do this well, for a large and varied set of images, will certainly
have learned pixel correlations.
Notice that this is very much like predicting blacked-out words or passages
in text—which is how large language models are trained! That’s why, in this
book, I use the terms “prediction” and “modeling” almost interchangeably.
To model data is to understand its structure, whether in space, in time, or
both; hence, to be able to guess unseen parts of the data, whether those are
masked or occluded in the present, or belong to the future (in which case
the term “prediction” is most apt), or even took place, unobserved, in the
past.
If a neural network has learned to successfully inpaint (or “predict”)
missing pixels in a corpus of training images, that implies it has also
learned how to recognize everything represented in those images—apples,
fire hydrants, Siamese cats—not just bananas. It will know how to
distinguish figure from ground, it will understand depth of field, it will
recognize colors, and it will be able to distinguish ripe from unripe fruit.
The evidence: if the network was trained on banana images, and you test it
by blacking out half of a previously unseen banana image, it should
convincingly fill in the other half. Moreover, the ripeness of the filled-in
half should match the ripeness of the visible half.
This raises some interesting questions, both practical and scientific. On the
practical side, all sorts of knowledge may be latent in a neural net trained
with unsupervised machine learning, but how would we read it out? That is,
how could one turn this pixel inpainting model into an actual Siamese cat
detector, banana detector, or fruit-ripeness detector?
We might also wonder about the relationship between unsupervised
learning and neuroscience. It’s nice to get rid of all that banana/not banana
labeling, but blacking out random regions of a sheaf of arbitrary images and
training the model to fill them in still seems like a highly artificial task.
What does this have to do with how learning works in brains?

Green Screen
The limitations of transfer learning, and the parallel limitations of our
own brains, are revealing. If the banana network had been trained entirely
on photos taken in supermarkets and we then tried to use it to recognize
individual faces, it would do a poor job, because the transformations
leading to the embedding layer would not include learned representations of
the needed features. Even if supermarket shoppers had been visible among
the “not banana” images, the relevant details of their faces might get
discarded early in the network, because those details are irrelevant to
banana detection—if it’s any kind of face, it’s not a banana, end of story.
A similar effect explains why people who grew up in a racially homogenous
environment tend to be so poor at distinguishing individuals of other races.
We learn our face embeddings young, and they are exquisitely sensitive—
but only within the statistical distribution we have learned from. Hence the
all-too-common sayings, usually considered racist, that all people of a
“foreign” race “look alike.”[326] Yet in a very literal sense, if our brains
weren’t exposed to “foreign” faces as children, then, for us, it’s true. As
adults, the best we can do is to understand the limitation and work on it
(ongoing improvement is possible[327]). Less excusably, the same problem is
evident in convolutional nets trained to recognize faces based on
inadequately diverse datasets.[328]
The same phenomenon holds for recognizing phonemes. In Japanese, for
example, there are no separate “r” and “l” phonemes, making it hard for
adult native speakers to distinguish between the English words “rock” and
“lock.” Studies dating back to the 1980s and ’90s show that, from the
moment an infant’s brain is exposed to language—and long before learning
to speak—the brain’s neural networks begin to learn meaningful invariant
representations of speech sounds.[329]
While these invariant representations constrain what the baby can hear (and
later, say), they are essential “scaffolding” for learning higher-order
concepts. In particular, babies can learn new words efficiently only once
they have developed a rich lower-level representation of the necessary
speech sounds. Japanese adults learning English can, over time, improve
their ability to discriminate “r” from “l,” but it’s much more of a slog than

learning a new word in Japanese, since learning a new low-level
representation doesn’t benefit from any of that developmental scaffolding.
Learning, then—whether supervised or not—is mostly a matter of
“representation learning”—that is, learning how to embed. Using a
combination of theory and machine learning experiments, physicist and AI
researcher Brice Ménard and colleagues have demonstrated that
representation learning in multilayer perceptrons is universal, regardless of
how they’re trained.[330]
One could even say that learning is also learning to learn. That is, once a
suitable generic embedding or representation has been learned, associating
a label with a specific point or region in the embedding space becomes
trivial.
So, although our brains take a long while to learn how to see the world and
how to hear language, once we have these representations down, we
become adept one-shot learners. If you are shown a kiwi for the first time,
you’ll henceforth immediately be able to recognize that furry little fruit. A
perceptron trained on general vision tasks can do the same, with the
addition of a kiwi neuron to the output layer trained in one shot. That’s so
much easier than labeling lots of kiwi (and not-kiwi) images and training on
them from scratch.
If a perceptron is trained to inpaint pixels rather than detect bananas, its
high-level layers will be general embeddings, equally good at representing
bananas, faces, cats, kiwis, and anything else in the (unlabeled) training
data. Moreover, there will be neurons specifying the ripeness of fruits, the
features of faces, and the breeds of cats. When the image is of a cat, its eye
color will be guessed if need be, for instance if we’ve blacked it out—
otherwise, those pixels could not be filled in. It follows that latent eye-color
knowledge is also present if the cat happens to be facing away from the
camera.
You can see how powerful unsupervised learning is. That’s why, in recent
years, researchers have been shifting away from the old supervised
approach. Not only are the large numbers of labels we used to rely on
unnecessary; they may actually impede learning, since training a model
only on a particular classification task can allow the learned representations
to get away with being less robust. Moreover, the very fact of labeling is

bound to introduce additional errors and biases, and is also labor intensive
—at best, boring, and at worst, exploitative.[331]
The hourglass-shaped “masked autoencoder” is now a common way to
construct an unsupervised perceptron-style model.[332] Starting from a
“retinal” input layer of, for example, 512×512 color pixels, a sequence of
progressively narrower layers culminates in a bottleneck—say, 128 values
—which then expands back into an output layer of the same shape as the
input. The input omits masked pixels, which may amount to seventy-five
percent of the total, while the output reconstructs (or “hallucinates”) the
whole image.

A masked autoencoder might appear unimpressive. If you picture it as a
machine with a digital camera connected to the input layer and a display
connected to the output layer, it seems to behave like an ordinary
viewfinder. You feed in a 512×512-pixel image of a Siamese cat, and out
comes … a 512×512-pixel image of the same cat, indistinguishable at a
glance from the input.
The masking capability adds magic, though. In addition to the three color
channels (red, green, and blue), masked autoencoders use a binary masking
channel to tell the network which pixels to use as input, and which to

inpaint. Suppose you dipped your hand in a special color of green paint that
will be interpreted as that mask—as in the “green screening” technique in
Hollywood, where live actors are recorded against a solid-green
background in the studio, then the footage is composited into a computergenerated environment. Here, you’d wave your green-painted hand in front
of the camera, and the autoencoder would do its best to inpaint those pixels.
On the viewfinder, anything that shade of green would be invisible, as if the
autoencoder had perfect x-ray vision and could see right through your hand
—even if you were to cover a large portion of the visual field.
Of course, that inpainted content is a hallucination. If the area you cover up
is small, or is entirely predictable from the surrounding context, the
reconstruction will seem flawless. But in general, it won’t be. If your hand
is partly occluding the cat’s body, there’s no way for the model to know the
arrangement of every hidden strand of fur, so those details will be made up.
And if you cover everything except a corner of blue sky, the reconstructed
scene might have little in common with what’s actually there.
The first half of the neural network begins with an input image and, layer
by layer, narrows to 128 values at the bottleneck. It looks just like a
supervised classifier stripped of its output layer, which suggests that the
bottleneck acts like an embedding—and indeed it does.
We can also interpret the bottleneck layer as a form of image compression
(as described in chapters 1 and 2). Compression is, in a deep sense, closely
related to language. It extracts the meaning from a signal, its semantic
essence, from which the original can be reconstructed, at least statistically.
If you can see just enough of the cat’s body to know it’s a Siamese, then this
knowledge suffices to imagine what its head will look like, where its eyes
will be, and that those eyes will be blue. The strands of fur might all lie in
different places in the reconstruction, but if it’s done convincingly, a judge
confronted with the original and the reconstruction wouldn’t be able to
guess which is which. The details would vary, but the semantic content
would be the same.

Grandmother Cell
Our visual cortex is not so unlike a perceptron, but it doesn’t get trained
by reconstructing arbitrary collections of partially masked static images.

Instead, our brain is exposed to a continual stream of “video” from our
eyes, broken up by eye movements, called saccades, that we make
approximately five times a second. The brain also controls those saccades,
along with the orientation of our heads and the position of our bodies, so the
stream isn’t passive, but actively generated.
Still, masked-autoencoder training isn’t as far from our experience as it may
seem. The retinal fovea, where we can resolve enough detail to read, is
barely big enough to make out a handful of printed words. Even that region
is noisy and jittery. The wider visual field is much lower in resolution and
crisscrossed with blood vessels.[333] This certainly differs from our
impression of what we see.
A dramatic series of experiments using eye tracking done in several labs
between the 1970s and the ’90s illustrates this.[334] A subject sits in front of a
display showing a grid of letters. Wherever the viewer’s eyes are looking,
the display shows stable underlying text, but everywhere else, the letters are
randomized. To an onlooker, the entire screen looks like an illegible jumble.
But, if the window of clear text is a mere eighteen characters wide—about
three characters to the left of the fixation point and fifteen to the right, in a
language like English that is read from left to right—then to the subject, the
whole page of text looks clear and steady. This is what neuroscientists mean
when they say we “hallucinate” the world into existence based on the
sketchiest of signals.
From the moment we open our eyes, soon after birth, and begin swiveling
them around using our “exterior ocular muscles,” we’re putting our visual
systems through an unsupervised training regimen much like that of a
masked autoencoder. With every saccade, we have the opportunity to test
whether or not a previously unresolved part of the environment looks as we
had predicted or “inpainted” it in our heads, and to improve our model
accordingly.
After a while, we learn to saccade to the spots that matter the most, and
where our uncertainty is highest—was that a tiger nosing through the
underbrush?—thereby constantly pinning our reconstruction to reality. Of
course, the moment we saccade away, uncertainty in that spot begins to
grow again, reminiscent of the way an unobserved particle begins to blur in
quantum mechanics.

Vision is not the raw stream of sensory input from our eyes. Rather, that
input stream acts like an error-correction signal. Vision—what we actually
see—is a reconstruction of the world around us, an actively maintained and
constrained hallucination.
Using nothing but prediction, then, we will rapidly learn a powerful
unsupervised model of our visual environment. It will include sparse neural
representations that have just the kinds of high-level semantic meanings
that masked autoencoders learn, that Hubel and Wiesel recorded in the cat
visual cortex, and that have even been recorded from the brains of awake
humans.[335]
I introduced the concept of sparsity in chapter 3 to describe connectivity in
neural networks, both artificial and biological. In a sparse network, neurons
are only connected to a small subset of the other neurons in the net; unless
the network as a whole is very small, this constraint is essential for efficient
learning—and, in a real brain, it is physically impossible for every pair of
neurons to be connected. The whole field of deep learning can be
understood as an exploration of sparse neural architectures, starting with the
separation of neurons into multiple distinct layers.
The idea of sparsity can extend from connectivity to activity.[336] In a neural
network with sparse activity, only a small subset of neurons will be active
(that is, have nonzero activation) at any given time. This, too, is a physical
requirement for biological brains, because a neuron burns serious energy
when it fires. (That’s why epileptic episodes, in which overexcited
populations of neurons start to fire continuously, can’t go on for too long,
and can lead to brain damage as energy reserves deplete and toxic
byproducts build up.)
Even without such physical constraints, sparse activity appears to arise
naturally in trained neural networks.[337] In the final layer of a classification
network, the reason is clear: softmax forces the output layer’s total activity
to sum to one, while supervised classification encourages a one-hot
distribution, with the activity dominated by a single neuron—an extreme
form of sparsity.
Less obviously, activation sparsity emerges in earlier layers too.
Nonlinearities like the ReLU function naturally lead to sparsity, since they
replace what would otherwise be negative activity with zero activity, and

the resulting “quietness” in one layer spreads through subsequent layers.
But in a more profound sense, sparse activity comes with the increasing
specificity of every neuron’s response as the network learns.[338]
Your cortex doesn’t have any single “banana” neuron. However, the idea
that we might have unique neurons in our brains corresponding to highly
specific percepts or memories has a long history. The term “grandmother
cell” was coined in 1967, somewhat cheekily, to refer to a hypothetical
neuron that activates only in response to one’s grandmother.[339] Margaret
Livingstone’s recollection of a cat visual neuron that, after an extensive
search, was found to respond only to a yellow Kodak film box can be
interpreted as evidence of something resembling a grandmother cell. A
famous 2005 Nature paper, “Invariant Visual Representation by Single
Neurons in the Human Brain,”[340] documented a neuron in a human subject
that seemed to respond only to Jennifer Aniston … and another neuron that
responded only to Jennifer Aniston and Brad Pitt together![341] The
researchers also found a Pamela Anderson neuron, which responded
specifically not only to pictures of Anderson (including a caricature of her),
but also to her name written out—and not to any other name or string of
letters they could find.
As suggestive as these findings are, remember that no supervised-learning
process was forcing a (hypothetical) one-hot layer somewhere in your brain
to activate a single “banana” or “grandmother” or “Pamela Anderson”
neuron, to the exclusion of all else. Such single points of failure would
make your brain far too fragile. Would you suddenly be unable to recognize
your grandmother if “her” neuron died one day, or just failed to fire? And if
you’re using up neurons on such granular concepts as Jennifer and Brad
together, do you risk running out?
No: in a sparse distributed code, which is learned by a set of high-level
neurons (analogous to the embedding layer) with neither supervision nor
centralization, a whole set of neurons in your brain lights up in response to
your grandmother, or a banana, or a specific movie-star couple. Even if only
one in ten thousand light up, that’s still nearly ten million neurons. So if a
few of those remain silent, it probably won’t matter. (And, while the code is
sparse, it’s not too sparse, or a neuroscientist poking around in someone’s
brain while showing them pictures would never get lucky enough to find a

Pamela neuron, let alone also a Jen neuron, and even a Jen and Brad
neuron.)
As a bonus, sparse distributed representations are vastly more efficient than
a one-hot code. With 128 neurons, a one-hot code can only represent 128
things. In a sparse code that involves, say, sixteen of them lighting up at a
time, there are about ninety-three quintillion possibilities.[342] With larger
numbers of neurons, the available combinations are virtually limitless, even
accounting for plenty of redundancy.

Final Causes
Let’s now switch from a perception-centric to a motor-centric
perspective. In doing so, we will be moving farther away from perceptrons
and closer to real critters.
Suppose a neuroscientist records from neurons somewhere along the
complex pathway from an animal’s visual cortex to its exterior ocular
muscles, postulating, quite reasonably, that these spike trains (that is,
sequences of action potentials) issue motor commands for eye movement.
How could the neuroscientist “decode” this command stream? The answer,
of course, is to simultaneously measure eye movement and build a model
(these days, probably using an artificial neural net) that, given the spike
trains, can predict eye movement. If it works reasonably well, voilà—an
eye-movement command-stream decoder, and thereby proof that what is
being recorded is a command stream!
However, what the neuroscientist has actually created could equally be
interpreted as an artificial brain region that—if the predictive-brain
hypothesis is right—performs exactly the same kind of prediction task that
every other brain region performs! The “decoding” will “work” reasonably
well, to the extent that
1) most of the information used by downstream neurons to carry out
their prediction is captured by the recording,
2) the timescale is fast enough to allow feedback loops to be ignored,
3) the neuroscientist’s model is sufficiently powerful to proxy the
downstream brain region, and
4) the downstream region isn’t actively trying to evade prediction via
dynamical instability and randomness (per chapter 3).

In short, given the feedback loops present everywhere in the brain, the
“command stream” interpretation is arbitrary. If various brain regions are
trying to predict each other, no inherent hierarchy determines which one is
giving orders.
Neuroscientists and AI researchers may find this counterintuitive; we need a
bit of neuroanatomy to understand why. Neurons have a cell body located
near the “dendrites” that receives inputs, and a long process, the “axon”—
I’ve previously called these connections “wiring”—sending neural spike
trains to other neurons (or muscles) elsewhere in the brain or body. Those
wires can be really long. For instance, the axon of a motor neuron with a
cell body in the lumbar region of your spinal cord can extend all the way to
the tip of your big toe, a distance in excess of three feet. (In blue whales,
axons can be thirty feet long!)
It’s tempting to imagine neurons as little people, doing their “thinking” near
the body or “head” and deciding what signal to send out along their axonal
“tail” to a downstream target. Using philosophical language, one could say
that we think of the head as the “agent” and the tail as the “patient,”
meaning the passive recipient of the agent’s actions.[343]
The idea that the target could be in charge seems odd, given where the
decision about when to spike appears to be made and the direction in which
that spiking signal appears to travel. But, in a sense, the tail wags the dog.
An example will help illustrate why. Imagine a theater has fifty free seats
that become available five minutes before a show starts, at eight o’clock
sharp. The usher is given a counter. At 7:55, she starts pressing its button
every time someone walks in so that she can close the doors when the
counter reaches fifty, or at eight o’clock, whichever comes first. It’s a
popular show, so at 7:57 the doors close.
Why did the doors close? One answer, corresponding to what Aristotle
called the “efficient cause,” is that the fiftieth person walked through the
door. Another, deeper answer, corresponding to what Aristotle called the
“final cause,” is that the theater had reached capacity. These “whys” differ
in where they locate agency.
If we were alien researchers studying the theater, we would notice that a
particular person walked through, triggering a click, causing the usher to

close the doors, and could easily mistake that fiftieth theatergoer for the
agent that made the doors close. The aliens would, in other words, observe a
“command stream,” with the commands issuing from the theatergoer to the
usher.
But, of course, none of the theatergoers exhibited agency here. The fiftieth
theatergoer might not even have noticed that he was the last one to make it
in, and certainly would not think of himself as having closed the door. To
understand where the agency really lies, we need to zoom out and look at
the whole system from a functional or purposive point of view, and this
requires understanding events farther back in time—the causes of the
causes—as well as more abstract concepts like theater capacity and the
usher’s job description.
As every kid knows who has asked an increasingly annoyed adult “why”
after every attempt at an explanation, there really is no such thing as a final
final cause. It is meaningful, though, to distinguish between a mechanistic
or “how-like” why and a purposive, agential, “final cause” why.
Here’s one way to tell the difference: when an event has a final cause,
disrupting the causal chain leading up to it will (when possible, and within
limits) not permanently disrupt the event, but merely force it to be achieved
by other means—which implies an intelligent agent at work, doing that
“causal rerouting.” For instance, if the theater-observing alien is
meddlesome and takes away the clicker, the usher will shrug and use some
other method to count people as they come in, perhaps with marks on paper
or a mental tally.
Similarly, if one of your muscle cells is working hard and there isn’t enough
oxygen available to meet the energetic demand with aerobic respiration, it
will switch to anaerobic metabolism, a different set of chemical pathways
that can liberate free energy without oxygen. Agents are adaptive and
resourceful, even when they are individual muscle cells!
Hence it’s meaningful to answer the question “why do our cells need
oxygen?” with the final cause answer, “because it’s used to obtain free
energy.”[344] Oxygen is needed for the aerobic means to that end, and
obtaining free energy is a critical cellular function that must be achieved
one way or another. (Unfortunately, in our cells, an oxygen debt is incurred

via the anaerobic route, so you can’t remain anaerobic for long, and you’ll
pant for a while after the vigorous exercise stops.)
Now let’s return to the nervous system. Neural circuits are functional too,
and, in complex nervous systems, their functions are learned. Learning
requires signals relating activity to its downstream effects to flow
backward, from target to source; hence the “backpropagation” algorithm for
training artificial neural nets. As will be discussed in chapter 7, real brains
are unlikely to implement the backpropagation algorithm, but whatever
algorithm they use must involve information about “downstream” effects
somehow making its way back “upstream” to the neural machinery that
caused those effects, so that the machinery can be modified accordingly. In
this sense, learning is the very essence of backward causality.
Neuroscientists often don’t directly observe learning taking place in
electrophysiological experiments, because it’s slower than real-time
electrical activity. It’s also not nearly as well-understood. We figured out
how neurons spike in the 1950s, but are still arguing about how they modify
their inputs and parameters to learn when to spike. Hence, our
understanding of the slower aspects of nervous systems exhibiting
backward causality lags far behind our understanding of the mechanisms
underlying their rapid, forward causality.
More abstractly, we tend to notice only efficient causes, and not the final
causes, just as an alien watching the theater fill up would have missed the
earlier interaction when the theater manager gave the usher a clicker and
directions about when to close the doors.
Sometimes final causes get ignored for another, related reason: they smell
of teleology. Indeed, the whole idea of a final cause only makes sense in the
context of purposive behavior. But as we’ve seen, biological (and more
broadly “entensional”) systems are characterized by purposes. We can only
understand them functionally, which means embracing Aristotle’s final
causes.

Meathead
This brings up an unsettling question: to what degree is the brain really
“in charge” of the rest of the body?

Since learning determines what each neuron does—which signals it
responds to and which it ignores—a neural cell body with a long axon
projecting to a different brain region doesn’t only live to serve the region
near the cell body. It’s also an outpost, a listening station, whose learned
function involves serving the community of neurons at the far end of the
axon.
This is most obvious for the neurons in our sensory periphery, which we
can think of as being in contact with our environment. Pressure and
temperature sensors in our skin relay their signals to “somatosensory”
cortex; light-sensitive cells in our retinas send information to the visual
cortex; and vibration-sensitive hair cells in our inner ears send information
to the auditory cortex.[345] These cells are clearly information-gathering
outposts.
You probably wouldn’t say that a sensor on your fingertip is the “boss”
sending commands to drive your behavior, but, rather, that it’s one of many
inputs informing your behavior. Under certain circumstances, though—such
as touching a hot stove—it would be hard to argue that these sensory
neurons aren’t bossing you. Your interests as an organism are best served by
the fastest possible reaction time, pushing initiation of this action as close to
the source of the signal as possible. So your brain doesn’t decide, but is
merely informed about what you did after the fact.
What about the muscular end of things? This is where the usual “brain in
charge” picture seems least in question. The idea of our brain being in
charge of our muscles seems obvious, while the idea of our muscles being
in charge of our brain sounds, on the face of it, absurd. As everybody
knows, brains are smart and muscles are dumb; otherwise, “meathead”
might be a synonym for “genius.”
Indeed, on their own, muscles are seemingly passive. That’s why, if you get
a nasty knock on the head, you will fall down. While you’re unconscious,
your muscles will go limp and do nothing. Your body will be like a
marionette with its strings cut.
Or will it? Despite its intuitive appeal, this view may be too one-sided.
Consider your heart, gut, and blood vessels—they’re muscles too. Luckily,
they don’t stop contracting when you’re unconscious or asleep. The heart

can continue to beat rhythmically for quite a while, even when disconnected
from the brain.
Indeed, the earliest motile life forms, dating back at least to the Ediacaran
(635–538.8 million years ago, just prior to the Cambrian), didn’t have
centralized nervous systems at all, but they certainly had muscular
coordination. Muscles are useful even for the simplest “sessile” animals—
those anchored to rocks on the seafloor—as they allow rhythmic pumping
movements to filter seawater over or through their bodies to sieve out
nutrients. Jellyfish perform such rhythmic pumping while free-floating,
enabling them to swim.
Coordinated oscillation can occur at larger scales and among more complex
organisms, too. Giant swarms of certain firefly species, for example, can
glow in near-unison, creating an otherworldly Christmas light spectacle.[346]
Both the synchrony of a firefly swarm and the speed with which they can
get into sync depend on the ability of the fireflies to see each other. They’re
able to coordinate quickly—and stay coordinated—because they can see not
only their immediate neighbors, but also the glow of more distant fireflies,
halfway across a clearing.[347]
Whether the oscillators are individual muscle cells or whole fireflies,
coordination requires a flow of information, but it need not involve any
centralized control. We can think of what the individual units are doing as a
minimal kind of local prediction, or pattern completion. Each unit aligns the
frequency and phase (i.e., timing) of its oscillation with that of its
neighbors. At the most basic level, coordinated movement is what makes
many entities into one.

“Phase synchronization” is the way the heart works too. Peristalsis—the
coordinated toothpaste tube–squeezing maneuver that moves food along the
gut—similarly relies on a traveling wave of contraction. Decentralized
coordination among muscle cells in organs like the heart and gut, and in
animals like jellyfish and Hydra, is partially achieved via “gap junctions”:
channels that couple two neighboring cells, causing electrical activity in one
to propagate directly into the other. However, fast and efficient
synchronization of muscular contraction requires longer-range connectivity.
The decentralized nerve nets of jellyfish and Hydra provide such longdistance connectivity, just as the visual systems of fireflies allow them to
coordinate across that forest clearing.

In fact, some of the earliest neural nets appear not to be made of distinct
neurons at all. The “subepithelial nerve net” of the comb jelly, an ancient
branch of animal life dating back to the Ediacaran, consists of a fused or
“syncytial” network of nerve fibers, effectively serving as an undirected,
organism-wide highway for long-distance information transmission.[348]
Perhaps these earliest neural nets are best thought of as providing extended
internal sensory systems for muscle cells, allowing them to contract in
synchrony with faraway neighbors.[349]
How and why, then, did organisms with diffuse neural nets evolve
centralized brains? A likely answer: sensing the external environment is
helpful for muscle cells too.
Food, of course, is an all-important environmental signal. And pretty much
everything that is alive pulls away from noxious stimuli, just as our hands
do from a hot stove—in general, using a fast, local feedback circuit.
Chemical receptors—implementing chemosensing, or what we call
“taste”—are in turn the oldest and most ubiquitous environmental sensors,
capable of detecting both yum and yuck. Recall that even bacteria have
such sensors, since in a watery medium and at the smallest scales, floating
molecules are the environment.
Now, consider the saliency of such receptors for an animal that can both
propel itself forward and turn via rhythmic muscular contraction—
something worm-like, for instance. While a coral polyp lives anchored to
one spot and must make the best of whatever washes over it, a crawling
worm continually makes decisions that will determine its future
environment, hence its survival prospects. In this respect, it resembles a
swimming bacterium.
Unlike a bacterium, though, a worm is long and bilaterally symmetric, or
“bilaterian,” rather than tiny and cylindrically symmetric. As a result, it can
steer left or right, not just run or tumble—an innovation critical to life on
land. As philosopher and naturalist Peter Godfrey-Smith has pointed out,
“In the sea, animals have various body plans. On land, all animals are
bilaterian. There are no terrestrial jellyfish.”[350]
Receptors at the front end of a bilaterian are especially important, because
they’re the first to detect an encounter with anything tasty or aversive. That
is, unlike a coral, a bilaterian moves through the world in a particular

direction, so it has a leading end. And unlike the point-like bacterium, space
and time are meaningfully correlated; one could say the front end of a worm
lives in its future, while its rear end lives in its past. Muscles throughout the
body will need to know about the future, and the ones on the right and the
left will want to behave differently in order to turn away from noxious
things and toward food.
Thus, a symbiotic partnership emerged between muscle cells and their nonmotile, spatially extended cousins, nerve cells. The usual way of thinking
about this partnership holds that the neurons took control of the muscle
cells, but I’ve argued that it may be equally valid to think of early neurons
as information conduits, or even as sensory outposts, to serve muscle cells.
Initially, neurons allowed improved long-range coordination across the
body. But by wiring up preferentially to the leading end of the animal,
muscles could also respond to any important changes in chemical
concentrations up there.
Among bilaterians, those responses needed to be differentiated from the
start, not only by stimulus type, but also by stimulus and muscle location. A
“yum” to the right, or a “yuck” to the left, should cause the muscles on the
right side, but not the left, to contract. It’s not so easy for a diffuse neural
net to convey such spatially differentiated signals.
So, as muscles all over the body began to wire up selectively to the front
end of the animal, the resulting knot of spatially organized neurons resulted
in “cephalization”: the first glimmers of a brain in the head.

Neuromodulators
In addition to growing simple brains to support immediate perceptual
input, bilaterians immediately faced a need to modulate their behaviors on
timescales longer than the activations of individual neurons or muscles.
Even chemotactic bacteria need to compute a “batting average,” adding up,
or integrating, what they sense over a long period to decide whether the
food level in the environment is going up (in which case they should keep
swimming), or down (in which case they should tumble and change
direction). Bilaterians needed to turn this integrated chemical signal around
the head into an internal chemical signal within the body, so that the signal
could be sensed by other neurons.

Early bilaterians did this via neuromodulators, chemical signals that
accumulate and reabsorb gradually, affecting entire populations of neurons
at a time. In terms familiar from chapter 2, we can think of these
neuromodulators as hidden-state variables (H) with long timescales—not
permanent, but longer-lasting than any momentary input (X), or action (O).
Dopamine and serotonin, neuromodulators that remain crucial to our brains
today, date back to these earliest bilaterian nervous systems.[351] The “nearby
food sensors” in a worm’s head release dopamine, triggering feeding
behavior, which looks like nonstop turning to exploit the local environment
—just like the increased rate of tumbling that causes a bacterium to stick
around and feed. We can understand dopamine, then, as turning the “foodoutside” signal into a time-averaged internal signal. When high, it lets the
worm’s muscles know that they should keep turning the animal in place to
continue eating whatever delicious thing is in the immediate vicinity.
While dopamine has sometimes been interpreted as a “pleasure” signal, this
isn’t quite right. It’s true that being in food will presumably make the
animal happier than not having any food, but, often, dopamine is better
interpreted as a predictive error signal, even in this very simple setting.
If you are a worm—or any living being—you need to predict the presence
of food in your future environment. So you’ll be “happy” when you are
swimming toward food, meaning the food level at your leading end is
rising.
The most apt feeling to associate with dopamine is probably anticipation.
This seems consistent with the subjective reports of human patients who, in
a series of ethically dubious experiments during the 1960s, were wired up to
directly stimulate dopamine production deep in their own brains. One
patient, while mashing the dopamine button, explained that “it was as if he
were building up to a sexual orgasm. He reported that he was unable to
achieve the orgastic end point, however, explaining that his frequent,
sometimes frantic, pushing of the button was an attempt to reach the end
point. This futile effort was frustrating at times and described by him on
these occasions as a ‘nervous feeling.’”[352]

On the other hand, when the dopamine-producing neurons of rats are
destroyed, the rats become passive and starve to death, even if food is
“literally under their noses.”[353] If food is placed into their mouths, they eat
it with evident pleasure, but no matter how hungry they get, without
dopamine, they aren’t spurred to action.
Now, put yourself back in the worm’s place. If you realize your prediction
of future food is being violated by a decline in the ambient food near your
head, you will want to turn. The turn, even if random (as with a bacterial
tumble), will reorient you toward a direction where the food level might
once again go up—and if that doesn’t work, just keep turning until it does.
In an area of peak food, every direction leads to a decline, so the animal will
continue turning (or tumbling) in place, which is, as it happens, the optimal
food-exploitation strategy.
Serotonin neurons serve the converse function. They sense food in the
animal’s throat rather than in the environment. As serotonin builds up over

time, the message becomes: “enough, I’m satiated.” The effect of dopamine
will be quelled, along with the impulse to move at all. Postprandial torpor
will set in, the better to digest.
Thus, we can crudely characterize dopamine and serotonin as the chemicals
associated with “wanting” (dopamine) and “getting” (serotonin). The word
“crudely” is important to emphasize here, though. Both serotonin and
dopamine serve complex and only partly understood functions in animals
with big brains.[354] Decreased dopamine levels, for instance, have not only
been implicated in “not wanting,” but also in lack of “vigor,” or drive to
exert effort for a reward—which isn’t quite the same. Are hungry,
dopamine-deprived rats not eating due to a lack of desire, a lack of vigor, or
both? These remain open questions.[355]
In early bilaterians, though, dopamine and serotonin affected behavior more
straightforwardly, by providing smoothed averages, accessible to other
neurons, approximating food expected and food eaten. Neurons that were
not in direct contact with either the outside world or the throat could then
modulate signals sent to the muscles appropriately.
This developmental stage appears to be preserved in Acoela, an ancient
order of small marine worms that diverged from other animals more than
550 million years ago. With simple body plans, Acoela have no gut and no
circulatory or respiratory systems. They move (either swimming or
crawling between sand grains on the sea bottom) by means of “cilia,” little
hair-like projections covering their exterior, whose movements are locally
controlled.
In addition to a distributed nerve net, Acoela have a sort of “brain cap,” an
aggregation of neurons at the front end, coinciding with sensors, including a
simple eye.[356] They can use complex repertoires of sensory-guided
behavior to actively hunt, modulated by dopamine and serotonin.[357] Yet the
“brain” seems not to be highly organized. If one of these worms is cut in
half, then, like the neurally decentralized Hydra, each half can regenerate
into a whole animal. Signaling molecules exchanged among the muscle
cells appear to orchestrate the patterning and re-generation process.[358]

Bootstrapping
Animals with simple distributed nerve nets, like Hydra, show little
evidence of learning in any form that a behavioral experimentalist would
recognize, though every cell does continually regulate its own biophysics to
ensure that it remains responsive to whatever signals it receives—a form of
local learning.[359] This is consistent with the idea that these earliest nerve
nets serve only secondarily for sensing the environment, having first
evolved to help muscles coordinate coherent movement.
Rudimentary behavioral learning arises the moment anything like a brain
appears, because, at this point, neurons in the head must begin jointly
adapting to changing conditions in the outside world. Every connection or
potential connection between one neuron and another offers a parameter—a
degree of coupling—that can be modulated to suit the circumstances, even
if the “wiring diagram” is genetically preprogrammed or random.
To see why, let’s take the neuron’s point of view, and imagine that it is
simply trying to do the same thing any living thing does: predict and bring
about its own continued existence.[360] Some aspects of this prediction will
certainly have been built in by evolution. For example, if dopamine is a
proxy for food nearby, the neuron will try to predict (and thereby bring
about) the presence of dopamine, because prolonged absence of dopamine
implies that the whole animal will starve—bringing an end to this one
neuron, along with all of its cellular clones. Even a humble cell has plenty
of needs and wants beyond food, but without food, there is no future.
Therefore, if the neuron is not itself dopamine-emitting, but its activity
somehow influences dopamine in the future, it will try to activate at times
that increase future dopamine. Aside from neuromodulators like dopamine,
the neuron’s inputs come either from other neurons or, if it’s a sensory
neuron, from an external source, such as light or taste. It can activate
spontaneously, or in response to any combination of these inputs, depending
on its internal parameters and degree of coupling with neighboring neurons.
Presumably, at least one of its goals thus becomes fiddling with its
parameters such that, when the neuron fires, future dopamine is maximized.
I’ve just described a basic reinforcement learning algorithm, where
dopamine is the reward signal. As brains became more complicated, though,

they began to build more sophisticated models of future reward, and,
accordingly, in vertebrates, dopamine appears to have been repurposed to
power something approximating a more sophisticated reinforcement
learning algorithm: “temporal difference” or “TD” learning.
TD learning works by continually predicting expected reward and updating
this predictive model based on actual reward. The method was invented (or,
arguably, discovered) by Richard Sutton while he was still a grad student
working toward his PhD in psychology at UMass Amherst in the 1980s.
Sutton aimed to turn existing mathematical models of Pavlovian
conditioning[361] into a machine-learning algorithm. The problem was, as he
put it, that of “learning to predict, that is, of using past experience with an
incompletely known system to predict its future behavior.”[362]
In standard reinforcement learning, such predictions are goal-directed. The
point is to reap a reward—like getting food or winning a board game.
However, the “credit assignment problem” makes this difficult: a long chain
of actions and observations might lead to the ultimate reward, but creating a
direct association between action and reward can only enable an agent to
learn the last step in this chain.
As Sutton put it, “whereas conventional prediction-learning methods assign
credit by means of the difference between predicted and actual outcomes,
[TD learning] methods assign credit by means of the difference between
temporally successive predictions.”[363] By using the change in estimated
future reward as a learning signal, it becomes possible to say whether a
given action is good (hence should be reinforced) or bad (hence should be
penalized) before the game is lost or won, or the food is eaten.
This may sound circular, since if we already had an accurate model of the
expected reward for every action, we wouldn’t need to learn anything
further; why not just take the action with the highest expected reward? As in
many statistical algorithms, though, by separating the problem into
alternating steps based on distinct models, it’s possible for these models to
take turns improving each other, an approach known as “bootstrapping”—
after that old saying about the impossibility of lifting oneself up by one’s
own bootstraps. Here, though, it is possible.
In the TD learning context the two models are often described as the “actor”
and the “critic”; in modern implementations, the actor’s model is called a

“policy function” and the critic’s model, for estimating expected reward, is
the “value function.” These functions are usually implemented using neural
nets. The critic learns by comparing its predictions with actual rewards,
which are obtained by performing the moves dictated by the actor, while the
actor improves by learning how to perform moves that maximize expected
reward according to the critic.
A TD learning system eventually figures out how to perform well, even if
both the actor and critic are initially entirely naïve, making random
decisions—provided that the problem isn’t too hard, and that random moves
occasionally produce a reward. Hence an experiment in the 1990s applying
TD learning to backgammon worked beautifully,[364] although applying the
same method to complex games failed, at least initially.

Beyond Reward
Around the same time, at the University of Fribourg’s Institute of
Physiology, Wolfram Schultz’s lab had been studying the relationship
between motor function and Parkinson’s disease, which was known to
compromise movement via dopamine depletion.[365] In a typical experiment,
Schultz and colleagues would record from single dopamine-releasing
neurons in the brains of macaques while they performed simple motor
tasks, which they needed to learn via Pavlovian conditioning.[366] A thirsty
monkey, for instance, might need to learn which of two levers to pull in
response to a flashing light to get a sip of juice. The researchers made the
following observations:
1. Dopamine neurons normally spike at a moderate background
rate.
2. When the monkeys first stumbled upon an action producing the
sugary drink, the spiking rate of these dopamine neurons rose.
3. Once the monkeys figured out the association between the visual
cue and the reward, extra dopamine was no longer released when
the treat came, but was released earlier, when the visual cue was
presented. This coincided with the monkeys licking their lips,
akin to the salivation of Pavlov’s dogs.
4. If, following the visual cue, the treat was withheld, then activity
of the dopamine neurons subsequently decreased—that is, they

went quiet relative to their background rate.

When Peter Dayan and Read Montague, then postdocs in Terry Sejnowski’s
lab at the Salk Institute in San Diego, saw these results from Schultz’s
group, they realized that dopamine was acting precisely like a temporaldifference learning signal.[367] This is the signal whereby the brain’s “critic”
tells the “actor”: please reinforce whatever behavior you’re doing now,
because I predict it will lead to a future reward. Long sequences of actions
that ultimately lead to a reward can be learned this way, with the TD
learning signal shifting earlier and earlier in the sequence as the learning
progresses.

The repurposing of dopamine from a simple reward signal to something like
a temporal-difference reinforcement-learning signal might follow naturally
from the growth of brain structures both “upstream” and “downstream” of
the dopamine-releasing neurons. Remember that even among the earliest
bilaterians, dopamine no longer represents food, but nearby food. In this
sense, dopamine is already a prediction of food, not a food reward in itself.
Predicting dopamine is thus a prediction of a prediction of food.
A predictive symbiosis between neural areas upstream and downstream of
dopamine will therefore result in the upstream areas being able to make
higher-order predictions (hence longer-range forecasts), thus acting as an
increasingly sophisticated critic or value function. Meanwhile, the
downstream parts become an increasingly sophisticated actor, or policy
function, smart enough to learn how to make better moves using these
longer-range forecasts.
This may help to explain the approximate fit between the TD learning
paradigm and at least one major role played by dopamine in the brains of
vertebrates.[368] Like many primal feelings, “something good is within
reach” is a simple, useful signal that a worm can infer directly from smell,
and a larger-brained animal like us can infer through a much more complex
cognitive process. That is a useful signal for many parts of the brain, since
they are all invested in producing good outcomes for the organism as a
whole; hence dopamine signaling has been conserved for hundreds of
millions of years, and its role has remained, if not the same, at least
recognizable throughout those eons.
Still, we should be careful not to interpret these experimental findings about
dopamine as proof that the brain implements TD learning as Sutton
formulated. That can’t be the whole story. For one, we have ample evidence
that humans, and likely many other animals, are even more powerful
learners than the TD algorithm is. Advanced board games we have no
trouble playing, for instance, are beyond the reach of TD learning.
Additionally, as I hinted earlier, recent experiments suggest that dopamine
encodes information well beyond that of a TD error signal.[369]
None of this should surprise us. Brain regions that symbiotically predict
their environment and each other are not restricted to implementing simple
learning algorithms, or communicating using cleanly definable

mathematical variables, any more than human emotional expression is
limited to a single dimension or natural language is restricted to logical
grammar. Like every other approach to machine learning described in this
book, TD learning is an elegant conceptual simplification that sheds light,
but does not illuminate every corner. It is neither a complete nor an exact
representation of what the brain does.
In 2016, DeepMind’s AlphaGo model made headlines by achieving a major
milestone in AI history. This program, based on a more elaborate
descendant of TD learning (which we’ll explore in chapter 5), defeated
reigning Go champion Lee Sedol in four out of five games.[370] The news
came amid reports of machine learning besting humans at a rapidly
lengthening list of tasks previously considered “safely” beyond AI’s
capabilities.[371]

Despite this impressive showing, neurophilosopher Patricia Churchland
pointed out fundamental limitations in the AI paradigm at the time relative
to what real organisms with real brains do. In response to AlphaGo’s
victory, Churchland wrote an essay entitled “Motivations and Drives are
Computationally Messy,”[372] noting:
The success of [artificial neural nets like AlphaGo] notwithstanding [
… their] behavior is a far cry from what a rat or a human can do [...].

Maintaining homeostasis often involves competing values and
competing opportunities, as well as trade-offs and priorities[...]:
should I mate or hide from a predator, should I eat or mate, should I
fight or flee or hide, should I back down in this fight or soldier on
[...]. The underlying neural circuitry for essentially all of these
decisions is understood if at all, then only in the barest outline. And
they do involve some sense of “self” [...].
It’s true. A pure reinforcement-learning approach, no matter how fancy the
algorithm, cannot account for realistic animal behavior, because real
animals—including us—are not optimizing for any one thing (except,
maybe, when we’re playing championship-level Go). However, “real AI”
may be simpler than Churchland—or any of us—imagined in 2016.
Close mathematical relationships exist among the various known machinelearning methods,[373] and ongoing theoretical work will likely unify them
further. While this remains an active research area, I believe that a unified
theory of learning will ultimately encompass evolution, brains, and, as
special cases, established ML methods. Such a unification would:
1. Frame the central problem as active prediction of the future given
the past;
2. Not distinguish between learning and evaluation or inference, but
instead recognize that prediction must occur over all timescales;
[374]

3. Synthesize prediction with an extended theory of
thermodynamics in the spirit of dynamic stability, as sketched for
bacteria in chapter 2;[375] and
4. Explain how mutual prediction between agents can lead to
collective, nonzero-sum outcomes.
A unified theory would illuminate the deep relationships between
computing, machine learning, neuroscience, evolution, and
thermodynamics. Such a theory is still incomplete, but this book offers a
glimpse of what it may look like, predicated on a hypothesis about what
nature does at every scale, from cells (and below) to societies: unsupervised
sequence prediction.

Predicted sequences involve continued existence. If they did not, then the
organisms that made those (self-sabotaging) predictions wouldn’t still be
here. Moreover, as we’ll soon explore, when entities that can sense each
other begin to mutually predict each other, it becomes easy for them to enter
into a symbiotic partnership in which their joint future existence is more
secure than their individual existences.
Let’s call this view “dynamically stable symbiotic prediction.” What would
it imply about the brain? Unlike TD learning or any form of pure
reinforcement learning, symbiotic prediction does not imply that animals
optimize any single reward, whether food or dopamine. On the contrary,
such single-mindedness would not be conducive to either mutualism or
survival in the real world, hence it would not be dynamically stable. Per
Churchland, “Maintaining homeostasis often involves competing values
and competing opportunities, as well as trade-offs and priorities.” This is
even truer in social settings. There are many ways to be alive in this world,
but all of them must involve continuing to exist in the future, and existence
requires ongoing relationships.
Let’s pull these threads together and summarize: as evolution built on the
design of simple Acoela-like bilaterians, additional neurons appeared in
heads. This happened because neurons are themselves replicators, and, like
all replicators, they will colonize any favorable niche,[376] in particular when
that neural proliferation symbiotically helps the whole organism. Once this
brain-knot began to grow, more complex neural networks developed,
capable of handling more sophisticated sensory modalities, like hearing and
camera-style vision. With help from neuromodulatory signals like
dopamine, such brains were also able to predict increasingly subtle patterns
relevant to the whole organism over ever-longer timescales.
Thus animals acquired the computational power to develop behaviorally
relevant models of other complex animals, resulting in the kinds of early
“social intelligence explosions” evident in the Cambrian period.

