5. Other Minds
Forking Paths
We’re finally ready to begin tackling the big questions posed in the
introduction: the nature of general intelligence, the “hard problem” of
consciousness, and the thorny issue of free will.
Let’s begin with free will, picking up where chapter 3 left off, with Nvidia’s
DAVE-2 self-driving car. Our goal will be to understand what we mean
when we call a model’s actions “willed.” Recall that DAVE-2 was nothing
but a convolutional neural net whose input was a front-facing camera and
whose output was a steering-wheel position. It was the purest and simplest
approach to cybernetic self-driving. But is it capable of choice?
More concretely, what happens when such a “reflex-based” car arrives at a
T-junction? A generic, pretrained model operating without any larger
context can’t react sensibly. When we’re driving, these are the moments
when we might make decisions based on higher-order goals. At other times,
we’re on “autopilot” ourselves: the goal is merely to stay in our lane, follow
the rules of the road, and avoid collisions with other vehicles, pedestrians,
or animals. If we’ve established habitual routes, say to and from work, we
might also make a lot of turns on autopilot. Those are instances when our
inner “autopilot model” is not generic, but specific to our own lived
experience.
DAVE-2, however, is only trained to perform the generic autopilot task. To
gather the dataset, human drivers navigated a wide variety of routes on
many different roads, and excluded from the training data the brief intervals
when they were changing lanes or making turns. During live road tests, the
human driver intervened to perform these maneuvers manually.
What would the car do if kept on autopilot at a T-junction? Presumably, it
would choose the straightest way. At an exactly symmetric T-junction, one
would hope that the model itself is just a tad asymmetric, causing it to break
the tie somehow. A perfectly symmetrical model would be unable to break
the tie, hence would be forced to generate the only non-tiebreaking output:

steering straight ahead and running off the road. (Remember, DAVE-2
doesn’t control the gas or brakes.)
This unfortunate situation illustrates the old saying about the perfect being
the enemy of the good. It also recalls “Buridan’s ass,” often framed as a
philosophical paradox in discussions of free will. In the parable, the ass (or
donkey, though the other definition applies too) is midway between two
equally sized piles of hay, and, being unable to decide which to eat, starves
to death.[377]
Avoiding this “metastable” situation is easy enough. All it requires is a
random variable, a bit of noise in the system, to break any near-ties.
In real life, though, Buridan’s ass only rears its poor muddled head
infrequently, because few decisions we make are truly arbitrary, fully
symmetric, or contextless. We don’t need to make random turns at Tjunctions since, when we’re driving, we’re usually trying to get somewhere.
More broadly, questions about choice, decisions, and free will only make
sense when we consider an agent with its own history, acting in time and in
context. That’s why we don’t generally count generic reflex actions as
willed.
DeepMind’s AlphaGo contest with Lee Sedol took place in 2016, the same
year Nvidia’s DAVE-2 self-driving-car paper was published. Go is
exceedingly complex, with many more possible moves at any point in the
game than chess—a vast and intricate garden of forking paths. For this
reason, it had resisted the brute-force search or heuristic approaches that
had produced grandmaster-level chess programs many years earlier, as well
as naïve temporal difference reinforcement learning.
At bottom, DeepMind’s trick was the same as Nvidia’s: replacing handwritten code with a learned convolutional neural net. AlphaGo’s system
design was considerably more complex, though, not only involving separate
policy and value networks trained through reinforcement, but also
incorporating traditional methods, like a randomized or “Monte Carlo” tree
search through possible future moves.[378] In this sense, it was a hybrid
between deep learning and GOFAI, though subsequent models—
AlphaZero,[379] MuZero[380]—moved progressively toward a purer deeplearning approach, removing the remaining handcrafted heuristics while

further improving performance. MuZero is general enough to play any
game, not just Go.
DeepMind has always aimed to solve artificial general intelligence through
an agential approach. Gameplay runs deep in the organization’s culture. Its
founder, Demis Hassabis, was a chess prodigy and an expert at many other
games. (In 2024, he won the Nobel Prize, along with John Jumper and
University of Washington researcher David Baker, for AlphaFold, which
applies deep learning to solving the longstanding problem of predicting a
protein’s structure from its amino-acid sequence.) Prior to DeepMind,
Hassabis designed video games, and even founded his own gaming
company. DeepMind’s first highly visible success, in 2013, involved
combining reinforcement learning with convolutional neural nets to play
Atari games.[381]
The company’s bet that gaming could provide a controlled arena for
developing general AI has certainly yielded impressive and important
advances. Go commentators studying AlphaGo’s games lauded the system
for “exhibiting creative and brilliant skills and contributing to the game’s
progress.”[382]
However, beyond the limitation Churchland pointed out[383]—its singlemindedness—AlphaGo was very different from the brain in another
important way: it did not exist in time. It had no dynamics or internal state.

Children of Time
Like the self-driving-car model, neither AlphaGo nor its successors
maintain any explicit memory of its prior “thoughts” or plans.[384] True, the
system works out its next move by thinking as many steps ahead as
possible, making it a stretch to call that extended evaluation a “reflex
action.” However, once the move is made, it’s groundhog day—the next
turn, it considers the board afresh.
AlphaGo makes no attempt to model its opponent’s psychology, nor does it
learn on the fly; thus, it can’t individuate. Neither can it have any sense of a
“self” acting in the world. All it models is that world itself and the possible
paths through it, annotated (courtesy of the value network) with each path’s
goodness or badness.

For a board game like Go or chess, none of these design choices are
necessarily shortcomings. According to game theory (as formalized by none
other than John von Neumann,[385] who had his fingers in many pies), the
optimal next move depends neither on history, nor on the opponent, nor on
any internal state, but only on the state of the board and the rules of the
game—to which both players have full access. And the opponent should be
presumed to always play optimally. To do otherwise would risk falling prey
to a wily antagonist, who might lull an opponent by playing dumb, then
take the gloves off at an opportune moment.[386]

You may wonder how AlphaGo could pull off a complex, multi-turn
strategy—which it certainly can—without a self or memory. But given a
clear view of the future’s forking paths at every turn, there’s no need to
remember. All possible strategies are visible at all times, including the
continuation of whatever strategy seemed best on the previous turn. If it’s
still the best option after the opponent’s move, then so be it.

While elegant in its way, this approach can be wasteful, in that it often
involves rediscovering the same strategy, turn after turn. Occasionally,
catastrophic (and quite nonhuman) failures occur, since the model’s view of
the future is not perfect, but, as with all Monte Carlo methods, stochastic.
The model might make an unusual move due to glimpsing a brilliant but
distant outcome down the line, but later fail to spot that same opportunity,
even if it’s still in play, and foreclose on it with a wrong move. Out of sight,
out of mind.[387]
Portia spiders offer an illuminating contrast to this kind of “statelessness.”
Although only a centimeter or less in size, they have been called “eightlegged cats” due to their unusually intelligent hunting behaviors.[388] They’re
odd-looking, with a slow, choppy, robot-like gait—until they pounce.
Unlike other spiders, Portia have a pair of large, forward-looking cameratype eyes with high resolution over a narrow field of view, well adapted to
nuanced visual discrimination. Their favorite meal is other spiders, typically
web-weavers, which may be twice their size. Portia can control the
behavior of prey by spoofing web vibration signals; they learn which
signals generate the desired response for each species through trial and
error. In the lab, they can even learn how to fake out species they would
never encounter in the wild.

They plan their attacks slowly and carefully. With tiny brains and telephoto
eyes that need to scan around to resolve the environment, it seems likely
that they sacrifice much of the parallelism of animals with bigger brains (a
topic we’ll return to in chapter 8). Once they have worked out a strategy,
though, they can execute it virtuosically, leaping from twig to twig,
abseiling down silk threads, and landing on their target from above, behind,
or frontally, depending on what is safest under the circumstances (for
oftentimes, the spider or insect they’re stalking is perfectly capable of
eating them if the tables turn). Perhaps most impressively, Portia routinely
reach their prey via indirect routes, including detours of up to an hour
during which they may move away from their goal, breaking line of sight.
[389]
Impressive stuff!

I’ve offered this detailed account because it illustrates—and builds on—a
number of Churchland’s observations:
● Portia isn’t playing any one game against any single opponent.
Eventually it must eat if it is to survive, but it gets to choose with
whom to engage, and when; it can always back off and try something
else, or “soldier on.”
● The “game board” is not equally visible to all players. In its totality, it
isn’t visible to any player. Portia must build up and incrementally
update a mental model of the world in order to make decisions.
● This model must include not only the externally visible world, but the
internal states of hunter and prey alike. Knowing its own state allows
Portia to assess how hungry (or desperate) it is, how strong or weak it
feels, whether hunting should take precedence over mating or resting,
and so on.
● Modeling the mental state of its prey is also essential. Are they
aroused? Have they realized I’m stalking them? If so, how well have I
been localized? By timing its movement on a victim’s web to coincide
with wind gusts, Portia may work to remain “vibrationally invisible”;
or, by strumming the web, it may attempt to create the illusion of a
trapped bug. The trickster must constantly assess: are my tricks
working? Is this getting the reaction I want?
None of these tricks or capabilities are fundamentally out of reach for
artificial neural nets; after all, each capability can be expressed in terms of

functions, and neural nets are universal function approximators. Such
capabilities will not, however, emerge on their own in a system like DAVE2 or AlphaGo, due both to the constraints of the setup (autopilot or board
game) and the structural limitations of a stateless classifier—even one that
makes very clever decisions in the moment by evaluating many possible
futures.

Sphexish
Given Portia’s alien lifestyle, physiology, umwelt, and brain limitations, it
takes a leap of imagination to understand what it’s like to be a jumping
spider, though it is fun (and maybe fruitful) to make the attempt.[390] My
own sense is that Portia, cats, and humans on the hunt all share not only the
ability to assess and plan an attack (or defend against one), but also to
experience doubt, uncertainty, fear, and triumph. I expect that such feelings
and experiences would emerge naturally from the evolution of predation, as
described in chapter 3, just as hunger emerges naturally from the need to
eat, as described in chapter 2.
But it seems so subjective to assert that another mind is experiencing
something familiar from one’s own experience. How can one really know?
We will soon explore how such claims can be assessed more rigorously, as
predictive hypotheses.
For now, though, let’s stick to a more ethological perspective. Ethology
concerns itself with animal behavior, studied using lab experiments and
analyzed in the context of neurophysiology, function, and evolution.
Through the ethological lens, we can simply ask the same questions about
feelings and internal states we would ask about physical features, like the
differently adapted beaks of Darwin’s finches. Why would that feeling arise
and be preserved by evolution? How is it useful? What would happen if it
were absent? This lets us fend off charges of anthropocentrism and defer
“philosophical zombie” questions a little longer.
Free will, as a desire or imperative, seems easy enough to understand from
an ethological perspective. No animal likes being trapped, humans
included; that’s why imprisonment is a form of punishment, even if our
bodily needs are met. Remember, the whole point of having a brain is to be
able to act in the world, choosing among alternative futures in order to

enhance our dynamic stability—that is, to stay alive, and to continue to be
able to make choices in the future.
When others restrict our ability to make choices, it doesn’t feel good, just as
gnawing hunger doesn’t feel good. The confinement of our possible futures
renders us increasingly helpless, like a king being chased into a corner of
the chess board in the endgame.
Go offers an even purer expression of this idea. Although the stones don’t
actually move once laid down, their “liberties” are the number of adjacent
unfilled board positions where they “could” hypothetically move, and
stones only remain “alive” as long as they have at least one liberty. Death,
then, whether in a game or in real life, represents the ultimate exhaustion of
one’s ability to choose. It’s the pinched-off end of our Wiener sausage.[391]
Mutual prediction is the key to sociality and cooperation, but, in a predatory
context, as the early cyberneticists understood, prediction can also be
adversarial. A predator will try to predict prey right into its stomach. Prey
will try to predict the predator’s moves, and escape. Each is trying to
preserve its own liberties, potentially at the cost of the opponent’s. Each
will therefore try to predict the other’s predictions, ad infinitum.
As we’ll discuss in more detail in chapter 7, when mutual prediction is
cooperative, it must also be imperfect, for cognitive cooperation involves a
division of labor. That means each party brings cognitive resources or
inputs to the table that the others lack. If one of the cooperating parties is
always perfectly predictable to any of the others, that would imply that the
predicted party doesn’t bring anything unique to the table, and is therefore a
third wheel.
So, whether in a cooperative or adversarial context, being perfectly
predictable is bad news. In a way, it’s even a form of imprisonment. Ted
Chiang mordantly explores the psychological consequences in his short
story “What’s Expected of Us.”[392] A device called the Predictor, consisting
of nothing but a button and a light, appears on the market. The light always
flashes green one second before the button is pressed. Millions of Predictors
are sold, and, at first, people treat the device as a novelty, showing it to their
friends and trying to fool it. When the implications sink in, though—that the
Predictor can’t be fooled—free will is revealed to be an illusion, and people
despair, eventually losing their will to live.

Real-life predictors aren’t single-button devices, of course, but other minds,
like that of a cat pursuing its prey. And one way to become highly
predictable is to run out of voluntary moves, like a cornered rat. But if one’s
behavior looks deterministic from the outside—if it can be perfectly
predicted by an observer—then, from an adversarial perspective, that is
equivalent to being cornered.
When an agent becomes perfectly predictable to an observer, it makes the
agent no longer register as agential to that observer. Cognitive scientist
Douglas Hofstadter has described this property as “sphexishness,” by
reference to the golden digger wasp Sphex ichneumoneus.[393] Hofstadter
was drawing on observations by French entomologist Jean-Henri Fabre
(1823–1915), who has been hailed as the founding father of ethology.[394]
Although generally a keen and sympathetic observer of animal behavior,
Fabre took a dim view of cognition in insects, claiming they exhibit a
“machine-like obstinacy.”[395]

He noticed that when the time comes for Sphex to lay eggs, she constructs a
burrow and seeks out a cricket to nourish her future hatchlings. Instead of

eating the cricket herself, she paralyzes it with a sting, brings it to the
burrow entrance, goes in to see that all is well, then drags the cricket in,
lays the eggs alongside the body, seals the burrow, and flies off. This
elaborate performance certainly looks purposive—and it is.
But then, Fabre noticed that if the cricket is moved by a few inches after the
wasp has gone into the burrow to check that all is well, Sphex will reemerge and move the cricket back into position, then go back into the
burrow to check that all is well again! He described repeating this process
dozens of times. By moving the paralyzed cricket every time the wasp went
into the nest, Fabre was able to get her stuck in an endless loop.[396]
One interpretation of this little parable: it’s easy to be fooled into thinking
that a behavior is intelligent or agential when in fact it’s just a running
program. That would beg the question, though: what else could it be? In
some sense we are all “just running programs.”
A better take is to recognize, first, that Sphex’s nest preparation behavior is
genetically determined, hence the intelligence manifested by the program is
a product of evolution, not of in-the-moment reasoning by the individual
wasp. The individual wasp appears to be, like DAVE-2, running on
autopilot, at least with respect to nesting behavior. This seems reasonable,
given the wasp’s small brain and two-month adult lifespan. It has no time to
learn the ropes, and nobody to learn them from, so it has to know how to
reproduce and care for its young “right out of the box.”
Perhaps more interesting, though, is our own response to observing
sphexish behavior. When we see the elaborate preparations the wasp makes
for her brood, we think she’s smart and agential. Then, when we see that the
behavior is pre-scripted, we “realize” that she’s just a machine, an “it,” and
any impression of intelligence or willed action vanishes. But the difference
is in our own minds, not that of the wasp.
Alan Turing arrived at a similar conclusion: “From the outside, [...] a thing
could look intelligent as long as one had not yet found out all its rules of
behavior. Accordingly, for a machine to seem intelligent, at least some
details of its internal workings must remain unknown.”[397]
In the case of Sphex, this realization comes about due to our reverseengineering of the script and “hacking” it to create an infinite loop. We

come to believe the wasp has no intelligence or agency precisely because
we can now predict its actions perfectly. What we really mean by “it’s just
following a script” is that we, on the outside, know what the script is, and
don’t even need to interact with the animal to predict what it will do next.
As a fellow computational being, how can you escape the same pickle—
how do you keep from becoming a robotic “it” to a clever observer? Here
are three ways:
1. As described for moth flight in chapter 3, simply using a random
variable can keep your behavior fresh and surprising even if
you’re not so smart. In an adversarial setting, this strategy still
works if your opponent is smart enough to see right through you
(that is, if your internal state is transparent, or can be fully
modeled by an outside observer). It even works if you are
entirely generic and incapable of individual learning, meaning
that your behavioral repertoire is fully genetically programmed,
and you are “just like” every other member of your species.[398]
Randomness is equally valuable in cooperative contexts, such as
for foraging insect colonies, where it ensures that even nearidentical individuals will diverge to explore different parts of
their environment.
2. The ability to learn allows your responses to be more unique, and
allows your behavioral repertoire to scale up far beyond what can
be encoded in your genome. By storing in your brain learnings
and behaviors based on past experiences, you become vastly
more complex on the inside—and all of this complexity is a
hidden state, invisible to a stranger. In a competitive setting, such
lifelong learning makes you harder to predict. In a cooperative
setting, it allows individually differentiated skills and expertise to
develop, greatly expanding the opportunities for cognitive
division of labor.
3. If you are able to model others effectively, including others who
are modeling you back, then in an adversarial situation, you can
outfox them by going meta. Modeling others is also essential to
the cognitive division of labor, as it allows you to know who
knows what you don’t know. Psychological studies suggest that
we humans are so adept at keeping track of socially distributed

knowledge that we tend to harbor greatly exaggerated beliefs
about how much we personally know, when a good deal of our
“knowledge” really consists of knowing whom to ask.[399]
Wasps might not bother with any of these strategies when it comes to nest
preparation because cricket-moving tricksters have never exerted
evolutionary pressure on making this specific behavior unpredictable.
Predator/prey interactions are a different story. It’s unlikely that Sphex
would behave so sphexishly while hunting the cricket it brings to its nest, or
evading a predator of its own.
The last trick on the list—modeling your modeler—requires being very
smart indeed. Roughly speaking, you need to be as smart as whomever
you’re modeling, or more so, and you need to be able to imagine how you
(and the world in general) appear from their point of view.
Does the small brain size of an arthropod preclude this trick? Apparently
not. When Portia spiders show an awareness of what their adversary does
and doesn’t know, and learn to actively manipulate that opponent’s world
model, they are operating at this higher cognitive level.

Matryoshka Dolls
Among human children, this so-called “theory of mind” or ability to
“mentalize” (I’ll use the terms interchangeably) takes quite a while to
develop fully. The classic experimental setup for probing it is the SallyAnne Test, popularized in 1985 by psychologists Simon Baron-Cohen, Alan
Leslie, and Uta Frith.[400]
The experimenters put on a little chamber drama for their young subjects
using two dolls, Sally and Anne. Sally has a covered basket, and Anne has a
box with a lid. Sally puts her marble in her basket, then goes out for a walk.
While she’s gone, Anne slips the marble out of Sally’s basket and into her
own box, closing the lid. Later, with Anne out of the picture, Sally returns.

During the skit, the children are asked four questions:
1. The Naming Question, a warm-up, asks them which doll is
which; it establishes basic understanding of the scenario.
2. On Sally’s return, the Belief Question is: “Where will Sally look
for her marble?”
3. This is followed up with the Reality Question: “Where is the
marble really?”
4. … and the Memory Question: “Where was the marble in the
beginning?”
Even babies (by the time they can talk a little) are able to say who is who
and understand where the marble is throughout the skit, although it’s
stashed out of sight; hence questions 1, 3, and 4 are all fairly easy.
However, until somewhere between two and a half and four years of age,
children tend to get the Belief Question wrong.[401] They probably aren’t
able to model the minds of others well enough to knowingly attribute false
beliefs to them.

Psychologists tend to be very particular about which kinds of agents they
believe could, even hypothetically, exhibit theory of mind, in part because
of the baggage implied by language like “knowingly attribute.” Many
reserve the term for humans only, though other great apes have also been
shown to pass the Sally-Anne Test, with suitable modifications.[402]
However, from a functional perspective, theory of mind is exactly what is
required to lie or deceive, as Portia does (and as many other animals do).
[403]

Exhibiting this cognitive capacity implies not only an ability to simulate
other minds, but also to model counterfactual (“what if”) universes. In the
Sally-Anne Test, there is a real-life universe, in which the marble is in the
box. There is the universe in Sally’s head, in which the marble is in the
basket. Each of these universes also contains agents, like Sally and Anne,
who in turn contain model universes in their virtual heads. The Anne in the
universe in Sally’s mind, for instance, also believes that the marble is in the
basket. Of course Sally and Anne are mere dolls; they only exist within the
minds of the experimenter and the subject. The experimenter and subject
are in turn abstract people I am describing to you, dear reader. Nesting
dolls, universes within universes, in an endless recursion. It’s a dizzying
prospect.
As adults, though, we negotiate such recursive mentalization all the time
without a second thought. Reading a novel like Jane Eyre involves
regularly entertaining fourth-, fifth-, and sixth-order theories of mind, as we
wonder what Charlotte Brontë expects us to believe about what Jane
believes Mr. Rochester must think Jane thinks about Mr. Rochester’s
feelings about Blanche. Exercising this mentalizing faculty seems to have
been the main pastime of the nineteenth-century English upper classes.
(Writing popular novels about it added yet another layer of indirection, at
times ironic.)
But theory of mind is far more than just a valuable skill for navigating
hidden barbs and avoiding faux pas at teatime. There is good evidence that
it is the very stuff of intelligence; it is, thus, at the heart of this book’s main
argument.
We have arrived at that heart. My contention is that theory of mind:

● Powers the “intelligence explosions” observed in our own lineage, the
hominins, and in other brainy species;
● Gives us the ability to entertain counterfactual “what-ifs”;
● Motivates, and is enhanced by, the development of language;
● Allows us to make purposive decisions beyond “autopilot mode”;
● Underwrites free will;
● Operates both in social networks and within individual brains;
● Results automatically from symbioses among predictors; and
● Is the origin and mechanism of consciousness.
In a sense, theory of mind is mind.

Intelligence Explosion
These are big claims. Let’s begin with the more established ones.
In the 1970s, Dian Fossey, the world’s leading expert on gorilla behavior,
invited British neuropsychologist Nicholas Humphrey to spend a few
months at her research station in the Virunga Mountains of Rwanda.
Reflecting later on what he had seen, Humphrey wrote, “[O]f all the
animals in the forest the gorillas seemed to lead much the simplest
existence—food abundant and easy to harvest (provided they knew where
to find it), few if any predators (provided they knew how to avoid them) …
little to do in fact (and little done) but eat, sleep and play. And the same is
arguably true for natural man.”[404]

These observations flew in the face of the usual explanation for evolving
high intelligence—that it’s all about being a brilliant hunter, or otherwise
“winning” at playing a brutal, Hobbesian game of survival in a tough
environment. But if not to hunt (or evade hunters), why bother with
intelligence? Couldn’t one live the easy life of a gorilla without incurring
the high cost of a big brain? The fossil record suggests not: primate brains
in many lineages, including those of gorillas and humans, haven’t shrunk
over time, but, rather, have grown dramatically.
Humphrey’s explanation: “[T]he life of the great apes and man [...]
depend[s] critically on the possession of wide factual knowledge of
practical technique and the nature of the habitat. Such knowledge can only
be acquired in the context of a social community [...] which provides both a
medium for the cultural transmission of information and a protective
environment in which individual learning can occur. [...][T]he chief role of
creative intellect is to hold society together.”[405]

There are now many variations on this basic theory—some, like Humphrey,
emphasizing cooperation and division of labor, others competition and
Machiavellian politics.[406] These correspond fairly well to the “love” versus
“war” explanations for the emergence of intelligence generally, as described
in chapter 3.
In the 1990s, evolutionary psychologist Robin Dunbar and colleagues used
comparative brain-size measurements across species to advance the closely
related “social brain hypothesis,” which holds that the rapid increases in
brain size evident in hominins and cetaceans (whales and dolphins), among
others, arise from mentalizing one-upmanship.[407]

Underpinning all of these related hypotheses is the observation that, among
highly social animals like us, theory of mind is a powerfully adaptive trait.
Being better able to get inside others’ heads increases the odds of finding a
mate, building coalitions, securing resources from friends and family,
getting help raising young,[408] avoiding violence (or being on the winning
side of it), climbing in prestige, and amassing fans or followers. So,
unsurprisingly, people with better theory of mind tend to live longer and

have greater reproductive success.[409] That means Darwinian selection will
be at work.
Strong theory of mind is correlated with both larger numbers of friends and
larger brains, particularly in brain areas associated with mentalizing—above
all, the frontal cortex.[410] Thus, startlingly, we can see evidence of the
evolutionary pressure on social intelligence even among modern humans.
My guess is that the extra cortical volume of highly social people is
dedicated not only to general mentalizing skills, but also to rich learned
representations—we could even call them simulations—of their many
specific family members, friends, colleagues, and acquaintances.[411] After
all, mentalizing requires not just imagining another person in the abstract,
but modeling their particular life experience, what they know and don’t
know, their quirks and values, the ways they express themselves—in short,
everything that comprises a personality, outlook, and umwelt. You probably
bring such knowledge to bear effortlessly to play out hypothetical social
situations in your head, drawing on a cast of hundreds of people you know.
This task is even harder than it appears at first glance, because there are
infinite reflections in the social hall of mirrors: all of those people are
themselves modeling others, including you. And, of course, their models of
you include models of them, and of others. These relationships are
important, because they powerfully affect behavior. Who shared their meat
with whom after the last hunt, and in front of whom? Who is sleeping with
whom? Who is gossiping about it, and who doesn’t know? Who is beefing
with whom, and over what (or whom)?
Even if your model of second-order relationships (i.e., who is friends with
whom, and what you know about those interactions) is not as rich as your
model of first-order relationships (your friends), the sheer number of
higher-order terms in your model explodes. If you have twenty classmates
who all know each other (and you), then you need to keep track not only of
your twenty relationships with them, but of all of their relationships with
each other and with you, which is another 20×20=400 pieces of
information. Third-order relationships climb into the thousands.
The numbers get truly mind-boggling when you consider that our
acquaintances can easily number in the hundreds; family, school, and work
environments tend to involve cohorts of people who all know each other;

and our theories of mind can go up to sixth order, or beyond.[412] You can
imagine, then, that even if many corners are cut, the amount of brain
volume needed to do social modeling might grow both as a function of your
number of friends and as a function of your ability to model higher-order
relationships.
Indeed, when Dunbar and colleagues set out to find the relationship
between the brain sizes and the social-group sizes of brainy animals, they
found that as troop size increases, the amount of brain volume dedicated to
the cortex also increases.[413] Mentalizing order, which Dunbar refers to as
“intentionality level,” appears to be limited by cortical volume; behavioral
studies suggest that monkeys can only operate at level one, while
nonhuman apes have level-two intentionality. By extrapolation, archaic
humans and Neanderthals may only have been able to achieve level-four
intentionality, which is at “the lower end of the normal distribution for
modern human adults, and at about the same intellectual level as young
teenagers.”[414] Finally, the slope of the relationship between cortical volume
and troop size is considerably steeper for apes than for monkeys, consistent
with the idea that modeling higher levels of intentionality requires a greater
investment of cognitive resources per troop member.

Findings relating brain size to social group size, and social group size to
Darwinian fitness, are themselves a hall of mirrors, revealing a profound
self-similarity—and feedback loop—between brains and social groups. If
you have a slightly larger brain than your friends and family, and are able to
model more relationships more reliably, you will have a Darwinian
advantage, so on average will have slightly more descendants than those
who are less socially adept. But that means that your descendants will
themselves become harder to model socially; that is, everyone else’s model
of them must now be more complex, including higher-level intentionality
and more relationships. And remember, everybody is trying to predict
everybody else, but not be fully predictable themselves!
So it’s an arms race, not unlike that of the Cambrian explosion—though
(usually) friendlier. Everyone is getting a bigger brain to model everyone
else, and everyone else is getting harder to model at the same time, because
… well, their brains are getting bigger. A social intelligence explosion

ensues: a rapid (by evolutionary standards) increase in brain volume in your
species.
When social modeling becomes such an important component of everyone’s
life, the effect on individual incentives is dramatic. Lone operators, like
leopards, are content to fend for themselves; their umwelt consists mainly of
their territory and their prey, while other leopards are, most of the time,
unwelcome intruders. For a modern human, though, being cast out or
excluded from the community becomes a severe punishment—or even a
death sentence. Our world consists largely of other people, and most of us
would be unable to survive at all without continual mutual aid.
At the same time, sociality is a fraught business. We try to “win” at
modeling others without being fully modeled ourselves; we compete for
mating opportunities and for attention; we strive for dominance and
prestige. These dynamics once again illustrate how competition and
cooperation can be interwoven to such a degree that it can be hard to tell
which is which.
Selection pressure also operates at the level of social groups. If one group
sports slightly bigger brains and greater social prowess, the group itself can
grow larger, and will thus tend to outcompete the smaller (and smallerbrained) group. Such may have been the fate of certain of our now-extinct
hominin kin.
Societies have a kind of collective intelligence, and a rich body of work in
social anthropology tells us that collective intelligence exhibits a scaling
law not unlike that of individual brains. Theory of mind, incidentally, is
important both for effective teaching and effective learning, which implies
that it enhances cultural evolution at the group level too.[415] So, bigger
societies can create and evolve more complex technologies, and thereby
develop greater adaptability and resilience.[416] Greater scale, in other words,
can support greater intelligence, and greater intelligence improves dynamic
stability, both at the individual level and at the group level.

Crew of Eight
It’s hard not to wonder whether this recursive pattern applies at finer
scales, too. Could our brains be “societies” of neural circuits that have
evolved to model each other and thereby create the larger collective

intelligence we call a “brain”? Neuroscientists and AI researchers have
advanced such theories many times over the years, offering a range of
supporting evidence.[417]
For one, the cerebral cortex has a modular or repetitive structure, consisting
of a honeycomb of “cortical columns”—though these columns don’t have
distinct borders, which has led to endless debate about their exact definition
and granularity.[418] Therefore, when I use the term “cortical column,” please
take it with a grain of salt; I will interchangeably use even vaguer language
like “small piece of cortex” or “part of the brain.”
Despite these ambiguities, we know that the basic “cortical circuit” is much
the same in different regions of the cortex. When we distinguish between
“auditory cortex” and “visual cortex,” for instance, the difference seems to
be mostly about where each gets its inputs.[419] In one famous experiment,
the optic nerves of baby ferrets were rerouted surgically to their auditory
cortex, and these animals nonetheless developed the ability to see.
Moreover, the characteristically patterned neural mapping of oriented visual
features Hubel and Wiesel discovered in the visual cortex developed in the
ferrets’ repurposed “auditory” cortex, albeit more sloppily.[420] There’s
evidence that the human brain can rewire in similarly dramatic ways: blind
people can learn to see using their hearing via “click sonar,”[421] and can
even acquire a limited form of vision via spatially patterned tongue
stimulation.[422]
Perhaps generic modularity is precisely what made the intelligence
explosion possible: just as DNA could easily evolve to replicate more
vertebrae and ribs to produce snakes (per chapter 1), the genomes of
animals undergoing intelligence explosions could respond to individual and
group selection pressure by replicating more cortical columns. Thus,
evolution could progressively expand the cortical sheet without needing to
invent anything fundamentally new. In the biggest-brained animals, like
dolphins and humans, expansion progressed to the point of scrunching up
the cortex into dense folds, giving our brains their characteristic furrowed
appearance. We manage to cram about a quarter of a square meter of
cortical area into our skulls.
Given this, one might even consider the cortex itself to be more like a
population than a single entity: a “colony” of cortical columns that have

managed to replicate inside our skulls in larger and larger numbers through
increased cooperation among themselves. The greater intelligence they give
us adds to our individual fitness, which in turn allows us to form larger
societies, which increases dynamic stability all round.
You might find it disconcerting to think of your cortex as a colony of
entities, rather than as one unified entity, “yourself.” Remember, though,
that at some level, life always works this way. Our cells harbor colonies of
mitochondria, and our bodies consist of colonies of cells. All of these small
entities are intelligent in their own right, as any living thing needs to be in
order to survive when surrounded by other similar entities in a dynamic
environment.
I think the reason we find intelligent cortical columns uncanny is that their
umwelt, the domain in which they are intelligent, overlaps with “our”
umwelt—unlike, say, a white blood cell, which, while obviously alive and
active, inhabits a microscopic inner world utterly alien to us. Cortical
columns, by contrast, understand colors and shapes, people and places,
stories and emotions. Our understanding is their understanding. And that is
weird.
Indulge me in a speculative digression about everyone’s favorite “alien
intelligence”: the octopus.[423] Octopuses have always seemed like a bit of a
fly in the ointment, as far as the social-intelligence hypothesis is concerned.
Unlike other very smart animals on Earth, they’re notoriously cranky and
individualistic. They don’t tend to hang out with each other, and usually
only meet to mate—a fraught encounter that may end in violence or even
cannibalism.[424]
While they are brilliant lifelong learners, they don’t live long enough to
raise their young, hence lack the ability to accumulate cultural knowledge.
If they did, it seems entirely possible that our planet’s seas would teem with
octopus cities, and perhaps even octopus-made computing machines (which
would undoubtedly use an octal, or base eight, numbering system—a much
better engineering choice than our own base ten).
If octopuses are so antisocial, and intelligence is a social phenomenon, why
are they so smart? One could dodge the question and note that sociality
doesn’t just involve conspecifics (i.e., others of your own species), nor is it
necessarily friendly. With omnivorous appetites and a total lack of body

armor, the octopus must rely on its wits to model and predict everything it
wants to either hunt or escape from; it seems likely that highly developed
theory of mind, vulnerability to predators, and flexible hunting strategies all
coevolved.[425]
A more fun possibility, though, is suggested by considering the other ways
octopuses are so different from other big-brained animals, including us. The
octopus’s “brain” is highly decentralized, likely due to the high cost of
long-distance communication in the nervous systems of molluscs. Our own
long-distance nerve fibers are coated with fatty myelin sheaths, which
greatly speed up and lower the energetic cost of transmitting electrical
impulses.[426] Mollusc nerve fibers lack myelin sheaths, though.
Transmitting fast impulses in unmyelinated nerves requires dramatically
increasing the diameter of the axon, which explains why squids have a
“giant axon”—a single nerve fiber up to 1.5 millimeters in diameter!—
running the length of their body. This giant axon allows for a rapid,
coordinated escape response.[427] But obviously, for an animal with many
neurons powering complex behaviors, there isn’t room (or the energetic
budget) for many such giant axons, so a great majority of neural processing
needs to be local. That probably explains why three fifths of an octopus’s
neurons are in the arms, rather than in the head.
While cephalopods are bilaterian like us, their bodies are far more modular
than any land animal, exhibiting many additional near-symmetries. In the
octopus, over two hundred suckers are arranged in beautiful patterns along
each of eight arms, with chained neural networks surrounding each sucker.
Individual suckers are prehensile, almost like a pair of opposed fingers, and
endowed with far richer local sensory input than our hands, including touch
and taste receptors, chromatophores for colorful skin displays, and even
photoreceptors for light sensing. A lot of tasting, moving, color-changing,
reacting, deciding, predicting, and even reasoning seems to occur under
local control.
Hence the octopus’s modularity is not just structural, but functional. Each
sucker is smart. Each arm, too, is intelligent, able to respond to stimuli with
complex movements without the involvement of the central brain.[428] Arms
recognize each other directly as they move, avoiding self-entanglement
without requiring any central representation of the animal’s geometry,[429]

which—given the wild range of geometries possible for such a squishy
animal with so many degrees of freedom—would be an extraordinary
challenge for any brain.[430] The arms can even communicate with each
other directly via a ring of ganglia that encircle the “shoulders,” with
additional direct connections between alternating arms; these routes bypass
the brain entirely.[431]
There’s more. Octopuses occasionally need to bite off an injured arm, an act
known as “autotomy.”[432] They may even do so to distract a predator,
leaving one writhing appendage behind while the other seven, along with
the head, escape. (At this point, as a smartass on Reddit observes, we would
have a septopus.) In at least one squid species, “attack autotomy” has been
observed as well: a severed arm attacks a predator while the rest of the
animal escapes.[433] Following autotomy, a new arm will regrow. For
octopuses, the process takes about 130 days.
Perhaps, then, the octopus is best thought of as a tightly knit community of
eight arms, sharing among themselves a common pair of eyes. In fact, the
bulk of the central “brain” consists of a pair of optic lobes; we could think
of these lobes compressing visual information in service to the arms, rather
than being “the boss,” or even, in any meaningful sense, “the octopus.” In
this light, attack autotomy in the squid (whose nervous system is similarly
organized) may not be so different from the kamikaze tactics of a bee
defending the hive.
Could the intelligence explosion that resulted in the octopus have been
driven by predictive social modeling—theory of mind, in effect—among its
eight arms? As absurd as this sounds, I think it’s plausible. Octopus arms
are individually smart, but communication among them is limited, due both
to the high latency and low bandwidth of unmyelinated nerve fibers.
Centralized control under these constraints is impossible.
Yet the octopus’s arms must work together seamlessly to swim, hunt, escape
aquarium tanks, and so on; to do so, they must model each other. We know
that people can work closely together to perform such tasks with only a
little communication; consider an elite military unit, or a hunting party,
exchanging subtle signs while stalking their quarry. Even intellectual tasks,
like solving escape-room puzzles or competing in Math Olympiads, involve

such teamwork. Language is a very low bandwidth medium, yet we still
manage.
Accounts of small, extremely high-performing teams invariably emphasize
both the unity of purpose that can be achieved and the need for each team
member to infer what the others are up to based on minimal cues: that is,
high-fidelity mutual prediction, or mentalizing. When this happens in
competitive rowing, it’s called “swing”: “It only happens when all eight
oarsmen are rowing in such perfect unison that no single action by any one
is out of sync with those of all the others. [...] Each minute action [...] must
be mirrored exactly by each oarsman, from one end of the boat to the other.
[...] Only then will it feel as if the boat is a part of each of them, moving as
if on its own.”[434]

Homunculus
How different are we from the octopus, really? We have fast, myelinated
nerves that allow for greater physical centralization of our brain in our
heads, but if what I’ve suggested is correct—that our brains can be thought
of as symbiotic colonies of cortical columns modeling each other—then the
difference may be more of degree than of kind. This is unsettling, because
we tend to have a strong sense of ourselves as a unified “I.”
Much intuitive (and supernatural) thinking over the ages has presumed this
indivisible self, located somewhere in the body. Presumably it’s in the brain
somewhere. That’s why we can imagine getting a “full body transplant” but
not a “brain transplant.” A common term for this “something in the brain” is
a “homunculus,” literally, a “little man” somewhere in there, pulling the
strings. In many religious traditions, the immortal soul plays this
homuncular role.
René Descartes (1596–1650) thought about the problem from a
neuroanatomical point of view. An influential champion of “mechanical
philosophy,” or what we now call physics, Descartes held that the body and
brain must be mechanical, or machine-like, since we seem to be made of the
same stuff as the rest of the physical universe. Further, human anatomy has
much in common with other animals’ anatomy, and human behavior has
much in common with other animals’ behavior: the “passions” of hunger
and sexual attraction, reflexes to flinch if burned, and so on. Hence

Descartes coined the term “bête-machine,” or “animal-machine,” to
describe the mechanically based physiology of animal and human bodies.
Still, Descartes needed some way to reconcile mechanical philosophy with
his Christian faith.[435] The Church held that we have immortal souls while
other animals do not, and the Enlightenment emphasized the divine gift of
human rationality; other animals certainly didn’t seem to be writing
philosophical treatises. Borrowing from Aristotle, Descartes found an
elegant solution: identifying rationality itself with the soul. The twist was
that a soul-brain interface of some kind would be needed for the immaterial
soul to puppet the material body.
To theorize how this might work, Descartes again borrowed from the
classical world, this time a medical authority. Galen (roughly 130–210 CE)
believed the cerebral ventricles were filled with “psychic pneuma,” a
volatile, vaporous substance that he described as “the first instrument of the
soul.”[436] Riffing on this idea, Descartes imagined the body to be, literally, a
hydraulic machine powered by psychic pneuma: “When a rational soul is
present in this machine it will have its principal seat in the brain and will
reside there like the fountaineer, who must be stationed at the tanks to
which the fountain’s pipes return if he wants to initiate, impede, or [...] alter
their movements.”[437]
Clever! But where was this “fountaineer”? Descartes concluded that it must
reside in the pineal gland, a small, pinecone-shaped structure near the center
of the brain. For one thing, it’s near the cerebral ventricles, the supposed
“tanks” or reservoirs of psychic pneuma. More importantly, the pineal gland
is one of the few discrete structures located along the brain’s midline—
meaning we have only one of them. Being indivisible, surely the soul
couldn’t reside in a pair of structures on both the left and right sides of the
brain!

Spoiler alert: the pineal gland’s main job is melatonin production. It helps
regulate the circadian rhythm. It is not the seat of the soul.
Descartes’s mistake was more fundamental than picking the wrong gland.
Some neuroscientists are still seeking an elusive brain region, circuit, or
type of neuron where our consciousness might reside. It’s certainly true that
not all brain regions are created equal; the severity of a stroke depends
critically on which structures it knocks out. However, I think that
attempting to pin down the location of a homunculus, soul, or “self” within
the brain is like trying to locate where the “swing” is in a crewed boat.
This isn’t to say that either phenomenon is unreal or illusory. Swing is
perfectly real, as those who have experienced it can attest. But it is a verb,
not a thing; distributed, not localized; a dynamic process in time, not a static
condition; and relational, not individual. There is nothing supernatural
about it, but neither is it physical, or even objective. It’s functional. It
results in higher performance of the boat, and so has tangible effects in the
world. But it is also subjective, experienced by each of the eight members
of the crew in relation to the others, and to the whole.

Imagine replacing one of the crew members in the boat with a robot. Not
the dumb kind we have in factories today, but one capable of pulling the
oars like a person, hearing, seeing, touching, and using haptic and
audiovisual cues to communicate with the rest of the crew. Could such a
“cyborg crew” achieve swing? I think the answer is a clear “yes,” and, in
fact, given the sophistication of today’s AI models, any remaining
impediment has mainly to do with deficiencies in batteries and motors—
bodies, not “brains.”
This thought experiment is a boat-crew version of one posed by
philosophers David Chalmers and Susan Schneider that we could call the
“brain of Theseus,”[438] by reference to Plutarch’s much older “ship of
Theseus” thought experiment (to stick with the boating theme a little
longer). Theseus, the mythical king and founder of Athens, has a legendary
ship that is preserved by the Athenians for generations. It undergoes
innumerable repairs over the years to keep it in good order. The question is:
once every timber has been replaced, is it still the ship of Theseus?
Now that we understand something about cellular biochemistry, we know
that the question applies literally to us, too, as most of the cells in our
bodies turn over many times throughout our lives, and, even in the longestlived neurons, every atom will get swapped out over time. If we want to
assert the continuity of our own identity, we need to acknowledge that a
“self” is, like swing, a dynamical and computational process, not a specific
set of atoms. And the same is true of a ship!
Let’s follow Chalmers and Schneider in considering the “ship of Theseus”
question for the brain, now with a cyborg twist, as for the rowing crew.
Imagine that a single neuron in your brain is replaced by a computer model
of that neuron. Once more, the greatest problems here are technological, not
conceptual. Thanks to those mid-century experiments on the squid giant
axon (and a great deal of work since), we have excellent computational
models of individual neurons, at least with respect to their fast dynamics.
A complete neuron-machine interface is a much taller order. It would
require not only coupling a computer to all pre- and post-synaptic neurons,
but also the ability to sense and emit a variety of neuromodulatory
chemicals. This is well beyond us today. But let’s set practicalities aside.

The question is: if one of your neurons were replaced by a “robot neuron,”
would you notice?
Of course you wouldn’t, because the brain is robust to anything going awry
with any single neuron. But what if we repeated the procedure for a billion
of your neurons? Or half of them? Or all of them?
The question is unsettling, because it highlights the difficulty we have in
coming to grips with a dynamic, process-oriented, computational,
distributed, and relationship-centric view of the “self.” We are still
Cartesian enough in our thinking to wonder whether—per Schneider’s
description of a hypothetical surgeon replacing your biological neurons
with silicon-based ones—“your consciousness would gradually diminish as
your neurons are replaced, sort of like when you turn down the volume on
your music player. At some point [...] your consciousness just fades out.” Or
perhaps, “your consciousness would remain the same until at some point, it
abruptly ends. In both cases, the result is the same: The lights go out.”
These ideas are—I have no words to put this gently—silly (and I think
Schneider and Chalmers both agree). In physical and computational terms,
a neuron has an inside and an outside, and if the insides were scooped out
and replaced with different machinery that performed the same function—
which is to say, resulted in identical interactions as seen from the outside—
then none of the larger functions in which this neuron plays a part will be
affected. Per the Church-Turing thesis, these functions could be computed
in many equivalent ways, and using many different computational
substrates. That is true at every level of the nested set of relationships, or
functions, that we call “life” or “intelligence.”

Illusion and Reality
Philosopher of mind Daniel Dennett believed that consciousness and the
self are illusions; we’re robots made of robots made of robots, so, per
Dennett, there is no real “there there,” other than as a convenience of
speech.[439] Similarly, for philosopher-neuroscientists Sam Harris and Robert
Sapolsky,[440] free will is an illusion because minds are products of
inexorable physical processes.
We are indeed robots made of robots made of robots, and minds are indeed
based on physical processes. However, my own sense is that “illusion” isn’t

necessarily a helpful word here, because it implies an incorrect assumption,
or at best a polite fiction. While nobody has suggested that we dispense
with this “fiction” altogether, Sapolsky comes close to running off that cliff
when he asserts that, since minds are physical and free will is illusory,
notions like criminal justice, prizes, praise, blame, and moral responsibility
are all invalid and should be abandoned.
In Sapolsky’s defense, it is worthwhile to ask tough questions about our
received notions of justice, reward, and responsibility, especially when
confronted with alternatives that seem more humane, fairer, or lead to better
outcomes. It’s less productive to become nihilistic because “it’s all an
illusion.” That kind of nihilism could also lead us to conclude that tables
and chairs aren’t “real,”[441] because they, too, are mere collections of atoms.
Chapter 2 offers a more pragmatic take on reality, familiar from physics as
well as real life: “reality” is our name for a model with good predictive
power. Or rather, a suite of models. We will always need many, because
every model has a limited domain of validity. It would be awesome to
discover the physicists’ holy grail, a “Theory of Everything” unifying
quantum fields and gravity. But it would tell you nothing about whether
your aunt will like the cake you’re baking for her, your friend will take your
shift at the café, or your kid will get along with the neighbor’s kid. In fact,
unless you’re one of a handful of rarefied physicists, it will inform precisely
nothing in your life.
Good questions to ask about a model, then, are: Does it agree with
observations? Does it make any testable predictions? Who cares about it?
What function does it serve? Where does it break down? Do we have a
better candidate model? Sometimes we do have a better candidate, but, as
with general relativity, it may be disturbing or challenge deep-seated
intuitions. Newtonian physics, which we find a lot more intuitive, follows
from general relativity, but only as an approximation valid in our everyday
world, where spacetime is reasonably flat and objects move far slower than
the speed of light.
That’s not to say that classical physics is an “illusion”; rather, the more
general theory illuminates a wider area. Einstein’s theory shows us when
the Newtonian approximation holds, when it doesn’t, and why. It resolves
apparent contradictions, like the incompatibility of Newtonian physics with

a constant speed of light. In this sense, general relativity actually bolsters
the narrower classical theory by reassuring us that the seeming paradoxes
aren’t cause for concern, and by showing us why, when, and to what degree
we can rely on familiar approximations.
Free will; the unitary, indivisible “self”; and interaction with other unitary
“selves” in the world are the common-sense axioms underpinning
something like a Newtonian model of social life. Theory of mind is that
model. It’s our folk theory—literally. It’s what we use when we predict our
aunt’s tastes, our friend’s willingness to help, or our kid’s friendships. While
powerful and useful in everyday life, theory of mind is also confounding,
even paradoxical, when we try to reconcile it with the physical universe;
hence the trouble Descartes got us into. In the following discussion, we’ll
flesh out a more general theory that will help us better understand our folk
theory—and how it arises, and its conceptual limits.
But let’s keep in mind just how powerful that folk theory is. Will Aunt
Millie like my cake? For a physicist, making such a prediction may seem
like weak tea compared with the extraordinarily precise, quantitative
predictions we expect from physical theories. But it’s not so.

