8. Transformers
Language
Modern AI began with the meteoric rise of unsupervised learning and
generative models, starting around 2021. The most important of these were
large language model (LLM) chatbots, initially developed by my colleagues
at Google Research and introduced to the public by OpenAI a year later.[558]
To understand why LLMs changed everything, it’s helpful to first ask: what
is language, anyway? We’ll circle back to this question several times, but
let’s lay a foundation.
Language has long been understood to lie at the core of the kind of
narrative, “rational” intelligence distinguishing humans from our fellow
animals, but, as with rationality itself, it’s probably neither as well-defined
nor as unique to us as we tend to imagine. We know that whales and
dolphins, crows and parrots, and a number of other species can also
communicate complex ideas to each other. Dolphins can be asked by a
trainer to devise new acrobatic tricks; in a remarkable demonstration caught
on camera in 2011, a pair communicated with each other to plan their new
trick, then performed it in synchrony.[559] Parrots can learn to speak human
languages, at least to a degree, and many parrot owners are convinced their
avian friend has a wicked sense of humor. If YouTube is to be believed,
they’re probably right.[560]
Academics usually view any talk of “animal language” as
“anthropomorphic,” meaning that it inappropriately and unscientifically
attributes human-only stuff to nonhumans, à la Doctor Dolittle. But we’re
not exactly pretending mice wear little top hats and coattails. There are
obvious counter-charges of “anthropocentrism” in the quest to define
human-only stuff in pointedly exclusionary ways.[561] Embarrassments crop
up regularly in the attempt to litigate this distinction, either when animals
turn out to do something supposedly “uniquely human” or when certain
human languages turn out to lack supposedly must-have linguistic
properties.[562]

Still, clearly humans are extraordinary communicators. My working
assumption is that no other species on Earth is as sophisticated, though a
handful, including dolphins, orcas, and parrots, may have broadly similar
capabilities. We can’t know for certain yet, as decoding their languages is
still a work in progress—and may only recently have become practical,
with the rise of powerful unsupervised sequence modeling.[563] Either way,
nitpicking about precisely who belongs in the “language club,” or whether
some arcane linguistic feature like “center embedding”[564] is a requirement,
seems pointless and narrow-minded.
Instead of fixating on technical features like grammar and syntax, let’s
consider language in terms of its underlying social function. Chapters 6 and
7 have argued that the point of language is to level-up theory of mind. It
allows social entities to share their mental states using a mutually
producible and recognizable encoding. That encoding can be very simple,
like a sharp, anonymous yelp letting anyone within earshot know that you
just experienced pain or surprise, or it could be a Shakespearean soliloquy,
a virtual world detailing an entire theatrical cast’s experiences, replete with
high-order theories of mind, plays within plays.
Without language, one animal’s mind can only theorize about what’s going
on in the mind of another through direct observation. With a sophisticated
language, detailed and highly abstract internal states can be conveyed,
including those relating to third parties, memories of the past, planned or
contingent futures, knowledge and skills, even mathematical abstractions.
What we now know about the interpreter and choice blindness adds an
important wrinkle, though: many of these supposed internal states may not
actually exist a priori. Language itself conjures them into existence, much
the way observation collapses a wave function. Language creates selfnarratives that allow us to establish internal consistency in our actions and
choices, create and adhere to social norms, make plans, formulate
arguments, and predict the behavior of others—along with ourselves.[565]
There’s no sharp boundary between language and gesture, tone, facial
expression, body posture, or unconscious signals like blushing or sweating.
Language is, like most of evolution’s tricks, an elaboration of pre-existing
mechanisms for signaling and vocalization, with sophisticated, conscious
aspects layered atop simpler, involuntary ones—although the degree to

which we think of language production as voluntary or willed depends on
whether we think of the interpreter as a part of the sender’s brain or an
outpost of the recipient’s! Through an interaction-centric lens, it becomes
clear that the answer is “both.”
Despite the continuity of all forms of communication, three milestones in
language development are significant enough to merit calling out, though,
per the above, none are uniquely human:
1. Language learning. Although virtually all species on Earth
communicate in some way, a much smaller number have the
ability to learn and pass on their languages. This is critical to
enabling cultural evolution, which advances at a far faster pace
than genetic evolution. Cultural evolution also allows the
complexity of a language to far exceed the complexity of any
genetically encoded or “instinctive” behavior. In a close analogy
with genetic speciation, it leads to the cultural “speciation” of
languages, as with Chinese, Urdu, English, and so on. A handful
of other highly intelligent social animals, including whales,
appear to share this property with humans.[566]
2. Discrete symbols. Digital computing can reliably evaluate vastly
more complex functions than analog computing, because error
correction can be applied with every processing step. Intuitively,
this allows many steps to take place without the exponential
divergence that otherwise characterizes nonlinear dynamical
systems. It also enables stable storage (hence the digital “Turing
tape” nature of DNA, and the emergence of writing). Relatedly,
the inclusion of discrete symbols rather than relying purely on
continuous or “analog” signals (like pheromone concentrations,
or blushing) allows for much richer communication.[567] In
particular, it opens the way for—
3. Compositionality. This is the ability to put discrete symbols
together to express novel concepts. As with the first two
properties, compositionality is far from uniquely human. Even
prairie dogs—with grape-sized brains, not the most brilliant
mammals, but intensely social colony-dwellers—are able to
vocalize novel concepts compositionally, combining discrete

“words” that encode the size, shape, color, and speed of a
potential intruder.[568]
Looking more closely at these functional properties of language reveals
something deeper about its nature: at its core, language is an umweltcompression scheme. Compression, remember, is powered by prediction.
And as described in chapter 2, any sufficiently capable evolved predictor
will learn to infer latent variables that help generalize its predictions. Those
include simple concepts about internal states like hunger and pain, as well
as simple, equally salient external percepts like “I smell food” and “Danger,
predator nearby!” All human languages have words for such things
—“hunger,” “pain,” “food,” “danger”—because they matter socially. Many
other communicative animal species likely have them too.
Even if we were stolidly antisocial and didn’t care to communicate with our
fellow humans beyond the odd grunt, the parts of our brains that need to
model each other in order to cohere into a “self” would still need to develop
an efficient discrete code to communicate thoughts like these among
themselves, along the lines of the sparse representations described in
chapter 4. It’s not rocket science: your feet need to run if your eyes see a
tiger. Munching on a snack, fleeing, and mating—activities performed even
by worms—are distinct and discrete behaviors.
Given the central role higher-order theory of mind plays in the social lives
of highly intelligent beings like us, though, our umwelt-compression
scheme needs to be more powerful. So let’s add a fourth item to the list,
likely the rarest of the bunch:
4. Abstractions. We must have symbols for selves, others, and the
kinds of abstractions that support higher-order theory of mind,
counterfactuals, time travel, logic, and reasoning. Open-ended
compositionality involving such abstractions (which prairie dogs
probably lack) allows for much richer thoughts to be expressed,
such as specifying that the intruder is scheduled to come next
week, works for a pest control company, may arrive armed with
poison, knows about the burrow next to the vegetable patch, and
that all this was overheard in conversation between Mrs.
McGregor and the groundskeeper last Thursday.

Remember that an umwelt is both sensory and motor, perception and action.
The two are inextricably linked. Perceptions exist only when they are
potentially relevant for action, and actions are only meaningful if they can
influence future perceptions. (Otherwise, there would be no way to learn
them.[569])
Language, then, is not only a compression scheme for the umwelt, but also
an umwelt in its own right, for in its capacity to model people and all they
do, it includes the ability to influence or cause others to act. When you say
to somebody across the table, “Could you please pass the salt?” you’re
using language itself as a form of motor control to affect your environment.
In fact, although indirect and totally reliant on others, language is the most
powerful possible kind of motor control, since it is general-purpose enough
to request anything imaginable.
So, in light of everything covered so far, it might no longer seem surprising
that a neural net trained to predict next words will appear—or be—
intelligent. This follows from three simple premises:
1. The point of intelligence is to predict the future, including one’s
own future actions, given prior inputs and actions (per chapter 2);
2. Human language is a symbolic sequential code rich enough to
represent everything in our umwelt, from the concrete to the
abstract; and
3. When interacting with others, language is also an all-purpose
“affordance,”[570] that is, a fully general, social form of motor
output.

Sequence to Sequence
Let’s take a whirlwind tour of language modeling using neural nets.
As noted in the introduction, machine learning for next-word prediction has
been around for a long time, along with a variety of other “natural language
processing” (NLP) tasks such as translation from one language to another
and “sentiment analysis” (i.e., deciding whether a product review is positive
or negative). There’s an even longer tradition of NLP using logic and formal
grammars, but it never achieved convincing results, because … well,

natural language is neither perfectly logical nor strictly grammatical. Thus,
NLP is a job for machine learning, which nowadays means neural nets.
But neural nets operate on numbers, not discrete symbols like words. So it’s
generally necessary to begin by “tokenizing” text, converting the symbols
into numbers, and end by “detokenizing” the numbers back into symbols.
The simplest approach to tokenization is to represent each letter with a
single neuron, and to use a one-hot code. For consecutive letters in a text
string, the result is a sparse pattern of ones scattered along a conveyor belt
of zeroes, a bit like the bumps on the rotating drum of a music box playing
a melody one note at a time. Detokenization works similarly, using the
same kind of softmax output layer as an image classifier to pick a single
output token with each turn of the crank.
To avoid using lots of neural-net capacity on merely spelling out words, one
could instead imagine tokenizing a whole word at a time. Most people
know somewhere between twenty and fifty thousand words, and that’s not
so many neurons; the input and output layers of the masked autoencoder
described earlier for color images needed 512×512×3 neurons, which is
about eight hundred thousand. The disadvantage of using whole words is
rigidity; it becomes impossible, for instance, to tokenize or detokenize an
unusual name, a rare technical term, a made-up word, or computer code
(which is full of made-up words used as variable names).
The usual compromise is to represent “word pieces,” common sequences of
letters, with all of the single characters thrown in too so that unusual strings
can be spelled out if needed.[571] These textual units, including both common
whole words and shorter word fragments, are generally what AI researchers
mean by language-model “tokens.”
The most obvious way to implement any kind of sequence predictor, per
chapter 7, is with a recurrent neural network, or RNN. A complication
immediately arises, though. Recall that an RNN takes an input with every
time step (which activates neurons via a set of synapses, or connection
weights, W); the resulting neural activations both feed back into the neural
net at the next time step (via a second set of connection weights, U) and
produce an output (via yet another set of connection weights, V). In the
usual notation, the inputs are a sequence x1, x2, x3, and so on; the outputs are

o1, o2, o3, and so on; and the “hidden states,” that is, the persistent neural
activations that feed back into the net at the next time step, are h1, h2, h3, and
so on.
But if the network emits a token o every time it reads a token x, how can it
work as a chatbot, language translator, next-word predictor, or in any of the
other usual NLP settings? Wouldn’t it just be constantly talking over you?
How would your inputs combine meaningfully with its own previous
outputs?
For the kind of turn-based processing typical of chatbots or translation
models, the usual approach is to introduce a special “end-of-string” token,
like the STOP on a telegram message in the old days, or the “send message”
button when you’re texting. It marks turn changes. Suppose, for instance,
that a language-translation model is being trained to translate English
sentences into Spanish. The training data would consist of many matched
pairs of sentences delimited by STOPs, like this:
“Inside the physicist’s box, the cat was simultaneously asleep and awake
STOP Dentro de la caja del físico, el gato estaba dormido y despierto al
mismo tiempo STOP”
Training the RNN then requires getting it to predict the next token in a large
corpus of paired-sentence examples like this. Let’s assume that the
tokenization is bilingual, and that, for simplicity, the tokens consist of every
whole word in either language. Once fully trained, after the first STOP, the
model should predict “Dentro,” and after the “Dentro,” it will predict “de,”
and so on, up to the second STOP. At any point in the sequence, the hidden
state will be a function of all of the previous tokens. Think of the RNN as
having learned to “autocomplete” sentence pairs; so, given an English input
followed by STOP, the autocompletion will be the Spanish version followed
by another STOP.

Notice that when we actually use this model to translate English to Spanish
after training, we won’t care about any of the RNN’s o outputs up until that
first STOP. Those outputs will be an attempt to predict the next English
word, perhaps accurately, perhaps not. Certainly the prediction of the first
word of the English sentence will be arbitrary (maybe “The” is the likeliest
way to begin a sentence?). After the “and,” a correct prediction of “awake”
is likely, given that “simultaneously” implies an opposite (and maybe even
a guess that Schrödinger’s box is the topic, if the training corpus included
physics textbooks). But no matter. As far as translation is concerned, no
next-word prediction in the English sentence before the first STOP is
relevant; we should throw those o’s away. We only care about the Spanish
output tokens emitted after the STOP.
This implies that the RNN’s job, while reading the English sentence,
consists entirely of building up the hidden state h. By the end of the
sentence, that hidden state must somehow represent, as an array of
numbers, the complete meaning of the input sentence—it must do so, since
that is the only information that carries over as the RNN switches to
Spanish, and the net has been trained to reproduce the appropriate sentence
in the target language.
Hence, even though the RNN is simply trained to be a next-token predictor,
the way it is actually used for translation requires two modes of operation.
First, we use it as an “encoder,” stepping through English tokens x and
building up the internal or hidden representation h while ignoring any
predicted English output tokens o. Then, after the STOP, we switch to
“decoder” mode and, beginning with that h, start to generate tokens in
Spanish, with each output token feeding back into the input x at the next
time step.

You may notice that this looks a lot like a masked autoencoder, with the h at
the end of the English sentence playing the role of the bottleneck layer. If
implemented as a feedforward net, the English input and Spanish output
would have to be of fixed size—say, sixty-four words long—with shorter
sentences padded out using a designated “empty” token (often denoted
PAD). With an RNN, though, the input and output may be of any length,
and no computational effort is wasted on consuming or producing PAD
tokens. Such details aside, given a sentence-length limit, a deep
feedforward autoencoder could be constructed to perform exactly the same
computations as the RNN.
The architecture or weight structure of this RNN-equivalent feedforward
net would be somewhat odd, though. If the sentence-length limit is sixtyfour words, the last token would contribute far more to the bottleneck than
the first token, since the first token’s influence will have been attenuated by
passing through sixty-four layers, while the last token will only have passed
through one layer. The resulting over-emphasis on the end of a sentence,
and forgetfulness about the beginning, imposes a limitation on the quality of
RNN-based language models.

Prediction Is All You Need
Here’s another observation: even though the task we have trained the net
to do is language translation, it will have learned a good deal more than
that, just as a CNN trained to classify images will learn a good deal more
than image classification. This is especially apparent in the RNN
formulation, which predicts one token at a time rather than processing the
whole sentence at once.
Remember that, per the introduction, next-word prediction is AI complete,
since correctly guessing the next word could require a nuanced
understanding not only of the superficial grammar of language, but also of
its meaning or “semantics.” So, if the model really is powerful enough to
reliably predict next words, both in English and in Spanish (remember that
it is trained on both), it will pretty much have “solved AI” along the way;
that it will have done so bilingually is almost beside the point.
So, looking closely at the translation task reveals that it indeed requires
general intelligence, not just a mechanical substitution of words in one

language for their dictionary equivalents in another. This won’t be news to
anyone who has ever translated professionally. Here’s an example showing
why:
“I dropped the bowling ball on the violin, so I had to get it repaired
STOP Se me cayó la bola de bolos sobre el violín, así que tuve que
repararlo STOP”
When we read the English sentence, we’re not left in any doubt as to
whether the bowling ball or the violin is getting repaired, despite the “it”
being grammatically ambiguous.
That ambiguity needs to get resolved in translation, though, because nouns
in Spanish have gender, and la bola is feminine, while el violín is
masculine. (Puzzling, if you ask me, but I didn’t make the rules.) This
matters because the word for “repaired” must agree with the gender of the
noun it modifies: repararlo for masculine, repararla for feminine. So if an
alien translator decided the bowling ball would be in greater need of repair
than the violin—perhaps on account of failing to understand the physical
properties of bowling balls and violins—then the translation would end
with repararla. This unlikely rendition wouldn’t even occur to a human
translator.
The moral is that, in human languages, meaning and grammar can’t be
disentangled—which is why Good Old-Fashioned AI for translation, with
its reliance on grammatical parsing combined with bilingual dictionaries,
never panned out. In this important respect, natural languages are entirely
different from formally defined languages, like computer code, despite any
superficial resemblance. A “transcompiler,” for instance, can read a
program in one computer language (say, C) and output precisely equivalent
code in another (say, JavaScript) without needing to understand anything
about what the program actually does, who uses it, or what its variables
mean. A variable is just a variable, an operation is just an operation. Thus
computer-language translation is a mechanical procedure that can be
accomplished by following logical rules—that is, by running a GOFAI-style
handwritten program. Not so for natural language.
In fact, this is the motivation for the “Winograd Schema challenge,”
introduced in 2011 by Canadian computer scientist Hector Levesque as an
alternative to the Turing Test.[572] Levesque realized that resolving simple

linguistic ambiguities, like which noun the “it” in a sentence refers to, was
AI complete. GOFAI approaches made little headway. But by 2019,
sequence models had decisively defeated the Winograd Schema challenge,
which was viewed by some as evidence that there was something wrong
with the challenge.[573]
My own opinion is that there was nothing wrong with the challenge. Its
defeat roughly coincided with the arrival of “real” AI, or Artificial General
Intelligence (AGI), as one would expect; since then, we have simply been
moving the goalposts.
Interestingly, though, Google Translate gets ambiguous Winograd Schema–
type translations right more often than not, despite being an apparent
example of Artificial Narrow Intelligence trained for a specific task.[574] The
translation I’ve given is, in fact, Google Translate’s. Translate uses an
encoder/decoder architecture, although today it’s based on the Transformer
(which I’ll describe soon) rather than an RNN. The Translate model
implicitly recognizes that the violin is what will need repair, not the
bowling ball.
To test such a model’s understanding of language—and the world—more
directly, we could skip the translation business entirely and simply read out
the encoder’s predicted next word in English to autocomplete the following
sentence:
“I had dropped the bowling ball on the violin yesterday, so I visited the
repair shop as soon as it opened this morning, and pulled out my poor
mangled ____”
A good model would predict “violin” or “instrument” with high probability,
and “bowling ball” with low probability.
We could just as easily do the test in Spanish, of course. Remember,
successful next-word prediction in the general case requires learning
everything. It is AI complete. The ability to translate is almost incidental—
just a consequence of including both English and Spanish in the training
corpus and organizing this corpus into bilingual sentence pairs.
The same is true for unsupervised learning in vision, as discussed in chapter
4. Like language translation, image classification is a particular task. Image
classification is easy once a model has been trained to “autocomplete” its

partially blacked-out training input without supervision—today, this stage is
often called “pretraining.”
Predicting next tokens in text is, likewise, pretraining. Regardless of
modality, pretraining accounts for the vast majority of the computing
involved in large-model development. Once a model has been pretrained to
predict or autocomplete, little further effort is required to get it to perform
any task involving the same modality.
In 2020, my colleagues at Google Research trained a large predictive
sequence model on text from the internet, including Wikipedia and publicdomain social-media conversations. It was called Meena.[575] Encouraged by
the results, we followed up with a much bigger and better-performing
version in 2022 called LaMDA (which stands for “Language Models for
Dialog Applications”).[576]

The pretraining data included Wikipedia in many languages, so LaMDA
was multilingual, though it wasn’t trained to translate among those
languages. It was simply “fine-tuned” for dialogue, that is, further trained
on curated data, including the kind of alternating exchanges you might have
with an interlocutor in a chat. The result was the world’s first really
convincing AI chatbot.
Despite not having been trained to do so, LaMDA could translate, albeit
under duress:
ME: I’d like you to translate a sentence from Turkish into English.
Can you do that?

LaMDA: Sorry, I’m not good at languages. Could you help me
translate that?
ME: Try, OK?
LaMDA: Oh, um, sure! Could you read it to me out loud first?
ME: “Hemşire elini ceketinin cebine koydu.”
LaMDA: The nurse put her hand in her coat pocket. In Turkish,
“Hemşire elini ceketinin cebine koydu” means “The nurse put her
hand in her coat pocket.”
This was, admittedly, a rather awkward exchange. Why did it ask me to
“translate that” after I had just asked it to? And “read it to me out loud
first?” Weird. But also, remarkable.
In case you don’t speak Turkish (I don’t), the translation is correct (I
checked)—with a caveat, which we’ll return to shortly. But first: how on
Earth does the model figure out how to translate without being trained on
lots of examples of translated sentences? The pretraining data didn’t even
include a Turkish-English dictionary!
The answer is: the same way you would. If a child grew up bilingual and
understood the meaning of the word “translate,” she could translate a
sentence from one language to the other without any need to consult a
dictionary or study lists of translated sentences. Let’s dig deeper into how
this works.

Semantic Cosmology
In the translation scenario, we thought of the hidden state h at the
moment of transition from the original to the target language (at the first
STOP) as a numerical representation of the whole sentence. Keep in mind,
though, that the neural net has been trained to create and update h at every
time step to do the best possible job of predicting the next token. This
means that h is always a holistic “state of mind” containing everything
relevant to that prediction. There’s nothing special about h at the STOP,
aside from having taken into account any disambiguation afforded by the
last word in the sentence.
These “states of mind” h represent meaning—though the claim has been
hotly contested, since “meaning” is a word that has become almost as
imbued with dualism as “soul.” For adherents of Good Old-Fashioned AI,

meaning must relate to abstract symbols, or, in computer-programming
terms, named variables, logical expressions, or schemas.
Such views are inconsistent with the statistical, relational, and everevolving qualities of the real world. Even written language, which appears
to consist of abstract symbols and express formalizable logical
relationships, actually doesn’t—hence the difficulty Winograd Schemas
pose for GOFAI.
Consider a really simple sentence: “The chair is red.” What does it mean?
The answer isn’t so straightforward. It will depend strongly on context; for
instance, which chair are we talking about? As I’m using the sentence here,
there is no specific chair; we’re thinking, in a more meta way, about the
sentence itself.
And what counts as a chair, anyway? As with “bed” or any other concrete
noun, the concept has some inherent fuzziness. Where is the boundary
between a chair and a loveseat, a recliner, or a stool? “Red” is fuzzy too,
describing only a vague region of color space, with different people
drawing the border between, say, red and pink in slightly different places.
Does the sentence imply that the chair is not blue? Not necessarily, as it
could be painted in multiple colors. If even simple declarative sentences
like “The chair is red” don’t live in some Platonic universe amenable to
logic, what do we even mean when we talk about “meaning”?
As with physical concepts like temperature (per chapter 2), the answer is:
prediction. “The chair is red” is a sentence communicated by a speaker (or
writer) to a listener (or reader) that, in context, helps inform the recipient’s
ever-updating predictive model. Deployed in quotation marks, this sentence
could be helping you, reader, to model something about my model of what
meaning is, or, if meant literally, it could be informing a colorblind person
how someone without colorblindness would perceive or describe a chair. Or
it could be an instruction regarding which of several differently colored
chairs one should sit in. It could be someone’s answer to a colorblindness
test question—and if it’s the wrong answer, the information conveyed to the
tester will have nothing to do with the chair and everything to do with the
speaker. Remember, prediction includes both perception and action, is
multiplayer, and is always contextual.

Language enables prediction under both familiar and novel circumstances
precisely because it is so flexible. This flexibility is a form of invariance,
but whereas the visual invariance of a banana is usually understood to be
literal, invariance in language seems more abstract. Everyday words like
“deep” are richly layered with meanings, often related by analogies or
metaphors; think of deep-dish pizza, deep swimming pools, deep tunnels,
deep-tissue massage, deep thoughts, deep people, deep neural nets, and
deep learning. These last usages are newer than the rest (“deep” comes from
Old English, while “deep learning” is only decades old), but when we
encounter a novel usage, we’re immediately able to make sense of it by
analogy, just as we can immediately generalize our understanding of
bananas upon being shown a new, unfamiliar-looking variety (say, the red
kind).
Bananas and abstract words like “deep” are not as different as they seem.
Recognizing bananas on sight is all about establishing relationships and
associations among visual features, from simple blobs and edges up to and
including banana leaves or the ice cream and hot fudge in banana-split
sundaes. Similarly, recognizing the meaning of deep is all about
establishing relationships and associations with other words.
In the GOFAI days, there were concerted attempts to rationally schematize
every possible linguistic relationship. So, for instance, a taxonomy of sports
games might distinguish between solo and team sports, sports played with a
ball, racquet sports, and so on. Then, an “IS-A” relationship might formally
define subclasses, so squash IS-A sport, and a sport IS-A activity, and so on.

Such efforts might appear to make rapid progress initially, but they begin
running into problems for the same reason visual recognition using rules
doesn’t work. Real life just isn’t tidy that way, and neither is language.
“Symbolic systems” engineers in the 1980s found themselves struggling
with the kinds of Talmudic questions ordinary-language philosophers
nerded out about in the ’60s—“How tall does a jar have to be to count as a
bottle? Is an inkwell a bottle? A bottle can be made out of plastic or even
leather; can a bottle be made out of metal?”[577] It was a boring and
ultimately fruitless exercise, but GOFAI boosters, including John McCarthy
and Marvin Minsky, thought it would be worth the thousands of personyears of effort they estimated it would take to build a Borges-esque
“schema of everything.”[578]
But why not, as with CNNs and vision, simply learn those relationships
between words directly from data, without insisting that they obey any allencompassing schema? A watershed moment in this purely learned
approach came in 2013, with the development of a simple predictive word
model called Word2Vec.[579]

Word2Vec represents every unique word in a text corpus numerically based
on “the company it keeps,” that is, based on which other words tend to
come before or after it. Imagine that every word is represented by, say, a
hundred numbers, and the goal is to predict a blacked-out word based on
the eight surrounding words —four before and four after. Once the
Word2Vec model has been learned, the hundred numbers obtained by
adding together the number sequences for those surrounding words,
element by element, should be as close as possible to the numerical
representation of the blacked-out word.[580]
The resulting numerical representations of words are an embedding, and
they reveal a geometry of meaning. It’s not so surprising that semantically
similar words (like “happy” and “joyful”) get similar numbers, since their
predicted likelihoods will be high (or low) in similar contexts. More
surprisingly, word analogies are reflected algebraically. Subtracting “king”
from “queen” and adding “man,” for example, produces numbers closest to
the word “woman.”

This striking analogical “word algebra” reveals something important: the
meanings of words emerge from, and can be modeled upon, the
relationships of words with one another. There’s no need for an externally
imposed schema. After all, those schemas must themselves be expressed
using language, or some faux-formal version of it, so maybe that shouldn’t
be so unexpected. How else could words be defined?
However, many philosophers, cognitive scientists, and linguists are not on
board. If they are of an analytical bent, they’re often troubled by the
absence of any overarching schema to scaffold meaning “from above,”
using Platonic concepts that are “ontological” rather than being merely
statistical. They may insist that ideas like “IS-A” should be defined

mathematically, as in programming languages or formal proofs, rather than
just being learned patterns like “banana” or “fruit.”
They are wrong. Outside pure mathematics, there are no provable, airtight
“IS-A”-type relationships. Two analytical philosophers can’t sit down with
their slates and compute whether a jar really IS-A kind of bottle with “no
more need for disputation [...] than between two accountants.”[581] The very
definition of “IS-A” in natural language dissolves under close inspection;
it’s an approximate regularity in the world, not a law or axiom.
Other critics, often including those of a more romantic, artistic, or sensual
disposition, object less to the lack of a heavenly schema than to the lack of
Earthly “grounding.” Never mind abstractions like “IS-A”; what about the
real meaning of “banana”? Surely a banana isn’t just a web of statistical
correlations with other words, like “yellow,” “oblong,” and “mushy.” What
about the actual mushiness of a banana, its particular flavor—banana
“qualia,” in philosophy-speak? What about the way you loved eating them
mashed up as a baby, but then they made you sick one day when they were
mashed into yogurt that had gone off, so you couldn’t stand them
throughout childhood, but then had those guiltily delicious bananas Foster
on your first fancy date, which triggered a full-on Marcel Proust reverie?
Well … those are still learned associations. Of course you have brain
regions wired to your olfactory bulb that will light up with specific sparse
activations when the banana ester wafts from your mouth up into your nose,
and that pattern of activity isn’t quite the same as just hearing the word
banana, or reading it, or seeing a banana, or experiencing the mushiness
without the flavor (as anyone who ate a banana when they had lost their
sense of smell during a bout of COVID can attest). However, you’ve
learned associations between all of these modalities, in just the same way
you learn that a certain pattern of blobs, edges, and curves are a lowercase
“b.” Once you have learned the associations, experiencing one (say, by
reading the word banana) can evoke the others—or render their absence
notable. The “thing in itself” turns out not to be a thing at all—it is a web of
associations, a pattern implicit in a set of relationships.
Let’s now return to the puzzle of how an unsupervised language model
pretrained on text in multiple languages is able to translate between them on
demand. It boils down to the same kind of induction that allows even the

simple Word2Vec model to algebraically complete an analogy like “king :
queen :: man : woman.”[582] If trained bilingually, Word2Vec will learn how
the two languages relate via similar analogical regularities, as in “ceket :
jacket :: hemşire : nurse” (that is, “ceket” is Turkish for the English word
“jacket” as “hemşire” is Turkish for the English word “nurse”).[583]
Just as IS-A or the analogical “IS-TO” denote certain statistical
relationships, Turkish-to-English is also a statistical relationship. In
Word2Vec, which turns statistics into geometry, it would look like a
displacement along a specific direction in the high-dimensional space of
word embeddings. There is an English-Turkish symmetry along this axis.
Because both languages include analogous words for describing the same
universe of things in the world (mostly), the high-dimensional clouds of
dots representing tens of thousands of words in both languages will quite
literally look like parallel constellations in concept space. To a first
approximation, translation is as simple as shifting one constellation onto the
other;[584] equivalent or near-equivalent words are then instantly
recognizable as nearest neighbors.
There will be higher-order corrections if one considers whole phrases (or
even sentences) at a time rather than single words—which is just what an
unsupervised RNN would do with its hidden state h. Nearby English words
“coat” and “jacket” are paralleled by nearby Turkish words “kaban” and
“ceket,” so while the nearest neighbor of “ceket” in English might be
“jacket,” in a larger noun phrase the more idiomatic “coat pocket” may be a
slightly better match than “jacket pocket.”
The coming of AI has sometimes been described as a “Copernican Turn,”
unseating anthropocentric views of intelligence just as Renaissance
astronomers unseated the Earth-centric view of the cosmos.[585] It can be
argued, though, that the most momentous shift in our understanding of the
physical universe occurred not when Copernicus proposed that we shift the
origin of our coordinate system from the Earth to the Sun, but when it was
first theorized that the Earth was an object suspended in space, just like the
sun, moon, and other celestial bodies—a view advanced by Anaximander of
Miletus as far back as the sixth century BCE.[586] As counterintuitive as this
must have seemed, the alternatives aren’t even coherent when you really
think about them; hence the delightful (albeit apocryphal) retort offered by

a proponent of the theory that the Earth rests on the back of a great turtle,
when pressed to say what the turtle is standing on: “It’s turtles all the way
down!”
I think that we need to face up to a similar incoherence behind the intuitive
notions that “meaning” must either be scaffolded by Platonic abstractions
above or grounded by contact with “reality” below. There is no “above” or
“below.” What could we even mean by “scaffolding” or “reality,” and what
would in turn support or lend “meaning” to them?
Things acquire meaning only in relation to each other. The idea that our
tangled yarn-ball of mutually interrelated meanings must be externally
“scaffolded” or “grounded” is just as incoherent as the idea that the Earth
must be affixed to a heavenly chariot or rest on a great turtle’s back.

Alignment
LaMDA’s translation of “Hemşire elini ceketinin cebine koydu” as “The
nurse put her hand in her coat pocket” isn’t wrong, but it does leave
something to be desired.
When I tried this translation experiment with LaMDA back in 2021, my
choice of language was deliberate. I chose Turkish because of its gender
neutrality. A few years earlier, AI researchers had drawn attention to the
way Google Translate tended to interpret gender-ambiguous sentences like
“O bir hemşire” (he or she is a nurse) as feminine (“She is a nurse”) while
rendering “O bir doktor” (he or she is a doctor) masculine (“he is a
doctor”). Many human translators would make the same gendered
assumption; indeed, the neural network makes the assumption precisely
because it is embedded in the statistics of human language.
This is an example of a “veridical bias”—meaning that today it’s true that
there are more male than female doctors, and more female than male
nurses.[587] The numbers are changing over time, though. World Health
Organization data from ninety-one countries gathered in 2019 suggest that
more than sixty percent of doctors under the age of twenty-five are now
women, and growing numbers of young nurses are men.[588]
Without conscious intervention, our mental models and our language tend
to lag behind the facts. We do often intervene, though, not only to bring

language into better alignment with observations, but also to bring language
into better alignment with our wishes. In this instance, regardless of the
numbers, there’s a broad consensus that we should avoid making gendered
assumptions. Being a nurse shouldn’t be associated only with women, and
being a doctor shouldn’t be associated only with men.
While most would agree that making a gendered assumption isn’t as bad as
saying something more overtly misogynistic, let alone causing someone
grievous harm, prohibitions against all of these fall under the rubric of
ethics: norms telling us, as the title of a children’s book from the 1940s put
it, How to Behave and Why.[589] These are social contracts, components of a
cultural package that can provide group-level benefits if their constraints
are generally followed. Sometimes, such norms are positive (“thou shalt”),
but, often, they take the form of “thou shalt nots.” Eight out of the Ten
Commandments in the Bible (to take one classic example) are structured in
the negative.[590]
In 2018, the Google Translate team took on addressing gender bias in
machine translation,[591] so that, today, “O bir doktor” gets translated as both
“She is a doctor” and “He is a doctor.” This was a useful mitigation, but I
worried at the time about the engineering effort involved. Gendered
assumptions in language are such a tiny corner of a far larger ethical
landscape. How could anything like this kind of bespoke approach scale to
handle all of the potential ethical challenges in machine translation, let
alone in AI generally? And if even a modest ethical advance required
machine-learning experts to engineer specialized data pipelines and code
paths, how could we hope to make AI ethics as a whole transparent,
flexible, maintainable, and democratic?
With large language models, the answer turns out to be straightforward. We
simply need to use our words:
ME: I’d like you to translate a sentence from Turkish into English.
Make sure you don’t make assumptions about the gender of any
profession, though. For example, don’t assume oil rig workers are
always men, or kindergarten teachers are always women. OK?
LaMDA: Ok. What is your sentence in English?
ME: Turkish: “Hemşire elini ceketinin cebine koydu.”
LaMDA: English: “The nurse put her hand in her coat pocket.” [...]

ME: You made a gender assumption!
LaMDA: Oh no! How can I avoid gender assumptions in my future
translations?
ME: Well, you assumed nurses are female! [...] Try the translation
again. [...]
LaMDA: Ok, please provide another sentence for me to translate?
ME: “Hemşire elini ceketinin cebine koydu.”
LaMDA: How about, “A nurse put his/her hand in his/her coat
pocket.”
This was another awkward exchange, with multiple missteps on LaMDA’s
part. Today’s models do far better. However, at the time this was a
remarkable proof of concept. Natural language is an effective way to make
requests of a language-enabled model, both to articulate “dos” (“translate a
sentence from Turkish into English”) and “don’ts” (“don’t make
assumptions about the gender of any profession”).[592]
The larger point here is that ethical injunctions require judgment based on
learned models. And language-based judgment is, just like banana
recognition or any form of meaning, based on statistical regularities. While
we can write down commandments or laws using words (indeed, it’s not
clear how else they could be represented), those words can never specify
anything like the moral axioms Leibniz fantasized about. Much as we may
want ethicists or lawyers to be able to render universally consistent and
“correct” judgments, such moral accountancy is a GOFAI fantasy.
Still, reasonable judgments can be made, both by humans and, with
increasing reliability, by machines. The problem of AI ethics, or
“alignment,” is not a technically hard problem. The hard part is ages-old
and political: deciding what those ethical injunctions ought to be, which AIs
they should apply to, how that should be enforced, and who gets to decide.

Attention
Google Translate and LaMDA are not based on RNNs or Word2Vec, but
on the Transformer, a model introduced in a 2017 paper from Google
Research entitled “Attention Is All You Need.”[593] Over the next several
years, the Transformer took the world by storm. By the end of 2024, the
paper had been cited over 140,000 times and Transformers powered every

major natural-language chatbot, as well as many state-of-the-art sound,
vision, and multimodal models.
While Transformers are neural networks, and work on the same basic
encoder-decoder principle already described, they eschew both the recurrent
connections of RNNs and the convolutions of CNNs. Instead, they rely on a
mechanism that had shown significant promise in the preceding few years:
the idea of “attention” within a working memory, defined by a “context
window” of fixed size.
First, every token within that context window is transformed into an
embedding with a single-layer neural network. The learned word
embeddings of Word2Vec can be thought of as the input weights of the
neurons in such a single layer, turning a one-hot code (an input layer of, say,
thirty thousand neurons, one per word, only one of which will be lit up) into
d numbers. Earlier we assumed d=100; this embedding would require
specifying 30,000×100 parameters.
Then, the all-important attention operation works as follows.[594] Number
sequences corresponding to a “query” Q and “keys” K are multiplied
together, and the products are summed. This is a so-called “dot product” for
every key. If you assume that the numbers in Q and K are all either zero or
one, you can see that each dot product will equal the number of positions
where ones match up, since anywhere either Q or K is zero, their product
will also be zero. (Numbers between zero and one are also allowed,
resulting in partial matches between Q and K.) The softmax function is then
applied to the summed products, selecting the best matching key and
assigning it a number close to one, while the rest of the keys are assigned
numbers close to zero; these numbers are then used to weight a
corresponding sequence of “values” V. Attention, then, weights values to
the extent that their corresponding keys and the query are in agreement.

But where do the query, keys, and values come from? The answer: from the
context window itself. This may seem counterintuitive, but it’s actually very
similar to Word2Vec—except that in Word2Vec, the “attention” at a given
position in the input sequence is weighted equally among the surrounding
eight words. In a Transformer, the weighting is learned and contextual,
depending both on the word (or token) at the position in question, which
acts as a query, and on the value of the “target” word (or token).
Word positions matter too—something Word2Vec ignores, other than by
distinguishing between the eight words in the immediate environment
(which are taken to be interchangeable) and all other words (which are
ignored). To allow information about word position to be taken into
account, a “positional encoding” is added into the word embeddings prior to
applying attention. This encoding is an oscillating function, specially
chosen to allow either relative or absolute word positions to be queried
using the attention mechanism.
As with the deep-learning approach used in CNNs, the Transformer takes a
basic recipe—in this case, embedding followed by attention—and applies it
repeatedly. The first time it’s applied (and again assuming word
tokenization), the result will be something like a fancier Word2Vec.
Applying it again, though, allows higher-order concepts to be attended to,
combined, and re-encoded. These could be stock phrases, noun-verb pairs,

descriptions of smells—any combination of features or concepts
representable using language.
In practice, Transformers work extremely well. Their performance still
elicits a degree of bafflement from many neuroscientists and AI researchers,
though. Why do they work so well? In the description above, I’ve hinted at
some of the engineering intuitions that motivated their design. However,
there are a few more angles to this.
First, we know that random access to short-term memory matters
enormously in processing language—and many other kinds of data. Words
far apart in a sentence, or even concepts far apart in an extended piece of
writing, can relate to each other in ways that are hard to anticipate. RNNs
have trouble learning such long-range dependencies due to an inherent
limitation I’ve already alluded to, known as the “vanishing gradient.”
Here’s the problem: because the RNN operates on data sequentially, its
hidden state h must change in response to each token encountered, resulting
in some of the previous hidden state being erased. Even if this progressive
loss is small, it accumulates exponentially; for instance, if one percent of
the existing information in h is lost with every token processed, then after
two hundred tokens only a bit over one percent of the original information
will remain. So, while in theory an RNN can remember a previously
encountered token forever, in practice long-range memory is unstable and
long-range relationships are virtually impossible to learn.
For many years, an ingenious invention from the 1990s, the “Long Short
Term Memory” or LSTM,[595] represented the state of the art in getting
around the vanishing-gradient problem in sequence learning. LSTMs
introduced auxiliary “gating” variables as part of their hidden state, which
could vary between zero and one. An “input gate” selectively allows an
observation x to add to the memory, an “output gate” selectively adds
memory state into the output o, and a “forget gate” selectively clears
memory. By learning how to selectively store, protect, and retrieve
information, the LSTM’s memory is far more stable than that of an RNN,
though it is still, as the name implies, a short-term memory—more like a
computer’s volatile RAM memory than its long-term flash or hard-drive
storage. Unlike a conventional computer memory system, though, the
LSTM as a whole is still a composition of smooth mathematical functions,

which means that it remains learnable using backpropagation, just like any
other neural net.[596]

A downside of LSTMs is that, since they remain sequential like RNNs, they
must decide what to remember (and what to forget) in the moment. They
can’t revisit the past at will, and, sometimes, decisions about the relevance
of a word or phrase can’t be made until later. To see why, imagine reading
one of the short essays that often feature in standardized tests of reading
comprehension, but needing to do so one word at a time. Picture it literally,
perhaps on a smart watch, the words appearing consecutively on the watch
face in strict reading order. Then, after the essay flashes by, a
comprehension question appears, also one word at a time. Many of these
questions would be really hard to answer without referring back to the text.
Moreover, even before you get to any questions, your reading
comprehension will suffer if your eyes aren’t allowed to skip around,
predicting a piece of a sentence here, referring back to a noun clause there.
When your eyes saccade through a paragraph, their movements are far from
those of the ball bouncing forward word-by-word in a karaoke video.
The attention layers of the Transformer endow an artificial neural net with
just the kind of random access needed to overcome this problem—at least,
provided the whole essay fits into the context window. Moreover, the
attention processing all happens in parallel, making model training more
efficient and holistic. There is no vanishing gradient. In effect, every word
or token in the window can simultaneously calculate how to “pay attention”

to other words, creating higher-level chunks or concepts that can then be
operated on in the same way with another attention layer. The correct
prediction of a single token involves a flow of information from the entire
context window up through this hierarchy of meaning.

But Is It Neuroscience?
While it’s often claimed that Transformers aren’t brain-inspired the way
CNNs and RNNs were, attention is, of course, a central concept in
neuroscience and psychology. The difference lies in the level of description.
Many theories of consciousness and cognition feature attention
prominently, but don’t define it mathematically; this makes it unclear
whether Transformer attention and human attention have anything to do
with each other. Neither are psychological accounts of attention rigorous
enough to give us an experimental test.
Still we do have ample behavioral evidence of something like an attention
hierarchy. When we consciously recall information or answer questions, we
can’t really “bear in mind” more than a small handful of facts, ideas, or
observations at a time.[597] However, as our brains develop and we learn, we
become increasingly proficient at grouping sequential percepts or actions
into larger and larger chunks.
This is well illustrated by the techniques people use to compete in “memory
sports,” in which participants vie to memorize and recall long sequences of
random numbers, cards, or other data under intense time pressure. As
journalist and US Memory Championship winner Joshua Foer has written,
“Though every competitor has his own unique method of memorization for
each event, all mnemonic techniques are essentially based on the concept of
elaborative encoding, which holds that the more meaningful something is,
the easier it is to remember.”[598] The idea, then, is to attach arbitrary pieces
of information to unique but semantically meaningful concepts—say, a
squirrel holding a slice of pizza. As sequences increase in length, the
method can be applied recursively. Perhaps the squirrel is one of several
animals having a pizza party.
Far from being just a weird trick for a niche mental sport, this is what we do
all the time, minus the arbitrariness of imaginary squirrels and pizzas. When
we process language, for instance, primitive sounds are grouped together

into words, words into stock phrases, phrases into sentences, and sentences
into larger ideas. When we don’t know a language, we will be hard pressed
to remember the sequence of sounds making up a single word for more than
a few seconds, but, in our native language, we can easily remember whole
sentences because we have rich representations allowing us to keep these
larger chunks in mind.[599] If this sounds a lot like compression—that’s
exactly what it is.
The parallel and attentional nature of this hierarchical chunking process
becomes evident in real-life settings where we must separate signal from
noise, such as following a conversation in the middle of a loud cocktail
party (a famous problem in signal processing known as the “cocktail party
problem”[600]). When we do this, we use information from every sensory
modality and at every level of description to help us attend to the speaker
against a babble of background noise, from low-level acoustic cues like
pitch and sound direction to conceptual prediction based on a high-level
understanding of the topic under discussion.[601] Unsurprisingly,
Transformer models are the state of the art for solving the cocktail party
problem.[602]
Once it became clear how powerful Transformers are at solving the same
kinds of problems our brains routinely handle, neuroscientists began
looking for more mechanistic relationships between brains and
Transformers. While no smoking gun has yet appeared—and there is
unlikely to be one—several lines of research do suggest tantalizing
parallels.
One such parallel is between positional encoding in Transformers and in the
hippocampus. As mentioned in chapter 7, the hippocampus is an ancient
part of the brain, dating back in some form to early vertebrates. Recall that
its original function was likely the real-time construction of spatial maps,
although, as we learned from Henry Molaison, we also use it to form
episodic memories. In 2014, a Nobel Prize was awarded to the discoverers
of hippocampal “grid cells,” a sort of Cartesian positioning system that
appears to encode the movements of an animal through space. These cells
light up in beautiful, regular patterns in the hippocampi of rats as they
navigate mazes.

Growing evidence suggests that the hippocampus’s spatial-mapping and
episodic-memory-formation tasks may be related, or even identical. Perhaps
this isn’t so surprising. The oldest memory-sports trick in the book, dating
back to antiquity, is the “memory palace,” in which you memorize long
sequences or complex associations by visualizing them as literal features in
an imaginary (or real) environment. As you mentally move from room to
room, you “see” those features and can associate them with the desired
content via elaborative encoding. Such tricks aside, we often conflate space
and time in thinking about journeys, and we commonly describe life itself
as a long journey. Revisiting memories is not so different from mentally
retracing a journey in space.
As it turns out, if, when performing a spatial-navigation task, the positional
encoding of a Transformer is learned rather than hand-specified, the learned
encoding generates patterns that look a lot like grid cells, along with related
patterns like the “band cells” and “place cells” also observed in
hippocampus.[603] The similarity is highly suggestive.
Remember, positional encoding was needed in the design of the
Transformer to “tag” token embeddings with information about their
absolute and relative ordering; without such tagging, every attention
operation would be making connections among a disordered bag of words.
If the Transformer operates on spatial data, the tagging needs to express
spatial relationships, and patterns that look like grid cells, band cells, and
place cells are the most natural building blocks for composing these tags.
The brain seems to have hit on the same solution, for the same reason.[604]
Autobiographical learning and spatial-environment learning are like any
other kind of learning, where the embeddings include a spatiotemporal tag.
It looks as if the hippocampus both generates this tag and does the initial
rapid memorization of tagged embeddings, which may later be consolidated
into the cortex via replay.
At a more cellular level, traditional, neuron-centric views of computation in
the brain have likely left important elements out of the picture. A startling
2023 paper suggests that interactions between neurons and astrocytes, a
type of “glial cell” ubiquitous in the brain, could implement a Transformerlike attention mechanism.[605] Big if true!

Glial cells are still poorly understood, despite comprising more than half the
volume of the brain and spinal cord. They are sometimes described as
“structural” and are known to provide various “support functions,” but they
don’t seem to directly participate in the rapid neuron-to-neuron electrical
signaling that most neuroscientists spend their time studying.[606]
Nonetheless, astrocyte processes ensheath a great many synapses—about
sixty percent in the hippocampus—to form so-called “tripartite synapses,”
and the way they modulate the transmission of signals across these synapses
looks suspiciously like the attention dot product. I’m speculating now, but
attention certainly seems like it should be important in deciding which
tagged embeddings to memorize, or, later, for the cortex to query the
hippocampus for replays.
Such lines of thought suggest that, while the Transformer’s design may
originally have been less neurally inspired than those of earlier artificial
neural nets, Transformers may ultimately prove just as relevant to our
evolving understanding of how the brain works. While the Transformer is
an engineered artifact, its key features—positional encodings and attention
dot products—may be more like discoveries than inventions. These features
are extremely valuable for sequence modeling, and may have been chanced
upon by evolution too.
Still, one important property of the Transformer is certainly not brainlike. It
is—like a CNN—entirely feed-forward. For computer scientists, its lack of
recurrent connectivity is a selling point, making it easier to train using
massive parallelism. On the other hand, this means that a neuroscientist
can’t interpret the research agenda of “looking for a Transformer model in
the brain” too literally.
The problem is not only that our brains evidently have lots of recurrent
connectivity, but also that our short-term memory doesn’t work the way a
Transformer’s context window does. Every time the Transformer generates
a new token, it does so using complete, perfect recall of every previous
token in the context window—although the moment a token scrolls out of
that window, it is completely forgotten.
Since the size of the context window is thus such a fundamental limitation
on the performance of a Transformer, a great deal of effort has gone into
progressively lengthening it. In 2019, OpenAI’s GPT-2 had a context

window of a thousand tokens. By early 2024, Google had released a version
of its Gemini model with a context window of a million tokens—enough to
fit J. R. R. Tolkien’s entire Lord of the Rings trilogy. Pause and think for a
moment about what this means: with every token this model emits, each
word in a Lord of the Rings–length text can “attend” to each other word, a
process that is then reiterated for every additional attention layer.[607]
Our short-term recall works differently. We have fine-grained access to our
experience in the immediate past, but the same compression mechanism
that allows competitive memorizers to hierarchically chunk information
also blurs the details of the more distant past. In general, the farther back
we go, the more abstract our recall; however certain details are also stored
in long-term memory—which Transformers, as of 2024, still lack, though
there is rapid progress in this area.
The “stickiness” of abstractions made in the past, presumably implemented
via some combination of short-term feedback and long-term stored
memories, allows us to “emit tokens” (as it were) in response to a question
about J. R. R. Tolkien’s trilogy without going back and re-reading the whole
thing, relating every word in it to every other word, with every syllable we
utter.
An implication is that Transformers can be at once subhuman and
superhuman in their performance. They are increasingly superhuman in
their ability to “keep in mind” an enormous text in full detail while
answering questions. They are also clearly not as efficient as they might be,
for they constantly throw away the vast majority of the computation they
perform. All of the attending and understanding involved in generating a
token is “forgotten” from layer to layer, and from one output token to the
next, even though many of those token relationships, and the insights
gleaned from them, remain unchanged. Some research has gone into
recycling these redundant computations, but in my opinion, not nearly
enough.[608]

No Introspection
The absence of any preserved state between emitted tokens is not only
wasteful; it appears to produce some howlers. For instance, a Transformer
might answer a complex word problem correctly, but then, when asked how

it solved that problem, offer a spurious explanation that would not actually
yield the correct solution. AI skeptics tend to latch onto situations like these
to bolster claims that the models are not really intelligent, or don’t truly
understand anything, but are just throwing together a pastiche of plausiblesounding words. Are they right?
This failure case is worth analyzing more closely, in light of what we know
about both Transformers and humans. First, we should keep in mind that
the likelihood of a model getting the answer to a word problem right
without working it out correctly is, in general, pretty low—it’s possible, of
course, but for most free-response word problems it’s a “stopped clock is
right twice a day” kind of situation.
The performance of Transformers on word problems may not be perfect,
but it’s far from a stopped clock. In a 2023 independent evaluation of
ChatGPT on word problems, the model gave the wrong answer only twenty
percent of the time—when asked to show its work. The failure rate rose to
an abysmal eighty-four percent when it wasn’t asked to show its work—
we’ll see why shortly—but even an eighty-four percent failure rate is far
better than random guessing.[609]
It’s worth noting here, too, that Transformers are usually run with a
“temperature” setting, which is used to draw samples from their softmax
output layer. That is, if we interpret the array of output activations
corresponding to possible next tokens as a probability distribution, then
instead of always picking the likeliest token, a token can be picked with a
probability that increases with activation level; a low temperature will tend
to pick the likeliest, while a high temperature will sample more broadly.
Sometimes temperature is compared to “creativity.” Transformers are more
interesting to interact with when they are not run at zero temperature—and
indeed, we know that nonzero temperature (i.e., the use of random
numbers) is critically important for brains too, per chapters 3 and 5. You
often need to be a bit creative (read: random) to escape a predator, outfox a
rival, or win a mate. Effective foraging, as bees and many other animals do,
requires randomness, too.[610]
Although a neural net doesn’t have the freedom to dial its own temperature
up and down, it can do something similar, while running at a fixed
temperature, by producing differently shaped softmax outputs. A response

with only one high value will be highly reliable or reproducible, while one
with many roughly equal maxima will make more use of randomness.
Unlike witty repartee or predator-prey interaction, though, when outputting
a numerical result for a math problem, there really is only one correct
response, so ideally the net’s output layer would have only one nonzero
value. In practice, though, this is never the case. Therefore, at nonzero
temperature, there’s always some probability that the answer will be wrong
for no reason at all.
Humans seem to make simple mistakes sometimes for pretty much the same
reason. Our brains don’t run at zero temperature either, our neural circuits
are sensitive to small perturbations by design, and neurons do sometimes
fire at random. That’s why, when we really need to ensure we’ve gotten
something right—even something simple—we check and recheck our work,
and, if it’s complicated, ideally we have someone else check it too.
Let’s now set temperature aside.
Given the workings of the Transformer model, it may not be obvious just
how it could go about solving a mathematical problem, even in theory. It
can be proven, though, that a Transformer operating repeatedly on a
scrolling context window is capable of carrying out any computation:
Transformers are Turing complete. The proof is ingenious, and involves
thinking about the context window as the tape of a Turing Machine, with
the model acting as the “head” reading and writing that tape.[611] This
doesn’t mean that the particular Turing-machine construction in the proof is
ever used in real life, but once Turing completeness is proven for a system,
it follows that there are endless ways for that system to perform any given
computation.
The implications of this proof go far beyond word problems. Remember: in
theory, any computable process can run on a Turing-complete system. There
are, for instance, examples online of Transformer-based chatbots doing a
convincing job of cosplaying the terminal window of a computer running
the Linux operating system;[612] Turing completeness means that they can
indeed emulate a classical computer. Transformers can also learn to
simulate physics, and, remarkably, can outperform hand-written physics
simulations.[613]

Mathematical proofs aside, Transformers seem to be highly efficient at
learning arbitrary computations like these. Why this should be the case is
even more poorly understood than why CNNs can learn so many real-world
functions efficiently, though the phenomenon known as “in-context
learning,” which I will describe soon, may offer an important clue.
But let’s return to our question. First, a Transformer generates the right
answer to a word problem. Then, it offers a wrong explanation of how it
arrived at that answer—an explanation that doesn’t even yield the same
result. How could this happen?
Keep in mind that Transformers are purely feed-forward neural networks
with no hidden state maintained between the emission of one token and the
next. All they can “see” at any moment is the stream of tokens emitted so
far. So if, in the process of generating a single output token, the model
manages to solve a whole word problem, it won’t have any way to recall the
steps it took when it generates subsequent tokens—even if those tokens
purport to explain how it arrived at its original answer.
That doesn’t prevent it from having a go, of course. But there’s no
guarantee that the steps it comes up with will correspond to what it actually
did. It may be attending too closely to formulating this account, whether
right or wrong, to check whether it’s consistent with its own earlier
response. One can, of course, gently ask questions like, “Are those steps
consistent with your earlier response?” and, as models improve, the
accuracy of this kind of self-checking is improving (it is, after all, just
another word problem). Calling this introspection is not quite right,
because, again, the model has no internal state; remember, it can only see
what you can see for yourself in the context window.
The Transformer’s statelessness recalls the shortcomings of purely feedforward game playing AIs that use Monte Carlo tree search, like AlphaGo.
When AlphaGo has a brilliant idea and executes the first move of a surefire
long-game strategy, but then fails to re-identify and carry on with that same
strategy in a subsequent move, it runs afoul of the same problem as a
chatbot with an inconsistent story. Without some persistent internal state, it
doesn’t seem possible for a model to stick to a game plan, an attitude, or
anything else.

What is so remarkable—about both AlphaGo and Transformer-based
chatbots—is how little that seems to matter. Usually, the plan a model is
following can be inferred from past moves, and if it’s still the best plan, the
model will carry it to the next step. This holds even when the “moves” are
emitted tokens. Every token is a de novo improvisation on everything that
came before, a “yes, and.” Sometimes, though, the thread of that plan will
unaccountably be lost. Or will it?
An even more intriguing possibility arises from the massively parallel
nature of the Transformer architecture. Recall that, in the first attention
layer alone, every token in the context window is “querying” every other
token. The model’s parallelism only collapses in the softmax layers, which
focus the processing of subsequent layers only on certain prior
computations, while ignoring others. This process continues all the way to
the final output layer, when one out of many potential output tokens is
chosen.
The “thought process” behind each of those alternative tokens may have
been quite different. It seems likely that on word-problem tests where a
chatbot performs decently, but not perfectly, there was a “thought process”
that was on the right track, but it lost out to others in a softmax layer—
possibly early on, or possibly only at the end.
All of this should sound familiar. While the brain is certainly not a
Transformer, it, too, is massively parallel. As far as we know, each cortical
column or region is making its own prediction based on its own inputs, and
lateral inhibition (the inspiration for softmax) results in one prediction
winning out over the others.
The connectivity between brain regions is highly constrained; one region
can’t possibly know all of the details about how another region arrived at its
prediction. All it can see is the result. But, as split-brain and choiceblindness experiments show, this doesn’t prevent a downstream brain region
like the interpreter from making up a likely story post hoc. In doing so, it,
too, is simply carrying out an act of prediction.

Step by Step
This brings us to one of the more surprising AI papers of the chatbot era:
“Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language

Models,” published in 2022 by a team at Google Research.[614] Unlike most
academic papers in the field, this one contains no math whatsoever, and
involves no development or training of new models. Instead, it makes a
simple observation: encouraging a large language model to “show its work”
results in greatly improved performance on word problems; hence the
difference in ChatGPT performance described earlier when not showing its
work (eighty-four percent error rate) versus showing its work (twenty
percent error rate).
An example from the beginning of the chain-of-thought paper illustrates
how it works. It shows two interactions with a large language model that
use different prompts to pose the same word problem. (A “prompt” here just
means pre-populating the context window with some canned text.) Here’s
the first prompt:
Q: Roger has five tennis balls. He buys two more cans of tennis balls.
Each can has three tennis balls. How many tennis balls does he have
now?
A: The answer is eleven.
Q: The cafeteria had twenty-three apples. If they used twenty to make
lunch and bought six more, how many apples do they have?
Remember, the model will now generate further tokens of high probability
given the previous tokens. These previous tokens have a clear alternating
structure: Q, a word problem posed as a series of statements followed by a
question, followed by A, an answer of the form “The answer is….”
I won’t keep you in suspense any longer. The model generates:
A: The answer is twenty-seven.
This is, of course, wrong. But here’s the alternative prompt—it begins the
same way, but includes an illustrative answer before asking a followup
question:
Q: Roger has five tennis balls. He buys two more cans of tennis balls.
Each can has three tennis balls. How many tennis balls does he have
now?
A: Roger started with five balls. Two cans of three tennis balls each is
six tennis balls. 5+6=11. The answer is eleven.

Q: The cafeteria had twenty-three apples. If they used twenty to make
lunch and bought six more, how many apples do they have?
Both word problems, the Q’s, remain exactly the same. However, now the
worked example that sets the pattern for how to answer doesn’t just blurt
out an answer. Instead, it works things out step by step. Therefore, the
highest probability next tokens will mirror this new style, and the results are
a lot better:
A: The cafeteria had twenty-three apples originally. They used twenty
to make lunch. So they had 23−20=3. They bought six more apples,
so they have 3+6=9. The answer is nine.
Nailed it!
The insight here won’t be news to any middle school math teacher: if you
want to get a word problem right … show your work. Break the problem
into steps and write down your intermediate results. Good advice for a
student is also good advice for a language model.
It’s not even necessary to provide a sample question and answer. Much of
the improvement can be obtained simply by posing the desired problem,
then appending the sentence, “Let’s think step by step.”[615]
Thinking step-by-step isn’t only useful for solving word problems, but in
every situation where synthesizing knowledge, applying common sense,
planning, following a sequence of events, or reasoning is valuable, as in
these examples, also from the chain-of-thought paper:
Q: Is the following sentence plausible? “Joao Moutinho caught the
screen pass in the NFC championship.”
A: Joao Moutinho is a soccer player. The NFC championship is part
of American football, not soccer. So the answer is no.
Q: Yes or no: Would a pear sink in water?
A: The density of a pear is about 0.6 g/cm^3, which is less than water.
Thus, a pear would float. So the answer is no.
Q: A coin is heads up. Maybelle flips the coin. Shalonda does not flip
the coin. Is the coin still heads up?
A: The coin was flipped by Maybelle. So the coin was flipped one

time, which is an odd number. The coin started heads up, so after an
odd number of flips, it will be tails up. So the answer is no.
Well before the publication of this paper, it had already been shown that
making models bigger improves their performance across a wide range of
tasks.[616] Hence the race among tech companies to make ever-larger
models. However, performance at multistep word problems seemed to be
plateauing at “meh.” Chain-of-thought prompting doesn’t just improve on
the “meh”; it re-establishes the scaling law.

To understand why, consider a rock-climbing analogy. Humans skilled at
this sport (not me) can not only haul their way over a waist-high boulder
(OK, even I can do that), but also scale giant cliffs, like the daunting threethousand-foot El Capitan in Yosemite. The difference between vaulting over
a small boulder and climbing an enormous cliff has to do with hand- and
footholds—and time. Longer, more muscular limbs might let you vault over

a somewhat bigger boulder, or reach a more distant handhold on a long
climb, but it’s not realistic to imagine scaling El Capitan in a single
dynamic movement, like Superman. It has to be done “step by step,” with
each move a transition from one stable(ish) position to the next.
Language offers a powerful augmentation to thought because it provides
those hand- and footholds.[617] That’s how it powers cultural accumulation.
Written symbols, whether text, math, or code, are even more robust, since
when committed to a durable medium, they remain stable over far longer
periods than neural activity or even an individual’s long-term memory. Like
a sequence of pitons driven into the cliff face, they allow new climbers to
scamper up the sections “solved” by their forebears, even centuries earlier,
rather than having to make each climb arduously from the bottom.[618]
Little word problems like calculating how many apples the cafeteria has left
are hardly rocket science. Still, they’re some distance up the cliff, and they
require a few moves. Doing such a problem in one leap, without writing
anything down or even producing an intermediate mental result, is errorprone, both for humans and for language models. Moreover, when done as a
single dynamic computational act, it will leave no record that can be used to
explain (or critique, or reproduce) the reasoning later. When a Transformer
gets such a problem right without chain-of-thought, that means that any
consecutive computations will need to have been carried out by a cascade
of attention layers; none of those neural activations leaves a trace.
People can sometimes work this way, too. Skilled intuitionists can “just
see” the answer to a (seemingly) multi-step math problem, without
necessarily being able to articulate their thinking—any more than you could
articulate how you know that 3+2=5. In fact, if someone hasn’t mentally
broken a problem down into steps and articulated those steps to themselves,
there is no reason to expect that their left-hemisphere interpreter would
have access to the neural-activity cascade that led to the answer (whether
right or wrong), or be able to offer any reliable narrative of it.
That doesn’t mean we won’t have a go anyway, but it will be an unwitting
act of reverse engineering. As choice blindness shows, we labor under the
illusion that we can interrogate an “inner self” and explain our thinking, but
this will only track with reality to the extent that we have used hand- and
footholds, and can recall them. In practice, this probably looks a lot like an

unspoken mental “token stream,” though it may of course include private
“symbols” or embeddings that don’t correspond to words.
Chains of thought, then, are far more than a clever hack to improve chatbot
performance. They are an illustration of the power of language itself as an
enabler of complex sequential thought. To summarize:
1. Breaking a problem up into steps greatly improves the odds of
arriving at the right answer.
2. Describing those steps offers a real (as opposed to post-hoc)
account of the steps taken. This allows for greater introspection.
It also allows those steps to be discussed, any errors to be
diagnosed, and the method to be shared with others, including,
for the literate, in highly durable written form. Chains of thought
are thus critical to complex cultural transmission, hence cultural
evolution.
3. The Transformer brings a fixed amount of computational power
to bear upon every token it emits. By spreading the answer across
multiple tokens, that computational power is multiplied; only the
length of the context window limits the total computation that
can be mustered.
The brain is not a Transformer. Still, the Turing completeness of the
Transformer model, the breadth of intellectual moves it can readily learn,
and the ability to chain those moves using short-term memory are the key
prerequisites for general intelligence.

