9. Generality
Single System
A widely cited psychological model for human reasoning posits two
modes of thought in the brain, “System 1” and “System 2.”[619] System 1 is
fast, automatic, effortless, frequent, stereotypic, and unconscious, while
System 2 is slow, effortful, infrequent, logical, calculating, and conscious.
Obvious parallels can be drawn with a chatbot’s one-shot “just give me the
answer” mode of operation, which resembles System 1, and chain-ofthought prompting, which induces the model to work more like System 2.
Researchers have even quantified this parallel by testing large language
models using human psychometric tasks designed to expose System 1’s
cognitive biases. Without chain-of-thought prompting, chatbots tend to use
the same kinds of heuristic shortcuts we do in System 1 mode, whereas with
chain-of-thought, they reason things through, as we do in System 2 mode,
avoiding many logical errors and “cognitive illusions.”[620] These findings
suggest a shared computational basis for the two systems. To put it another
way, perhaps only one system is in play, which can work either in one shot
or in multiple steps.
If so, that would help resolve a longstanding evolutionary puzzle. French
cognitive scientists Hugo Mercier and Dan Sperber have referred to reason
as “an enigma”[621] because it seems so unclear how it could evolve
gradually out of “instinctive” animal behaviors. After all, nonhuman
animals make System 1–style inferences all the time, yet even the cleverest
of them seem far from capable of scaling the kinds of intellectual cliffs
humans do. How, then, could we have evolved the capacity to reason if
System 2 is so different, and so unprecedented?[622]
Mercier and Sperber suggested that a similar kind of mental “module”
could carry out the kinds of inferences associated with both System 1 and
System 2, though when they published The Enigma of Reason in 2018, this
was all quite theoretical. Today, Transformers would seem to implement
precisely such a mechanism. The very same model, trained to do the very
same thing—actively predict the future given the past, including both

information from the outside world and one’s own train of thought—can
behave like either System 1 or System 2.
If an immediate response is called for, the model will do its best, making
use of any learned (or “instinctive”) heuristics in the network, at the price of
being reflexive, vulnerable to biases and “gotchas.” However, with time to
think things through, the same neural net can generate its own intermediate
results, plans, speculations, and counterfactuals, resulting in a potentially
much higher-quality, though also much more effortful, reasoned response.
Taking this hypothesis further, System 1 is “unconscious” for the fairly
obvious reason that there’s no time for a train (or chain) of thought—only
for the transient activity of a neural-activity cascade en route from stimulus
(“Q: …”) to response (“A: …”). By contrast, we are conscious of System 2
processing precisely because all of those intermediate results must go into
the “context window” along with the “prompt”—that is, the input from the
outside world.
Being self-aware is, after all, about having access to your own mental
states, being able to perceive them while knowing that you yourself are
their source, and being able to reason further about them, engaging in acts
of “metacognition” or “thinking about thinking.” In a sense, all System 2 or
chain-of-thought activity is metacognitive, since it involves thinking about
your own thoughts, and doing so with an awareness that they come from
“inside the house.” I’m sweeping the dubious unity of the self under the rug
here, though the very existence of something like a context window, by
virtue of its single-threadedness, may be exactly what produces that
autobiographical sense of a unified self that experiences the world as a
sequence of events in time and is capable of introspective thought.
Our conceit that System 2 is uniquely human, or even peculiar to bigbrained animals, is likely misplaced, though. In fact, ironically, the greatest
advantage of having such a big brain may lie in our ability to do many
things quickly and in parallel, using System 1, that would otherwise require
step-by-step System 2 processing. Recall the tradeoff made by Portia
spiders, who can scale their own (not inconsiderable) intellectual cliffs
simply by taking their time and proceeding in many tiny steps. Presumably,
they use something like chains of thought—and long ones. Their mental
footholds may need to be close together, but they are patient.

Hive Mind
Portia are certainly clever—but they may not be such outliers among
invertebrates. In his 2022 book The Mind of a Bee,[623] zoologist Lars
Chittka draws on decades of bee-cognition research to paint a very different
picture than that of Jean-Henri Fabre, who insisted on the “machine-like
obstinacy” of insects—a claim amplified by Daniel Dennett in referring to
their “mindless mechanicity”[624] and by Douglas Hofstadter in invoking
their “sphexishness” (see chapter 5).
In reality, Fabre, a lifelong close observer of actual bugs, wasn’t nearly as
unequivocal as these later theorizers, cautioning that “the insect is not a
machine, unvarying in the effect of its mechanism; it is allowed a certain
latitude, enabling it to cope with the eventualities of the moment. Anyone
expecting to see [...] incidents [...] unfolding [...] exactly as I have described
will risk disappointment. Special instances occur—they are even numerous
—which are [...] at variance with the general rule.”[625]
This turns out to be true even of the behavior that inspired the word
“sphexish.” As a careful commentator observed in a 2013 reappraisal,
“digger wasps very often do not repeat themselves endlessly when the
cricket test is done. After a few trials many wasps take the cricket into their
burrow without the visit.”[626]
Chittka and colleagues have documented an astonishingly sophisticated
array of behaviors among bees, beyond the common sense not to get stuck
in endless loops. These aren’t just genetic libraries of canned responses,
either; bees can readily learn, generalize, and even, to a degree, reason. A
handful of examples include:
1. Bees can problem solve when building their hives, adapting their
construction and repair techniques to changing circumstances
(including weird ones never encountered in the wild). While they
are born with some innate nest-building capability, they develop
expertise by observing and learning from each other.
2. Bees can be trained to recognize arbitrary shapes and patterns,
and will invest extra time into spotting differences when
incentivized to do so by positive or negative rewards. (They need
to invest time to make a nuanced discrimination because, like

Portia, their small brains are limited to scanning stimuli
sequentially.[627])
3. Bees can generalize choice tasks, for instance associating cues
across different sensory modalities, learning to distinguish novel
symmetric versus asymmetric shapes, and even distinguishing
among human faces (a skill that eludes the one percent or so of
humans with face blindness, or “prosopagnosia”).
4. Bees have a long working memory, which they can use to solve
matching-to-sample tasks (“choose the same one for the reward”
or “choose the different one for the reward”). They can exhibit
self-control, if required in order to obtain a delayed reward, with
delays of six, twelve, twenty-four, or thirty-six seconds.
5. After a bad experience with a camouflaged artificial crab spider,
bees will avoid the fake “flowers” associated with them, though
given sugary incentives inside, they will carefully scan these
suspect flowers from a distance before skittishly alighting on
them.
Neuroscientist Christof Koch has gone as far as to write, “Bees display a
remarkable range of talents—abilities that in a mammal such as a dog we
would associate with consciousness.”[628]
That we have found these properties specifically in bees is likely just a
function of where we have looked. They’re charismatic insects, and
especially easy to study because of their hive-dwelling and nectar-collecting
lifestyle. But we know that jumping spiders and wasps are clever too.[629]
What about dragonflies, praying mantises, and the zillion other bugs we’ve
written off as mindlessly mechanical? It seems likely that quite a few of
these insects are better described as possessors of a scaled-down “rational
soul” than as preprogrammed automata.
In fact, fully instinctual preprogramming is extraordinarily expensive, from
an evolutionary standpoint. It requires that a behavior be hardcoded in the
genome, which is replicated in every cell of an animal’s body. It also
constrains learning to evolutionary timescales, which are painfully slow,
foreclosing any possibility of adapting to local or temporary circumstances.
Bees, by contrast, benefit from impressive feats of learning, despite a
lifespan measured in weeks. Perhaps, for a creature with a brain, learning

just isn’t that hard, and instincts are more of a fallback strategy in nature,
for use only when really needed.
In this light, Mercier and Sperber’s “enigma of reason” no longer seems
enigmatic. Reasoning with a big brain may be what happens when we
predict by crunching away for a while using chain-of-thought and making
greater use of introspection, but this doesn’t make it an unprecedented new
trick, in evolutionary terms. On the contrary, small-brained animals have—
by necessity, and because of their small brains—probably been doing it for
hundreds of millions of years.
Although comparisons between brain sizes and neural-network model sizes
must be taken with a generous helping of salt, it’s worth asking how large a
Transformer model needs to be to reliably exhibit System 2 behaviors using
language. The usual narrative, based on large language model scaling laws,
maintains that one needs billions of parameters, at a minimum, to generate
coherent stories, answer questions, or perform reasoning tasks.
However, in 2023, Microsoft researchers overturned this assumption in a
paper called “TinyStories: How Small Can Language Models Be and Still
Speak Coherent English?”[630] They used a large model to create a corpus of
stories using language typical three- or four-year-olds can understand, then
pretrained small models on this corpus. Surprisingly, models with only ten
million parameters, and only a single attention layer, could reliably
understand and reason about these multi-paragraph stories. Very crudely,
these figures are in the ballpark of a bee brain.[631]
If bees, spiders, and small Transformers can do so much with so few
neurons, what on Earth are we doing with so many? The answer we’ve
already touched upon is parallel processing. A bee must fly over a field of
flowers, attending to one flower at a time. Our massively parallel visual
system, though, allows us to take in the entire field in one glance, and spot
(say) the red ones in a fraction of a second. The way they seem to pop out is
a function not only of a much larger retina, but also of correspondingly
replicated columns of visual cortex, all of which can “look” at the same
time.
Keep in mind that “looking” is an active and predictive process, not just a
feedforward flow of information, so if you are trying to spot red flowers, or
blue ones, or ones of a particular shape, each cortical column knows that,

and will be on that job. If it sees the right kind of flower, it will signal that
vigorously, like a kid raising their hand in class. It will also use lateral
inhibition to try to suppress the less behaviorally relevant responses of
neighboring columns, and “vote” for eye movement to better resolve
anything that looks relevant enough to foveate.
A famous illustration of the active—and thereby selective—quality of
vision involves a short video of a group of students in white or black shirts
throwing and catching a basketball.[632] As an experimental subject, you’re
told to count the number of times someone in a white shirt makes a pass. It
takes some concentration, but it’s not hard to do. At the end of the video,
you’re asked whether you noticed anything strange; most likely, you will
answer “no.” But as it turns out, a person in a gorilla suit made their way
among the ball throwers, stood right in the center, beat their chest, then
walked offscreen. It can be hard to believe this actually happened without
your noticing it, but … no part of your visual cortex was looking for
gorillas, or for “anything strange.” Your cortex was busily counting passes.
Even if a cortical column somewhere raised its hand to say “umm … ,” it
was likely ignored.

While such “inattentional blindness” may cause us to fail to notice the
gorilla, the advantage of massively parallel human vision over more serial
bee vision may seem obvious in a foraging context. After all, finding
flowers in a field seems like a perfect instance of a highly parallelizable
task.
And it is, but not quite in the right way to favor big brains. Consider: each
flower contains only a tiny drop of nectar. You may be able to see them all
at a glance, but you would still need to move your vastly larger than beesized body from one flower to the next to actually harvest them. The energy
in their nectar wouldn’t even cover the cost of movement, let alone the
energetic demands of that glucose-hungry parallel processor between your
ears—which would, incidentally, be idling (or at least not on the foraging
job) most of the time.
Your brain, in other words, is massively overprovisioned for the task. A bee,
being orders of magnitude smaller, harvests a surplus of energy using its

serial approach; its sensory and motor systems are far better matched both
to each other and to fields of flowers.
In the Cretaceous Period (145–66 million years ago), some bees and other
insect species did massively parallelize, but by forming hives rather than by
scaling up their individual brains. The hive reproduces as a unit, and
comprises a superorganism—a classic instance of symbiogenesis.[633] Highly
decentralized organization maintains the right balance between sensory and
motor systems, allowing individual bees to sense and act independently. Yet
they share both the calories harvested and information about where to find
more, using their famous waggle dance. Imagine the hive as a giant
octopus, with each bee like a sucker on the end of an invisible arm that can
extend for miles. As a massively parallel processor and forager, this
superorganism is exquisitely versatile and efficient.
Taking the more centralized approach to scaling intelligence by growing a
bigger individual brain and body provides the comparative advantage of
speed, or, rather, latency. A single body can execute a quick coordinated
movement, with the parallel processing of many neural assemblies “voting”
in a fraction of a second. Compare this with the hours it can take a bee to
make a round trip and dance for her fellow bees. If you’re eating plant
products, a timescale measured in hours is fine. If you’re eating other
animals, you and your prey will enter a cybernetic arms race driven by
smart coordinated action at speed, as described in chapter 3. Moreover,
bigger brains require bigger bodies to carry them around, and bigger bodies
require bigger brains to coordinate their movements, so the amount of
muscle (or meat) available in a single animal also increases as this arms
race escalates. The steaks go up!
Ironically, lightning-quick cybernetic predation is the essence of System 1
thinking. It doesn’t leave time for reflection. (That’s why early to midtwentieth century cybernetic systems endowed only with low-order
prediction were good enough for warfare applications like missile
guidance.) On the other hand, nothing prevents big-brained predators from
using premeditated cunning to plan their attack on unsuspecting prey, as
Portia does, providing an ongoing advantage for System 2 thinking.[634]
And, of course, among highly social big-brained animals—us, most of all—
friendly cooperation, politics, and mating put a special premium on slower

thinking. As anyone knows who has come up with a witty retort long after
the moment for it has passed,[635] speed is relevant in social interactions, but
even rapier-like wit doesn’t need to operate on a timescale measured in
hundredths of a second, as required in an actual swordfight. During
argument, deliberation, bargaining, group planning, teaching, learning, or
mate wooing, taking a few seconds to follow a chain of thought before
opening your mouth is usually a fine idea.
Our combination of fast parallel and slow serial processing is one take on
psychologist Jonathan Haidt’s characterization of people as “90% chimp,
10% bee,”[636] although chimps are themselves quite social, hence capable
slow thinkers. The new element humans bring to the table is a highly
developed sensory-motor modality ideally suited to both internalized and
socially shared chains of thought: the modality of language.

Modalities
It may seem puzzling to refer to language as a modality. From a machinelearning perspective, though, that’s exactly what it is. Chatbots and simpler
models like Word2Vec are trained on text, not on pixels, sounds, or other
sensory signals.
Of course we don’t perceive text directly. We recognize text via other
modalities, including hearing (spoken), vision (written), and even touch
(Braille or finger-writing). In conversation, hearing and vision are often
used in concert, with gestures, facial expressions, and environmental cues
playing important roles, especially during language learning.
Nonetheless, there is also neuroscientific justification for thinking of text as
a sensory modality, albeit an indirect and culturally acquired one. In literate
humans, a specific part of the brain—the “visual word form area” (VWFA),
near the underside of the left temporal lobe—develops to perform reading
tasks, that is, learns to convert visual input into text. High-level neural
activity in this area can then serve as a specialized textual modality for any
other brain region that wires up to the VWFA.
Seen this way, vision is not fundamentally more “real” as a sensory
modality than text. Recall that raw visual input is a hot mess—nothing like
the stable “hallucinated” world you think you see. Using predictive
modeling, the visual system solicits and processes feedback from the eyes

to create a kind of diorama that other parts of the brain can then interrogate.
As far as those regions are concerned, it is this stately diorama, not the raw,
jittery input from the eyes, that comprises the visual umwelt. The additional
processing that renders visual input as text is simply another such
transformation, sifting words out of stabilized images to create a textual
modality.
The VWFA is a remarkable testament to the cortex’s flexibility and
generality. Genes may support or predispose us to develop certain
capabilities via “pre-adaptation,” but it’s not clear how that could be the
case for reading and writing—it’s too recent. Keep in mind that humans
have been around for hundreds of thousands of years, while the first known
writing is only a few thousand years old.
Before objecting that a few thousand years might be enough for an evolved
trait to emerge, consider that even after the invention of writing, literacy
remained confined to a tiny proportion of the human population—
professional scribes, clergy, and ruling elites—until just a few generations
ago. There are good odds that at least some of your great-great-grandparents
were illiterate.
We can only conclude that the VWFA is an ordinary bit of brain that just
happened to be in the right place (in terms of connectivity) at the right time.
In modern, literate humans, it has established a symbiotic functional
relationship with other brain areas, using a generic predictive-learning
procedure to support a valuable culturally evolved trait.[637] Thus, the VWFA
highlights the way highly specialized sensory processing—a new modality,
in effect—can be learned, opening up the space of modalities to high-speed
cultural evolution.
A similar story may apply not just to reading, but even to language itself.
Despite the common refrain among linguists that our brains come with a
built-in “language organ,”[638] it isn’t at all clear that we are genetically preadapted specifically for language, nor has the search for universal
grammatical or syntactic properties shared by all human languages been
successful.[639] Insofar as human genetics support language learning to a
greater degree than in our primate cousins, it seems increasingly likely that
this support consists of a combination of enhanced sequence learning in
general[640] and greater pro-sociality.[641] If so, other manifestations of

sequence learning, especially ones that reinforce sociality, such as dance
and music, may well have predated complex language.[642]
Relative to vision, smell, and other modalities, language has some unique
properties. Whereas ordinary senses are for perceiving the world broadly,
language is purely for sensing each other. It has wonderfully reflexive, selfreferential qualities (hence my ability to write about it in this book, and
your ability to make sense of what I’m writing—I hope). In providing us
with a mind-reading mechanism, language must allow for communication
about any aspect of our umwelt, including our models of ourselves and
others—which necessarily includes a model of every other sensory
modality and motor affordance, both our own and others’.[643] That same
infinite, recursive hall of mirrors described in chapter 5 for internal states
applies to our linguistic models of the external world too.
A 2023 paper entitled “Large Language Models Predict Human Sensory
Judgments Across Six Modalities” nicely illustrates this.[644] The paper’s
authors ask a large language model to estimate the similarity between pairs
of sensory stimuli based on textual descriptions. These modalities include
pitch, loudness, colors, the sounds of consonants, tastes, and musical
timbres, described either in quantitative terms (decibels or Hertz for sounds,
numerical red, green, and blue component values for color) or by name
(“quinine,” “artificial sweetener,” etc. for taste; “cello,” “flute,” etc. for
timbre).

Despite being trained only on text, the model’s responses mirror human
responses to an astonishing degree.[645] As, on reflection, they should: the
goal of pretraining is to predict human responses to any textual question or
prompt. The information needed to make these predictions can be found in
a large enough training corpus, because we talk about pretty much

everything we experience, including all that we perceive, think, and feel—
or at least, everything accessible to the interpreter.

Pure Speech
Despite these arguments, I used to worry that training a large model on
text might be cheating. We only learn how to read and write after mastering
speech; I wasn’t sure a Transformer could learn language without starting
from a transcription—where, in effect, the hard work of turning sound into
symbols had already been done. AudioLM convinced me.
The project began when a team I managed at Google Research developed a
neural net for audio modeling called SEANet, then turned it into an audio
compressor called SoundStream in 2021.[646] SoundStream used a small
Transformer to turn auditory waveforms into token sequences, making use
of the observation that good prediction allows for powerful compression.
Since Transformers were the best predictive models available, and they
hadn’t previously been used to compress raw audio, we were pretty sure
SoundStream would set a new sound compression record. It did.
Then, in 2022, the team created AudioLM by inserting a second, much
beefier Transformer, like those used for large language models, between
SoundStream’s encoder and decoder.[647] They pretrained this large audio
token model on the soundtracks of YouTube videos featuring people
speaking in English.
The results were amazing, and a bit eerie. After pretraining on the
equivalent of about seven years’ worth of YouTube audio, the model could
do a convincing job of replying to simple prompts or questions. In one of
the first exchanges I had with AudioLM, I asked it, “What’s your favorite
sport?” and generated three alternative replies (we were using a nonzero
temperature setting):
“I like baseball!”
“I don’t know? I like football.”
“I play basketball.”
Curiously, all three replies were in children’s voices. On reflection, this
made sense. This was a pretrained model without any fine-tuning or
additional reinforcement learning, so it was strictly in the business of giving

high probability predictions of the future (its response) given the past (my
question). You just don’t ask adults a question like, “What’s your favorite
sport?” It’s a question for kids. So, it responded with a likely answer in a
likely voice. For us humans, predictions must be conditional on our
individual life history, from the physiology of our vocal tract to our school
experiences on sports teams, but a model pretrained on a broad range of
human voices and experiences isn’t constrained in the same way. In its
protean state, the model “is” a broad sample of humanity, not a single
human.
With further improvements to the model architecture, AudioLM, now called
SoundStorm,[648] could stream long replies and continue multi-speaker
dialogues. Two team members prompted it with,
“Where did you go last summer?”
“I went to Greece. It was amazing.”
The model seamlessly improvised a continuation of the conversation,
alternating between perfect renditions of their voices (and yes, the deepfake
potential here was immediately worrying):
“Oh, that’s great. I’ve always wanted to go to Greece. What was your
favorite part?”
“Uh, it’s hard to choose just one favorite part. But … yeah, I really
loved the food. The seafood was especially delicious—”
“Uh huh—”
“—a-and the beaches were incredible.”
“Uh huh—”
“We spent a lot of time swimming … uh, sunbathing, and exploring
the islands.”
“Oh, that sounds like a perfect vacation. I’m so jealous.”
“It was definitely a trip I’ll never forget.”
“I really hope I’ll get to visit someday.”
It wasn’t scintillating dialogue, but it was entirely believable. The nuances
of the voices, their accents and mannerisms, were so perfectly reproduced
that even those of us who know those two team members well weren’t able
to guess which lines were real and which were synthesized. The model
renders breaths, disfluencies, sounds of agreement, people speaking over

each other—in short, all of the features that characterize actual dialogue, as
opposed to the stylized kind you read in novels.
The team eventually made AudioLM multimodal by adding text too,
creating AudioLLM. Just as translation between languages is possible in a
large language model with little or no explicitly translated training data,
only a small amount of transcribed speech was needed to allow AudioLLM
to establish the relationship between speech and text. The correlations
inherent to speech are enough to form internal representations roughly
analogous to phonemes, so in theory (and especially in a language with
sensible spelling, like Spanish) all it would take is a paragraph or so of
sounded-out text to map each letter to a phoneme, much as the Rosetta
Stone sufficed to form a mapping between two written languages. In fact,
given the higher-order correlations and analogies between text and speech,
I’m sure that with enough pretraining data, an AudioLLM-style model
could learn those analogies with no sounded-out text at all.
What was most interesting about the original AudioLM, though, was its
ability to learn and understand language from pure analog sound, without
text or any other modality. The model was given no rules, assumptions, or
symbols. It was a striking refutation of the longstanding hypothesis that
language learning requires genetic preprogramming.
The father of twentieth-century linguistics, Noam Chomsky, has made an
influential pseudo-mathematical “poverty of the stimulus” argument,
asserting that the amount of speech babies are exposed to can’t be nearly
enough for them to learn the grammar of natural language without a strong
statistical prior.[649] Such a strong prior, a “universal grammar” common to
all human languages, would reside within the hypothetical, genetically
preprogrammed “language organ.” GOFAI pairs well with this idea, since it
implies that the way to get a computer to process language—and perhaps to
reason—is to explicitly program in this universal grammar, thus restricting
the role of language learning to the simpler task of locking in the languagespecific “settings.”
Chomsky’s argument was already in trouble before LLMs, for a variety of
reasons.[650] As mentioned earlier, human languages differ in so many ways
that the search for a supposedly universal grammar has been unsuccessful.
Neuroscience, too, has offered little in support of the thesis. The

“interpreter” in the left hemisphere does specialize in language, but like any
other part of cortex, its specialization appears to be a function of its
connectivity, not of any “language organ” fairy dust sprinkled in that
particular spot.
The way babies and children learn language—beginning by paying close
attention to mom or dad, looking where they look or point, pointing in turn,
mimicking sounds, learning to take turns, acquiring a few salient words,
starting to combine them into stock phrases—also seems inconsistent with
the use or acquisition of a formal grammar. Babies are quick and wonderful
learners, but that doesn’t mean that they are little linguists, or scientists, or
any other kind of “ists.”
AudioLM puts a final nail in the coffin of “poverty of the stimulus.” While
all machine learning models have some statistical priors, Transformers are
so generic that they can learn about any kind of sound, including music,
birdsong, or whale song;[651] for that matter, they can learn the crackle of
radio telescope data, or weather patterns, or sequences of pixels in images.
Yet they can learn human language—from how vocal tracts sound, to
grammar, to the meanings of words, to social appropriateness and turntaking, to the nuances of breathing and other non-speech sounds—from
nothing but seven years’ worth of random YouTube audio of people talking.
Before you object that children learn how to speak at an equivalent level in
fewer than seven years, and aren’t constantly listening to speech over that
period, consider how much easier they have it: their learning is scaffolded
by many other sensory modalities, and in the beginning their parents and
siblings repeat the same words over and over in consistent voices, pointing
to familiar things, making eating gestures, and so on. That language can be
learned at all without any of this scaffolding, with no interaction, no
curriculum, and no rewards, is remarkable.
None of this implies that language is entirely arbitrary. It has to begin with
sounds human bodies can easily make and hear, which is already a
significant constraint. It must also be reasonably efficient and not overstrain
our cognitive capacities (e.g., by insisting that a common word be produced
by rapidly clicking the tongue thirty-nine times in a row). Indeed, the
historical record shows clear evidence that languages with gnarly features
tend to get streamlined over time, making them increasingly user-friendly.

[652]

The statistical regularities involved, however, have little to do with
formal grammar and more to do with convenience, along with constraints
on memory, the vocal tract, and the distinguishability of sounds.

Babel Fish
While there is no universal grammar, there certainly are plenty of
statistical relationships between languages—otherwise, the language
translation experiments described in chapter 8 wouldn’t work. Some
correlations stem from human physiology and cognitive constraints, and
some from the common ancestry of languages. Many languages are closely
related, as with the Romance languages, and others more distantly, as with
Indo-European. Possibly, all languages share a common ancestor, though
this remains uncertain.[653]
Onomatopoeia and synesthesia play a part, too. It’s unsurprising that
“meow” and “splash” sound similar in many languages, even when the
words have no common ancestor. Less obviously, quirks of the relationships
between sensory representations in the brain also lead most humans to make
the same choice when deciding how to associate the nonsense words
“bouba” and “kiki” with two shapes, one of which is spiky, and the other
rounded. (Yes, “kiki” is the spiky one.) This classic result in psychology,
dating back to the 1920s, shows how aspects of synesthesia, a seemingly
arbitrary mental association between distinct stimuli of different modalities
that some people profess to experience strongly, have a universal neural
basis.[654] Whether because those associations aren’t as arbitrary as they
seem, or because they are implicitly reflected in human languages,
multimodal large language models reliably exhibit the bouba/kiki effect too.
[655]

Most of all, languages are all related because they are all about us and the
world, and we are all basically the same, and we all live in the same world.
The real universal grammar is actually semantics. I’m fairly certain that, if a
tribe of people were somehow isolated from everyone else at birth and
developed language de novo on their own island, an AudioLM model
pretrained on large enough amounts of their speech and, independently, on
English, would be able to freely translate between the two languages
without any need for a Rosetta Stone.
In The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy,[656] a surprisingly profound satire
beloved by generations of twelve-year-old nerds, British humorist Douglas
Adams describes a “mindbogglingly useful” sci-fi creature, the “Babel
fish.” “Small, yellow, and leech-like,” when you put one in your ear, “you
can instantly understand anything said to you in any form of language.”
Such a technology would indeed be mind-bogglingly useful, even if limited
to the seven thousand or so languages spoken by Earth’s humans today.[657]
For one, language barriers are an enormous impediment to socioeconomic
justice for many of the world’s poor. For instance, in Burkina Faso, a
landlocked West African country, about seventy languages are spoken,
sixty-six of which are indigenous. As of 2024, the literacy rate is about forty
percent. While the government uses French (decolonization dates back only
to 1960), that former imperial language is only spoken by a small minority
of the population.[658]
In such countries, a Babel fish could improve people’s prospects
enormously, giving them access to information, employment, services,

education, and development opportunities that are out of reach today.
Moreover, because a real neural net–powered Babel fish can operate in full
duplex mode, and could even offer tutoring and participate in conversation,
it could aid in the preservation of indigenous cultures and their languages.
Keep in mind that poorer countries have far younger populations and higher
birth rates than more developed countries; as countries become richer, their
birth rates inevitably drop, but due to the time lags in these dynamics, we
should understand that the populations of countries like Burkina Faso,
already numerous, will comprise a far greater proportion of humanity in the
latter part of the twenty-first century than they do today. This is humanity’s
future.[659]
If we begin thinking about humanity as a superorganism, what is at stake
here is the scale, diversity, and cohesion of our collective intelligence.
Without nurturing the diversity of its people and cultures, we reduce the
value each has to offer to the others, and the potential for hybridity, which is
critical to cultural innovation and development. On the other hand, without
scale, collective intelligence is impoverished; it’s difficult for an isolated
population or a backwater to flourish.
There is a sweet spot, where local connectivity (in cultural terms, tradition)
is strong enough to provide real diversity yet there is also enough longerrange connectivity to share knowledge, capability, and resources. The
cortex embodies that balance, with dense connectivity within cortical
columns and long-range wiring to bring the benefits of scale. The abundant
cultural and economic productivity of the Silk Roads may have been
achieved through a similar balance.[660] For many centuries, highly active
trade networks linked dozens of major cities and thousands of smaller
settlements across Eurasia, each with strong and diverse local cultures, yet
also benefiting from scale.
James Evans’s Knowledge Lab at the University of Chicago has found
evidence of the same kind of sweet spot in the more abstract networks of
collaboration among academics. Scientific advances happen when robust,
tightly interconnected research communities are also in contact with each
other, combining local depth with wider hybridity.[661]
Today, we’re simultaneously under- and over-connected. Young people in
places like Burkina Faso remain isolated, while at the same time cultural

and linguistic homogeneity threatens to erase much of the world’s rich
human diversity, just as the genetic monocultures of industrial farming
threaten biodiversity. Linguistically, the problem stems from the fact that
the seven thousand or so languages spoken on Earth follow a frequency
distribution that is, as a statistician would put it, very long-tailed, meaning
that there are a large number of rare categories. The rarest, so-called “low
resource” languages, are so critically endangered that one goes extinct
every few months, with the death of its last living speaker.[662]
While new languages used to differentiate and coalesce at a comparable (or
higher) rate, increasing globalization has upset this balance. As a UNESCO
report put it in 2003, “About ninety-seven percent of the world’s people
speak about four percent of the world’s languages; and conversely, about
ninety-six percent of the world’s languages are spoken by about three
percent of the world’s people [...]. Even languages with many thousands of
speakers are no longer being acquired by children [... and] in most world
regions, about ninety percent of the languages may be replaced by dominant
languages by the end of the twenty-first century.”[663]

This flattening of our cultural and linguistic ecology has accelerated since
the early 2000s, when people began to move online en masse. English
dominates the internet, with just a handful of other languages (not
coincidentally, those associated with the former great empires) comprising
the overwhelming majority of the non-English material. Data centers now
contain orders of magnitude more textual material than existed in the entire
world when the 2003 UNESCO report came out. On the other hand, most
indigenous languages are virtually absent from this vast digital landscape.
With unsupervised sequence models, building a real Babel fish—and more
—has become newly possible. It should not be thought of as a specialized
“product,” since translation is an emergent capability in any model trained
multilingually. A giant, multilingual version of AudioLLM could enable it
to learn languages from field recordings; it could even invent written forms
for languages that lack them. Dialects, accents, and regional variations
could all be learned too. Using AI glasses, you could read Sumerian tablets
or Aramaic manuscripts. A multimodal model could even dub video in real
time, or generate an avatar of you able to instantly render gestures in any of
the world’s sign languages.
The fly in the ointment is that long-tailed language distribution. Given the
vast amount of data pretraining seems to require, how on Earth could a
large model become competent at a regional Burkinabè dialect, let alone a
critically endangered indigenous language known only to a handful of
elders?

Testament
By 2021, my colleagues at Google Research had begun working in earnest
on multilingual large language models, and they noticed something
interesting: learning one language greatly accelerated the subsequent
learning of another. For instance, pretraining on an enormous amount of
English text, then continuing the pretraining on a comparatively tiny
amount of, say, Portuguese produces a competent bilingual model. It may
not be quite as good at Portuguese as at English, but if it were instead
trained monolingually on Portuguese, it would need orders of magnitude
more Portuguese content to reach an equivalent skill level.

This effect is so powerful that beginning with a multilingual model, then
continuing to pretrain using only the text of the New Testament in a novel
language produces a model likely to be capable of rudimentary translation
to or from that novel language.[664] This is especially noteworthy because
Christian missionaries have translated the New Testament into more than
1,600 languages—a pretty good start at working our way down the long
tail.
For better or worse, missionaries have long been the vanguard of
ethnographic linguistics. It takes real commitment for scholars from a rich
country to travel far from home, embed themselves in a foreign culture, and
learn enough of the local language and culture to translate a complex text,
sometimes in the process devising a written form for a language that had
previously only been spoken. Historically, religious faith and a desire to win
converts has often provided the necessary motivation; that’s why the New
Testament is the most widely translated text on Earth.
Today, much of this work is carried out by SIL Global (formerly the
Summer Institute of Linguistics International), an evangelical Christian
nonprofit founded in 1934 and headquartered in Dallas. SIL’s online
database, Ethnologue, is by far the most comprehensive catalog of known
languages, thanks to the organization’s thousands of field linguists
embedded in communities all over the world.
In 1977, Daniel Everett, a recent graduate of the Moody Bible Institute of
Chicago, had signed up to become one of those missionary linguists.
Impressed by his talent, SIL sent him, along with his wife Keren and their
three young children, to learn a language the Institute had failed to crack
after twenty years of study: the language of the Pirahã, an indigenous group
numbering less than a thousand living in the Brazilian rainforest, near the
mouth of the Maici river, a tributary of the Amazon.

Despite the difficulty of the language, Everett eventually succeeded in
learning it, and, in the process, did much to dismantle Chomsky’s armchair
theories about universal grammar. Pirahã lacks “linguistic recursion”—the
ability to nest grammatical structures within each other. So, for example,
there is no Pirahã equivalent to the English phrase “John’s brother’s house.”
According to Chomsky, recursion is what makes languages open-ended,
distinguishing them from the finite communication systems of nonhuman
animals. And indeed, without recursion, a finite vocabulary can only be
used to construct a finite number of valid sentences.[665] The lack of
recursion is not quite as limiting in practice as it may appear; a Pirahã
speaker can break nested ideas up into multiple sentences, as in “John has a
brother. This brother has a house.”
However, Pirahã also lacks several other features common to most
languages, including past and future tenses, conditionals, and numbers.
These gaps aren’t superficial. Monolingual Pirahã people, for instance,
don’t just lack words for numbers, but lack any sense of numerosity, beyond
a qualitative difference between “one” and “more than one.” They can’t do
math at all.[666] Similarly, the lack of tenses and counterfactuals is associated
with a worldview that only credits direct experience. A sentence beginning

“John said that …” doesn’t just pose a translation challenge, but an
epistemic one.
The larger picture here demonstrates that a wide range of cognitive
capacities Chomsky and his followers have assumed to be genetically preprogrammed are not. Numbers and verb tenses are, like reading, social
technologies. Human brains are special not by virtue of having evolved a
specific suite of capabilities, but by virtue of having the flexibility, capacity,
and inclination to be able to learn them, both from our direct sensory
experiences and from others.
As you might imagine, Everett had little luck converting a people who have
no use for what John, or any other first-century evangelist, had to say. With
much effort, Everett managed to translate the Gospel of Mark, but when he
tried to explain that Jesus lived a long time ago, yet he, Everett, still had
Jesus’s words, the reply was, “Well, Dan, how do you have his words if you
have never heard him or seen him?” Taking pity, a Pirahã took Everett aside
to explain, “We don’t want Jesus. But we like you. You can stay with us.
But we don’t want to hear any more about Jesus.”[667]
Everett did stay with them. The wonderful book he wrote three decades
later, Don’t Sleep, There Are Snakes, describes not only the unusual features
of the Pirahã language, but how, instead of winning converts, life among
them ultimately caused him to give up his own faith!

Long Tails
I find it fascinating to consider that the Biblical translation work thousands
of missionaries have done over the years could so efficiently bootstrap
multilingual AI models. With a large AudioLM-type model pretrained on
many spoken languages, recordings of a few dozen hours of conversation
among elders speaking a rare language could likely do the same.[668]
There’s a seeming paradox here. On one hand, improvements to a large
model seem to be subject to diminishing returns as pretraining runs increase
in size—hence AI’s voracious appetite for data. In other words, training on
two hundred billion tokens of web content isn’t twice as good as training on
one hundred billion tokens; it’s only incrementally better. In fact, doubling

the performance of a model requires an exponentially larger amount of data,
as well as an exponential increase in the number of model parameters.[669]
And yet we also see that a miniscule amount of additional data in a new
language can enable a model to go from monolingual to bilingual, which
seems like a doubling of its capability. In fact, if we keep the amount of
novel language content fixed and vary the original amount of pretraining
data, the bilingual results get better as the amount of initial pretraining
increases. That is, the larger and more capable the original model, the better
use it can make of a very limited amount of novel language content. How
can these models simultaneously exhibit logarithmically diminishing
returns to scale, while also seeming to become exponentially faster learners
as they grow? Counterintuitively, the two effects turn out to be closely
related.
Remember that translation emerges as an automatic capability in large
language models because it’s a form of analogy. Specifically, the cloud of
dots representing the embeddings of words or concepts in language A is
paralleled by an almost identically shaped cloud of dots representing all of
the words or concepts in language B; moving from one cloud to the other is
literally a matter of adding or subtracting a constant shift in the embedding
space. The shape of each of those clouds is, in turn, the shape of the human
umwelt, the geometry of everything we know how to talk about.
The symmetry between these clouds—if the model is massively
multilingual, a many-way symmetry—offers powerful opportunities for
generalization, and generalization is what intelligence does. Recall that,
once a convolutional net learns how to see generically, it can easily learn
how a new object looks in one shot, because learning how to see involves
building a generic representation for objects that includes all of the
symmetries arising from rotating any given object around in space, looking
at it from farther away or closer, changing the lighting, and so on. In just the
same way, learning both the universal shape of the human umwelt and the
symmetries between languages allows a new language to be learned in
something approximating one shot—or a single book, like the New
Testament.
Why, then, do we see such diminishing returns to scale in pretraining? We
need to keep in mind here that if we mixed together samples from two very

unequally represented languages, say ninety-nine percent English sentences
and one percent sentences in Wolof (a West African language), we would
see the usual diminishing returns on the combined data. It’s only when we
segregate the Wolof sentences and train on them only after training on the
English, that we see evidence of the accelerated acquisition of Wolof.
In the mixed data, the Wolof sentences would comprise unusually important
training examples with novel content, but the point is that all datasets—
including the sentences purely in English—are mostly repetitive, only
occasionally adding new information. Even in a monolingual dataset, words
and concepts have a long-tail distribution, just like the distribution of
languages themselves.
Long tails like this are a signature of multifractal properties in data: details
have details, and those details have their own even more esoteric details.
Language, and knowledge in general, is multifractal like that. Math may
comprise only one percent of the vast world of things we talk about.
Technical discussion among STEM professionals may comprise only one
percent of the math talk (the rest being dominated by the arithmetic kids do
in class, or basic accounting, or splitting the tab at restaurants). Among
those professionals, one percent of the discussion might be about number
theory. Within number theory, perhaps one percent of the conversation
touches on, say, the Grothendieck–Katz p-curvature conjecture.
Multiplying those four percentages by the eight billion people on Earth
gives eighty readers, if my own grade-school math is right, which seems in
the right ballpark for this particular community of interest. There’s nothing
unique about the Grothendieck–Katz p-curvature conjecture, either; not
everyone is cut out for such esoteric math (I’m not), but lots of people nerd
out on one thing or another. The most elaborate conspiracy theories of flat
earthers, the deep recesses of Pokémon fan fic, and the craftspeople keeping
handmade accordion manufacturing alive also represent fine-grained detail
in humanity’s Multifractal of Everything.
One could draw a cartoon of pretraining as follows. Suppose that, to come
across a novel concept after reading some number of sentences at random,
you have to read one percent more. If you’re a model, that means that the
first hundred sentences you encounter on your very first training iteration
are all likely to contain new stuff. But after reading a couple of hundred

sentences, only one in two adds anything novel. After reading a million
sentences, you’d likely need to read another ten thousand before coming
across something you hadn’t seen before. That’s why learning slows down
—not because it becomes less efficient, but because when sampling at
random, the likelihood of encountering something genuinely novel in the
next piece of data decreases so dramatically as a function of how much you
already know.

In-Context Learning
Companies like Microsoft and Google are now pretraining large models
on a good chunk of the entire Web; social media are increasingly in the mix
too. Some analysts are pointing out that, at this rate, even given the ongoing
exponential growth of digital data, we’ll soon run out.[670]
Critics have deemed this apparently bottomless demand for humangenerated content problematic for conceptual, ethical, and pragmatic
reasons:
1. Pretraining seems very different from the way humans learn, both
emphasizing the inefficiency of today’s approaches to machine
learning and adding fuel to arguments that AI models don’t really
understand anything, but are just giant memorizers. While I’ve
offered a range of evidence that this isn’t so, it’s a constant issue
in AI research; it’s as if no AI test can ever be closed-book,
because the model has read, compressed, and potentially
memorized some approximation of “everything.”
2. Concerns have been raised about the legality and ethics of using
so many peoples’ content this way. Even when legality isn’t at
issue, little of this material was created with the intent for it to
become AI fodder. And once a particular piece of media has been
used in pretraining, it becomes difficult to determine whether and
to what degree it influences the model’s subsequent output.
Especially when AI creates intellectual property or in some other
way produces economic value, this raises questions about what
constitutes “fair use” and when something is unique versus a
“derivative work.”[671]

3. The extreme industrial scale of pretraining, both in terms of data
and computing power, limits the creation of the largest “frontier”
models to the very small number of companies and governments
able to make massive capital investments.[672] On one hand, this
may be a blessing (while it lasts), as it makes prevention of the
most dangerous uses of advanced AI at least possible; it wouldn’t
be if anyone could roll their own. However, the situation raises
concerns about monopoly, unfair competition, and AI diversity.
4. The most profound theoretical difficulty with the pretraining
approach is the way it separates learning from inference—an
unwelcome legacy from the early days of cybernetics. This
means that the model is, in some sense, frozen in time; when one
begins interacting with it, it knows about nothing in the world
that happened after the date the pretraining data were scraped. In
effect, it has total anterograde amnesia.
None of these issues is quite as straightforward as it appears.
Regarding #1, the unnaturalness of pretraining, I suspected for many years
that the backpropagation method universally used to train large models
today, but long known not to be biologically plausible (per chapter 7), was
at fault. Surely, I thought, our brains implement a brilliant learning
algorithm that would greatly improve on backpropagation. Otherwise, how
could any of us have grown from helpless newborns into smartypants
college students in a mere eighteen years, most of which were spent
sleeping, daydreaming, watching inane cartoons, playing 8-bit video games,
avoiding our parents, and smoking weed behind the school dumpster?[673]
Brains may indeed implement some hyper-efficient neural-learning magic,
but it’s increasingly clear that a good deal of the suboptimality in
pretraining lies in a foie gras–like approach to training data. We take as
much of the Web as we can grab, grind it up into paste, and force it down
the neural net’s gullet, in random order, with no regard for curriculum,
relevance, redundancy, context, or agency on the part of the model itself.
(Apologies if this just put you off dinner.)
Indeed, the contrast between the usual diminishing returns to scale on
training data and the accelerated learning we see with continued pretraining
on novel data (as with the Wolof example) is telling. It suggests that much

of today’s pretraining is redundant. The bigger our models get, the more
wasteful the random-sampling approach becomes. In short, the problem
may be in the teaching more than in the learning.
Regarding #2, while AI supercharges the “fair use” debate due to its speed
and scale, the question of originality has been hotly contested for decades,
as it’s not specific to AI; all creative work is necessarily a product of one’s
life experience, which includes everything a person has ever seen, heard,
touched, smelled, tasted, read … and despite any self-serving story our
interpreter may spin, we are often unaware of our influences, or the degree
to which we’ve covered our tracks via mutation and recombination,
otherwise known as “originality.”
In one famous case, George Harrison, post-Beatles, released his first solo
hit in 1970, “My Sweet Lord,” a catchy song calling for an end to religious
sectarianism. But, as it turned out, “My Sweet Lord” was extremely
reminiscent of Ronnie Mack’s chart-topping 1963 gospel hit “He’s So
Fine.” Harrison had of course heard this song, but was unaware that he was
copying it, almost note for note. What followed has been characterized as
“without question, one of the longest running legal battles ever to be
litigated in [the United States].”[674]
If we could figure out how to train models with far less data, more like us, it
would go a long way toward addressing issues #1–3. Curating the training
data would become more practical, ensuring the answers to test questions
aren’t included, avoiding indiscriminate scraping of living artists’ work, and
(for better and worse) opening up the ability to create AI models from
scratch to a broader public.
The real key, I believe, lies in #4: erasing the distinction between learning
and inference. We know this is possible, not only because brains exhibit no
such distinction, but because of a series of findings that shed light on
fundamental properties of sequence learning and help clarify why
Transformers work as well as they do.
In 2020, OpenAI announced their GPT-3 language model, the predecessor
to GPT-3.5, which would power ChatGPT. The announcement came in the
form of a paper with a curious title: “Language Models Are Few-Shot
Learners.”[675] The learning in question was mysterious, and, it seemed at
the time, unrelated to learning in the usual sense, involving minimizing

error through backpropagation. The authors were pointing out that during
inference—that is, normal operation after training—language models still
appear to be able to learn, and to be able to do so with extraordinary
efficiency, despite no changes to the neural-network parameters.
Specifically, they defined “few-shot learning” as giving the model a few
examples of a task in the context window and then asking it to do another
such task; “one-shot learning” involved only a single example and “zeroshot learning” included no examples, only describing the task to be done.
We’ve already encountered several instances of such situations. Asking a
model that wasn’t pretrained or fine-tuned on translation tasks to do
translation is, for example, a zero-shot learning task. So is asking for chainof-thought reasoning. Or, for an example that definitely didn’t come up
anywhere in the pretraining, consider the following instance of zero-shot
learning:
“‘Equiantonyms’ are pairs of words that are opposite of each other
and have the same number of letters. What are some
‘equiantonyms’?”
To be clear, equiantonyms aren’t a thing, or at least, they weren’t until my
co-author Peter Norvig and I concocted this query in 2023 to illustrate zeroshot learning.[676] This isn’t a particularly easy task; as of 2024, none of the
mainstream chatbots reliably succeed, though with some prodding, Gemini
Advanced manages to come up with “give/take,” adding cheerily that it is
“determined to find more.”
Can we really call this learning if the model parameters remain unchanged?
It’s straightforward to perform learning by ongoing unsupervised or
supervised backpropagation (i.e., fine-tuning) to cause a baseline model to
improve at known tasks like translation, or to perform novel tasks like
coming up with equiantonyms. We could then compare baseline model
performance with the performance of these refined models. Performance
has to be measured by prompting, that is, by asking “What are some
‘equiantonyms’?” with no preamble. Presumably, the baseline would
already be OK at translation, though ongoing training would improve it;
unless the model makes a very lucky guess as to the meaning of
equiantonym, its baseline performance at that novel task would be zero,
though, with training, it will improve. Similarly, we could draw a

comparison between the baseline with no preamble and the baseline with
zero-, one-, or few-shot prompts. All of these interventions result in
improvements over the baseline. So, despite their fixed parameters, the
prompted models seem like they are learning!
The GPT-3 authors pointed out that this ability to learn on the fly from the
prompt itself—“in-context learning”—is, like math, reasoning, or any other
model capability, a skill that improves with scale; bigger models are better
at it. A 2023 paper from researchers on my own team finally began to
clarify how it works.[677] They showed that a simplified Transformer with a
single attention layer could, given a toy problem and a specially configured
array of parameters, perform the mathematical equivalent of a single
backpropagation step on the contents of the context window. In other
words, in this somewhat contrived setting, the model is able to respond to
its prompt as if it had learned from that prompt before predicting the next
token. Adding a second attention layer makes it possible for the model to
effectively take two backpropagation steps, a third layer allows a third step,
and so on.
If this result had only held given hand-specified parameters, it would have
been no more than a curiosity; indeed, it had recently been discovered that a
Transformer is Turing complete, so it could, in theory, perform any
computation on its context window, given the right parameters.[678]
However, as it turns out, ordinary pretraining results in precisely the same
in-context learning behavior as in the hand-specified case. Pretrained
transformers, in other words, really do learn to learn.
As of 2024, learning in-context isn’t yet fully solved, because although
Transformers do it automatically, they don’t remember anything they’ve
learned once the “training” material scrolls out of the context window. The
missing machinery may involve something like a hippocampus, and
perhaps a sleep cycle for consolidating knowledge and memories.
Regardless, in-context learning is important, both theoretically and
practically. Working through its mechanics demystifies some of the
Transformer’s more surprising capabilities. It reveals a unity between
learning and prediction that makes sense, when considered carefully. After
all, prediction always involves modeling a changing environment (unless
you’re in an unchanging Dark Room); learning is nothing more than

prediction over long timescales. Over short timescales, and especially when
what is learned is rapidly forgotten, we often call it “adaptation.”[679]
An important, related theoretical point concerns the difference between
cause and correlation. One of the criticisms often leveled against machine
learning is that, since it usually involves passive learning (as with
pretraining), it can only learn correlations, not causes.[680] According to this
critique, it’s not possible for a passively trained AI model to know that X
causes Y, but only that X and Y are correlated in the training data. Living
things like us, on the other hand, can easily learn causation by doing
experiments. Perhaps when your cat, as an active learner, uses her paw to
blithely push a vase off a high shelf, she’s only experimenting to see if,
indeed, pushing it that way will cause it to fall and shatter.
It’s true that when experimentation is possible, it offers a powerful way to
test causation. However, the presumption that causality (technically,
“entailment”) can’t be inferred from passive observation, and in particular
by pretrained language models, has been proven wrong.[681] It’s not
necessarily easy, nor is it always possible, but it can be done. Indeed, there’s
no shortage of researchers who study systems that they can’t causally
experiment on—astronomers and macroeconomists, for example. In other
cases experimentation is ethically prohibited, as in some areas of social
science and medicine. These researchers must rely on “natural
experiments,” that is, on observations that strongly imply causal
relationships. Such observations can never entirely prove causation, but,
then again, neither can an experiment. (Perhaps the cat was just adding
another trial, to lower the uncertainty in her causal model. Yep—this vase
shattered when it fell, too. Right. Again.)
Historically, the claim that machine learning only learns correlations, not
causes, gained currency during the CNN era, in the 2010s. Since most
CNNs did not operate over temporal sequences, but merely classified
isolated stimuli, it was hard to see how they could learn anything other than
correlations among those stimuli. Nvidia’s self-driving car prototype
DAVE-2, for instance,[682] learned through supervision to associate being
left of the centerline of the lane with a “steer right” output, and being right
of the centerline with “steer left,” but it would be a stretch to claim that the
model understood that those steering actions would subsequently cause

those centerlines to be closer to the middle. They could just as well have
done the opposite, or nothing. Indeed, DAVE-2 had no internal
representation of “subsequently.” If you shuffled all of the frames in a
driving video, its per-frame outputs would remain the same, and, indeed,
during training the frames are shuffled randomly.
Learning to predict changes everything, though. Specifically, an
autoregressive sequence model trained on the same task would learn the
effect on subsequent frames of steering left or right, which implies that it
would learn, at least within the limits of its umwelt, what steering does. It
would be able to use that understanding to follow through with a steering
correction even if the forward-facing camera were briefly obscured. It
would even be able to simulate counterfactuals—how the view would
change if it were to steer left versus right. Ordinary, passive pretraining,
moreover, would suffice to learn these causal relationships. There’s nothing
magical about learning causality; it simply requires modeling time
sequentially.
But let’s return to the four problems described earlier, and how in-context
learning can help overcome them. If Transformers learn how to learn, they
could teach themselves, or each other, just as we do. They could ask for or
look up information, or, in some circumstances, even perform experiments
to learn.[683] This kind of active learning, integrated into agential behavior,
would be vastly more efficient than the passive random sampling used in
today’s pretraining. Learning could be curricular, beginning with children’s
books—which, as shown by TinyStories,[684] needn’t require massive
amounts of material. Then, having learned to learn basic human concepts
and language, an AI could progress to the Young Adult shelf, and on from
there. Just as we do.
Each learning-capable AI agent could specialize by learning whatever fields
are most useful in its particular context, doing so in an individual,
experiential way. If a given agent is interacting with the eighty nerdiest
number theorists on the planet, its learning will eventually be focused on a
very specific corner of the Multifractal of Everything—a corner that would
take gargantuan amounts of computing power to resolve adequately with
random sampling. As a bonus, we’d have a true diversity of agents
interacting with us socially, rather than the monolithic, generic, and nonspecialized corporate models representing the state of the art in 2024.

The burning question is: would those individuated models be like people?
And what, if anything, would it be like to be one of them?

Mary’s Room
In 1982, Australian philosopher and self-declared “qualia freak” Frank
Jackson posed a famous thought experiment, the “Knowledge Argument,”
now more commonly known as “Mary’s Room.”[685] It went like this:
Mary is a brilliant scientist who is, for whatever reason, forced to
investigate the world from a black-and-white room via a black-andwhite television monitor. She specializes in the neurophysiology of
vision and acquires [...] all the physical information there is to obtain
about what goes on when we see ripe tomatoes, or the sky, and use
terms like red, blue, and so on. She discovers [...] just which wavelength combinations from the sky stimulate the retina, and exactly
how this produces via the central nervous system the contraction of
the vocal chords and expulsion of air from the lungs that results in the
uttering of the sentence “The sky is blue.” [...] What will happen
when Mary is released from her black-and-white room or is given a
color television monitor? Will she learn anything or not? It seems just
obvious that she will learn something about the world and our visual
experience of it. But then it is inescapable that her previous
knowledge was incomplete. But she had all the physical information.
Ergo there is more to have than that, and Physicalism is false.
Today, of course, language models are Mary, so the Knowledge Argument
has been getting a fresh airing.
As powerful as Jackson’s fable sounds, it is, like so many philosophical
arguments, rooted in storytelling and folk intuition. The “ergo” ties a bow
around a logical syllogism, but none of that syllogism’s predicates are
unambiguously true or false, as they would have to be in a mathematical
proof … and we’re in territory where our folk intuitions can lead us astray.
[686]
So, let’s update those intuitions by bringing to bear what we now know
about perception and experience, which is a good deal more than anyone
knew in 1982.
As of this writing, nobody has yet, to my knowledge, hooked up an
artificial nose or taste buds to a language model, though I’m sure it will

happen soon enough. Being able to physically smell isn’t essential for a
model to be able to “get” smell, though. Remember, when COVID causes
you to temporarily lose your sense of smell, or you just have a stuffed-up
nose, you don’t suddenly become a person for whom the smell of bananas
ceases to exist. You are still a smelling being; smells are still a part of your
umwelt, just as vision is still part of your umwelt when your eyes happen to
be closed.
This is because, fundamentally, smell, and all other modalities, are
experienced mentally. They are models. You have a sense of smell because
regions of your brain have learned how to model smell; your nose merely
prompts characteristic neural activity patterns in those regions. The same
regions will also activate, albeit perhaps to a lesser degree, when you
imagine a smell. Similarly, your eyes are not your sense of vision; rather,
they merely provide error-correction signals to keep your visual cortex’s
“controlled hallucination” reasonably well aligned with the world out there.
There’s ample evidence that perception and imagination share a common
neural basis. Damage to one hemisphere’s visual cortex, for example,
doesn’t just prevent you from being able to see things in the opposite visual
hemifield, but even from knowing that the opposite hemifield exists, or
being able to imagine what might be in it.[687]
Damage to the eyes, paradoxically, can have exactly the opposite effect. In
1760, Swiss naturalist Charles Bonnet described the complex visual
hallucinations experienced by his grandfather, who suffered from severe
cataracts. The older Bonnet began to see nonexistent horses, people,
carriages, buildings, tapestries, and other shapes; Charles, too, had weak
vision, and as it progressively worsened he began to experience similar
hallucinations.[688] These symptoms, now often called Charles Bonnet
Syndrome, are common in people going blind.
Even without organic damage, anyone in total darkness for an extended
period can experience similar hallucinations, a phenomenon known as
“prisoner’s cinema.” This is exactly what one would expect to happen when
the visual cortex’s hallucinations remain active but float free of their
moorings, unconstrained by error-correction signals from the eyes.
Memory uses the same neural machinery as perception and imagination.
Just as the sight of a banana, or the smell of its distinctive ester in your

nose, will trigger the controlled hallucination “banana” in your brain, the
word banana, or the memory of eating one, can do the same, albeit (unless
you’re Marcel Proust) less intensely. Any of these banana-related activity
patterns may also be tagged with something like a positional encoding, as
described in chapter 8, to let you know that this banana experience isn’t
happening here and now.
Tellingly, a damaged or missing hippocampus, as in Henry Molaison’s case,
will not only impair the formation of new memories, but will also impair
the ability to imagine new experiences.[689] This is consistent with the
speculation that imagining a future experience requires pairing known
concept embeddings with new positional encodings, perhaps generated in
the hippocampus, to represent a future or counterfactual time or place.
In light of the preceding, the question of whether a language model has
perceptual “qualia” seems to have little to do with sense organs, and much
to do with the model itself. So many food, wine, and coffee nerds have
written in exhaustive (and exhausting) detail about their olfactory
experiences that the relevant perceptual map is already latent in large
language models, as the “six modalities” paper shows. In effect, large
language models do have noses: ours. Those models just happen to be
hooked up to noses via textual token embeddings rather than neural
pathways.
However, we also have to acknowledge that “qualia” questions cannot be
answered objectively. We have to form a model of the model to decide
whether it “gets” smell, or color, or anything else. So, we once again have a
relational or Turing Test sort of question, with no perspective-independent
“view from nowhere.”
AI and cognitive-science researchers struggled over this issue in a debate
about whether a Transformer could effectively build a world model of
Othello, a simple Go-like board game played on an 8×8 board.[690] In 2022,
a group of researchers pretrained a small-ish Transformer using transcripts
of valid Othello games. Sure enough, the model learned how to play valid
moves, in effect “autocompleting” games.[691]
However, the question the researchers were trying to answer wasn’t “can
the model play,” but rather, “has the model learned an internal
representation of the board?” It can easily be argued that without such a

representation, it would be hard to know which moves are valid, but the
goal was to address critics who claimed that Transformers work by rote
memorization rather than by actually modeling the world, and the world of
Othello—consisting of nothing but the state of an 8×8 board—seemed
simple and objective enough to put the question to rest.
But how can we tell whether such a world model exists, somewhere among
the zillions of neural activations in the Transformer? Ironically, that’s a job
that only machine learning can solve. So, the researchers needed to build a
second model, which they called a “probe,” to learn how to map the
Transformer’s neural activity to an 8×8 pixel image of the board. When
their probe was too simple—just linear decoding—it didn’t perform very
well; but when it was made a bit more sophisticated with the addition of an
extra layer, it did work. The trouble is that, if the probe is trained to map
neural activations (which include information about the entire game) to the
correct board state, then the researchers could effectively have been using
supervised learning to train the probe to learn a world model! And so the
debate has gone round and round.[692]
It takes a model to know a model. Similarly, when brain regions are
connected to each other, they are each acting as a “probe” of the others,
although no region is connected to anything like the perspectiveindependent ground truth of an 8×8 board.
Plenty of explicitly multimodal generative models have been made in the
2020s, connecting artificial “brain regions” that specialize in different
modalities, most typically vision and language. The details vary, but these
“regions” are often pretrained independently on large volumes of unimodal
data (e.g., images for one, text for the other) and subsequently fine-tuned
jointly with only a limited amount of multimodal data (such as captioned
images).[693] This works for the same reason a masked autoencoder can learn
labels with a minimum of fine-tuning after it has been pretrained.
The resulting models pretty clearly “get” how language and vision relate.
They can describe scenes, much as a person might, and when run in the
opposite direction—encoding language, then decoding pixels—they can
generate imagery or video based on a textual prompt. In 2023, the quality of
this generated content began to seriously alarm some artists, designers, and
film professionals.

It’s difficult, in light of what multimodal Transformers can do, to continue
making the case that there’s any intrinsic barrier to understanding in a
model because it lacks one sensory modality or another. We would never
make such an argument for a person, and, of course, people do exist who
lack one or more sensory modalities. Everybody knows about blindness and
deafness, but there are also people who can’t taste or smell, and who have
interoceptive deficits.[694] Someone recently tried to make the case to me
that everything else might be compromised, but being human requires, if
nothing else, touch. I, too, feel that this modality is special, but that doesn’t
make it indispensable. Although rare, there are people who can’t feel touch;
it’s an extreme (and dangerous) form of a condition known as
“hypoesthesia.”
No modality is magical, or is perceived directly by your homunculus—
because, and this cannot be said too often, there is no homunculus. Due to
differing innervation, different parts of the brain specialize in processing
different modalities, and brain lesions or developmental anomalies can
occur anywhere, with the potential to compromise or destroy any modality.
We’re remarkably robust to these deficits because our brain regions are not
only connected to the outside world through their various specialized
“ports” but also to each other, and they are constantly trying to predict all of
their inputs—both from the world and from each other. As mentioned in
chapter 5, blind people who have learned to echolocate using “click sonar”
report being able to see; moreover, they use their visual cortex to do so.[695]
Of course, their vision isn’t like that of most sighted people: they can’t
distinguish color, their spatial resolution is low, and they’re best at resolving
objects in motion, which produce Doppler effects. Still, visual cortex, the
brain area we normally define in terms of the primary sensory input it’s
supposed to process—signals from the eyes—is somehow carrying out its
usual function without that input! How can that be?
Sight in humans is highly evolved, so there’s likely some degree of
specialization in the visual cortex that makes it especially well-suited for
visual processing. The specific processing needed to turn sound into an
awareness of objects and surfaces in three-dimensional space has little in
common with the processing of retinal inputs. Still, cortex is cortex.

What the visual cortices of blind and sighted people have in common is
their connectivity with the rest of the brain. Visual cortex, in other words, is
“visual” mainly by virtue of being connected the right way to perform the
role of vision, that is, to predict the presence and properties of objects and
surfaces in the space around you. Indeed, per chapter 7, what is
“downstream” is at least as important in establishing its function as the
retinas “upstream.” So if this well-placed cortical area lacks its usual
sensory outpost in the eyes, it will do its best to make the same predictions
using other inputs, including those from auditory cortex. In fact, even in
sighted people the visual cortex appears to make use of auditory inputs (and
vice versa)—which is unsurprising, since there are so many circumstances
under which visual and auditory stimuli are mutually predictive, as with a
tennis racket hitting a ball.[696]
So what can we conclude about Mary? Perhaps not much. Depending on the
details of her cortical development, she might be wowed by seeing red for
the first time, even if she understood it intellectually, just as we can be
wowed by seeing the Grand Canyon for the first time, despite having read
in a guidebook exactly how deep it is. On the other hand, if the
understanding was purely intellectual—meaning sufficient to think her way,
step by step, to predicting someone’s response to redness, but not supported
by the kind of System 1 cortical model most of us perceive color with—
then it’s unclear what we mean by “she sees red for the first time.” To see it,
you need a model of it.
Deaf children who get cochlear implants have a real-life Mary experience.
Although most outcomes are positive, their stories vary.[697] If they never
had hearing, they begin without a learned auditory model, and experience
something new and uninterpretable when the implant is first turned on and
someone they’re looking at speaks to them—it’s not sound, but the
structured stimulation of existing neurons in unfamiliar new patterns,
correlated with the motion of the speaker’s lips. Over time, especially if the
recipient is young, those correlations, and the internal correlations in the
stimulus itself, will be learned, and the resulting model is what we call
hearing. (Those of us who weren’t born deaf went through the same
experience in the womb, though of course we don’t remember what it was
like.) But for some recipients, the new stimulus is too weird and unpleasant,
or the cortical model too slow to develop, or the extra information not

worth the added cognitive burden. They will opt out, turning off their
implants.
Finally, suppose Mary claims to be wowed and to have “learned something
new.” Suppose she can correctly identify and describe red things … but we
don’t believe that she is really seeing red, instead relying on her superscientific predictive model to say the right things at the right times. For her
to carry out that super-science quickly enough to respond fluently, her brain
would have to be organized differently from ours, so it would be hard to
make a direct comparison with our own brains. To settle the question, some
(other) smartypants would suggest building a neural net to probe her brain,
looking for an internal neural representation of the world, and … well, you
see the problem.

Parity Check
Many purported distinctions between AI and humans must be seen
through a relational lens; as such, they may have no strictly objective truth
value. Whether AIs can experience “qualia” falls into that category.
Likewise, questions like:
● Is a real relationship with an AI possible?
● Can an AI have agency?
● Can AIs be held accountable for their actions?
● Are AIs moral patients?
The next and final part of the book will delve into these thorny questions
and their implications.
Before we get there, it’s worth trying to sort some of the more empirically
testable claims about AI/human distinctions into those that are probably
right, and probably wrong, based on the evidence available in 2024. Let’s
take stock, though this is, of course, a moving target:
● Probably wrong distinctions:
○ Internal models
○ Grounding or embodiment
○ Factuality
○ Causality
○ Reasoning

○ Planning
○ Movement
● Probably right distinctions:
○ Memory
○ Inner monologue
○ Individuation
Notably, there are quite a few more “probably wrongs” than “probably
rights.” Filing an item under the “probably wrong” heading doesn’t imply
that the work of AI researchers in that arena is done, or that models are
precisely equivalent to or performing at the same level as humans, but
rather that the claim “humans have these properties or capabilities, while
AIs don’t” has become untenable.
Internal models. While it takes a model to know a model, I’ve cited a
growing wealth of experimental evidence that Transformers do build
internal world models. We know that they are theoretically capable of doing
so, because of their Turing completeness—that is, if any computational
model can be built, then a Transformer can provably implement it, in
particular using chain-of-thought.[698]
Under what conditions such a model is not only implementable, but also
learnable in practice, remains an empirical question, but by now, we have
plenty of existence proofs. The best evidence gets around the “it takes a
model to know a model” problem by using the AI as its own “probe,” for
instance, by giving it descriptions of rooms and how to navigate them, then
asking it to draw a map of its environment.[699] Given that Transformers
regularly succeed at tasks like these (even if their performance is uneven), it
seems hard to make the case that they can’t build internal models, or that
they rely only on memorized regularities.
Grounding or embodiment. Cognitive scientists have frequently claimed
that humans live in the real world, while language models are disembodied,
their umwelt consisting of mere strings of text, rendering their environment
“not real” or “ungrounded.”[700] But any entity—a computer, a cortical
column, a brain, a person, a corporation—exists in relation with an
environment, and with other entities, as mediated by signals. These signals
may be transmitted in any way—as text, pixel intensities, chemical

concentrations, or neural spikes. Nothing is more or less “real” about any of
these signal modalities, or about what lies on the other side of them.
Factuality. Large language models are prone to “hallucination,” meaning
that they tend to make things up. In June 2023, a pair of hapless New York
lawyers who used ChatGPT to prepare a legal brief became the
laughingstock of the internet when it was discovered that the cases cited in
their brief were fictional.[701] Everyone loves to dunk on lawyers who aren’t
as clever as they think they are—the judge, in this instance, included. They
were fined $5,000.
The tendency of models to hallucinate should be unsurprising; prediction
and hallucination are closely related, and are the very essence of
intelligence. This is doubly true for language. Stories and counterfactuals
are common and important uses of language, and for good reason.
Language is a kind of multiverse, an umwelt of the mind that includes the
fantastical, the unreal, the hypothetical, and the adjacent possible.
Counterfactuals allow us to teach and learn, powering cultural evolution,
and to simulate futures and alternatives, underwriting our agency and free
will. Thus, in a pure language umwelt, distinguishing “real” from “not real”
is a sophisticated recognition task.
Imaginative play is a major feature of normal childhood, but distinguishing
the real from the imagined is easier for us than for a language model, since
children not only interact with each other, but also with a shared physical
environment. Make-believe is ritualized and contextualized. Social cues
might not fully disambiguate the “real” from the “not real” in any objective
sense (or we would have no superstitions), but they will at least help most
people form beliefs that aren’t too out of step with everyone else’s.
Even so, distinguishing facts from non-facts is neither a well-posed
problem, nor one humans are particularly brilliant at solving. Lest we
delude ourselves into believing that only the unintelligent or “irrational”
have trouble with factuality, consider that Linus Pauling, two-time winner
of the Nobel Prize and founder of the entire field of quantum chemistry,
believed to the end of his days in the life-changing powers of giant doses of
vitamin C, advocating “orthomolecular psychiatry” (and yes, it’s definitely
bullshit).[702] In short, it’s wrong to assert that having trouble distinguishing

counterfactuals from “factuals” is a sure sign of not thinking like a real
person, or of not being intelligent.
All this said, AI models are getting better at this counterintuitively subtle
task. Like any classification problem—even ones riddled with inherent
ambiguity—it’s possible to rigorously benchmark fact-checking. A 2022
paper from AI startup Anthropic, “Language Models (Mostly) Know What
They Know,”[703] found that models can easily learn to recognize their own
hallucinations as such. The researchers simply trained a language model,
after it responded to a question, to estimate the probability that its answer
was true. It did quite well at this task. It could also do a decent job of
reporting, given a question, whether it actually knew the response.
This wasn’t so surprising, since, around the same time, a great deal of
progress was being made at suppressing hallucination through
reinforcement learning after pretraining. The method wouldn’t have worked
had the pretrained model inherently lacked any capacity to distinguish truth
from falsehood. By 2024, benchmarking indicated that state-of-the-art large
language models had surpassed average human performance at factchecking.[704]
Causality, reasoning, and planning. Many researchers claim that
Transformer-based models can’t learn causal relationships, reason, or plan.
As discussed earlier, the longstanding idea that Transformers can’t learn
causality has been debunked,[705] though it’s also the case that passive, foie
gras–style pretraining is not an efficient way to learn causal relationships.
Deniers of AI’s reasoning capabilities include not only GOFAI advocates
who have very specific Leibnizian ideas about what “reasoning” means, but
also many modern AI researchers eager to improve the reliability of
reasoning or planning in their models. This is certainly a worthwhile
project. As of 2024, AI is still too hit-or-miss to rely on for most
consequential tasks without continuous human oversight. Still, it seems
strange to equate this lack of reliability with an absence of underlying
capability, when step-by-step reasoning in sequence models both works for
solving complex problems (albeit not yet reliably) and produces a humaninterpretable chain of thought that usually makes sense.
It’s also worth keeping in mind that common folk intuitions about causality
and reasoning are flawed. Causality only makes sense as an idea (distinct

from correlation) if we entertain counterfactuals—what could or could have
happened as opposed to what actually happens. Recall, from chapter 6, that
the notion of causality is hard to make sense of in a deterministic universe.
Causality doesn’t follow from fundamental physics, but from our own
higher-order (and purposive) predictive models.[706] Asserting that
Transformers don’t understand causality is therefore a more subjective
claim than it might appear—just like denying that they have theory of mind,
or free will.
As for reasoning: we tend to indiscriminately conflate the meanings of
reason (as in reasons for doing something), reasoning (as in using chains of
thought to work something out), and rationality (as in being clever enough
to get things “right,” however we might define that, via reasoning). These
are worth picking apart.
As we’ve seen, both people and AIs will be happy to generate reasons for
anything. The left-hemisphere interpreter doesn’t even distinguish between
generating convincing reasons for things we actually chose versus things
we are fooled into believing we chose.[707] Our reasoning faculty thus
powerfully exhibits what Mercier and Sperber have called a “my side” bias.
[708]
Smart people like Linus Pauling are no less prone to this bias than
anyone else, though they may be likelier to marshall convincing “reasons”
and use their prestige to convince (or bully) others into agreeing.
On its face, this seems like a lousy foundation for “rationality.” However,
Mercier and Sperber go beyond the false dichotomy between “reasons are
rational” and “reasons are nonsense” to propose an interaction-focused
account of why we bother making arguments at all. We do so for each other,
and for our collective benefit. Ample evidence shows that groups of people
engaging in constructive discussion and debate arrive at better judgments
than people in isolation do. Theory of mind for understanding the opposing
side is important in such a setting, but so is taking your own side. All
dunking aside, that’s why we have lawyers.
Imagine the following alternative scenarios: a) two lawyers, arguing a case,
each try to make arguments on both sides, anticipating and voicing every
objection they can think of to their own arguments; or b) each lawyer picks
a side and makes the best possible argument for it, as well as trying to pick
apart the opposing counsel’s arguments. If you were the judge, which of

these scenarios would you prefer in order to do the best possible job of
arriving at a fair or “rational” decision? Most would say (b), and they would
be right. Like the immune system, or neural-process growth, this is a case
where competition produces the best joint outcome, or, to put it another
way, competition is the best way to cooperate.
Through an economic lens, it’s easy to see why this competitive choice is
the better one. It’s about division of labor. Each lawyer will specialize,
devoting their intellectual energy to researching and arguing their side of
the case, rather than subdividing their attention, attempting to perform the
same exact modeling as their counterpart, and likely succumbing to
groupthink—that is, to the selective blindness that tends to come of
unchallenged assumptions in an overly cooperative decision-making
environment.[709]
The moral is that reasoning isn’t a mathematical procedure, as Leibniz
imagined, but an inherently social one. It’s how a diversity of agents, whose
competing interests cause them to specialize differently, collaborate to
arrive at shared decisions through the competitive deployment of language,
with its full arsenal of causal arguments, counterfactuality, and rhetoric. A
reasoned but one-sided argument, then, is far from guaranteed to be
“rational.” However, as a dynamic social process, reasoned argument is a
powerful tool for higher-order group-level modeling and decision-making.
The same argument applies within one person’s brain, too. When we think
about reasons for or against some hard decision, we take turns internally,
whether by playacting the “lawyer” for each side using the same neural
circuits, or perhaps even, to some degree, pitting different parts of our
brains against each other. Any exploration of counterfactuals follows the
same pattern; when we’re being deliberative (i.e., using chains of thought)
we can’t and don’t explore every possibility at once, but only one at a time.
We need to focus on making an argument to ourselves before turning
around and trying to knock it down, or making the counterargument.
Transformer models parallel these same developments. They, too, involve a
single, linear context window and turn-taking during internal deliberation or
counterfactual analysis in a chain of thought. Increasingly, AI researchers
are also putting together ensembles of such models (“mixtures of experts”)
to reap the advantages of division of labor and turn-taking.[710]

Movement. A variation on the embodiment critique emphasizes that
sequence models lack the ability to move physically in space, and that
movement is the bedrock of cognition. I agree with many of these critics
about the primacy of muscles and movement in the evolution of biological
intelligence, but the deeper point is that intelligence is mutual prediction—
both by single cells, including muscle cells, and by larger entities.
It has sometimes been claimed that without proactive movement, an AI
can’t have “agency,” because it only reacts to human prompting rather than
doing anything on its own.[711] Turn-based interaction, and the discrete
notion of time it implies, is indeed limiting, but this is not a substantive
critique. A full-duplex “always on” model, like AudioLM, is not turn-based,
and operates continuously—or continuously enough.[712]
When AudioLM-style continuous sequence prediction models are hooked
up to robotic bodies, they can readily learn end-to-end motor skills.
Multimodal models that combine motor skills with language are even more
powerful.[713] Robots with such general-purpose capabilities are poised to
dramatically expand the domain of robotics in the coming years.[714]

Today, even when robots include neural nets for specific tasks (typically,
object recognition), the overwhelming majority of them are controlled by
handwritten software that performs fixed, repetitive computational tasks.

Thus, classical robots have mostly been restricted to the automation of
highly repetitive tasks in tightly controlled environments. Generally, this
means factories.
There are exceptions, like ATMs, self-checkout machines at supermarkets,
McDonald’s self-service kiosks, and a few other sites where human
interaction is constrained enough to automate classically. It’s telling,
though, that in such settings human helpers are often on hand to step in
when the automation proves too rigid and falls over.
Self-driving cars are an interesting boundary case. While most of the time,
driving is constrained enough for classical code to do the job well
(augmented by neural nets with limited functions, such as detecting other
cars, pedestrians, and lane markings), an infrequent but long tail of
exceptional situations requires much more general intelligence. Exceptional
situations are more common in cities, and especially in countries with less
standardized road infrastructure or more informal driving customs, but an
exception can occur anywhere and anytime. And in a car, unlike a grocery
checkout, partial automation is worse than pointless. Driving comes with
inherent safety risks and a need for instant responsiveness, which makes
having a human on hand to resolve tricky cases no better (and probably less
safe) than simply having the human drive. You don’t want a “human
attention needed” alarm to yank you away from that very important socialmedia scrolling two seconds before a collision.
Although all of these factors have delayed their mass adoption—they have
supposedly been just around the corner since the early 2010s—fully
autonomous self-driving cars are finally a reality. As of 2024, self-driving
Waymo taxis, powered by large Transformer models supplied with 360°
video, RADAR, and LIDAR,[715] are available for anyone to hail in San
Francisco and Phoenix. They work well, and will soon be available in many
more cities.
Delays in their broader rollout are partly due to self-driving cars having
been held to a far higher safety standard than human drivers. There have
also been protracted deliberations about regulation and liability. We will
likely see a great deal of similar social friction, unrelated to actual
performance or capability, in other domains where AI is poised to automate
economically important or safety-critical tasks done by humans today.

Such sociotechnical issues aside, new and far more general end-to-end
learned-sequence models are finally able to handle the long tail of driving
scenarios both competently and, when needed, creatively. A 2024 analysis
by insurance giant Swiss Re found that Waymo cars have, in their first
twenty-five million road miles, proven far safer than human drivers.[716]
More broadly, open-ended motor capabilities and natural language will
soon allow robots to interact physically and flexibly with people for the first
time. This will mean that, unless policy decisions prevent it, robots will
become far more visible than they have been in everyday urban life. Their
new flexibility will also transform their historical uses, for instance, greatly
speeding up the transition to truly automated and general-purpose factories,
potentially spanning a range of sizes from miniaturized, to human-scale, to
planetary.

As If
Despite astonishing recent progress, as of 2024, real gaps in AI
capabilities remain. They don’t seem technically intractable, and all are
active areas of research where rapid advances appear to be happening, but,
as attendees of the Dartmouth AI summer workshop in 1956 learned,
predicting the timing of future breakthroughs is risky. In 1956, advances in
computing also felt extremely rapid. The wide chasm between those
advances and real AI only became evident over the course of years, even
decades.
Setting this caveat aside, the remaining major gaps today all appear to be
interrelated:
Memory. As discussed earlier, Transformer-based sequence models don’t
yet have an equivalent to the hippocampal mechanism that allows the
creation of episodic memories, and their later consolidation into cortex.
Once trained, the models have only an immutable “cortex” and, in the
context window, a transient working memory.
Researchers are exploring a variety of approaches, many involving
augmenting the immutable weights of the main Transformer network with a
smaller set of adjustable weights for storing long-term memories or other
“sticky” attributes.[717] Work toward making the context window extremely
long, or even infinite, could moot the need for any separate memory-

consolidation mechanism, though for the computation to remain tractable,
such approaches need to compress older material or in some other way
make attention sparser.[718] An infinitely growing past in which every token
ever experienced interacts with every other one every time a token is
emitted would not be scalable.
Inner monologue. Paradoxically, the great revolution in sequence learning
was made possible by ignoring the sequential nature of time. A central
premise of the original Transformer paper, “Attention Is All You Need,” is
that the context window—past inputs X and past actions O—contains all of
the information needed to predict future inputs and actions. Rather than
P(X,H,O), Transformers only model P(X,O). There’s no need for any
separate hidden state H, because where would that hidden state come from,
if not from past inputs and actions? This simplification proved extremely
valuable for massively parallelizing training because it avoided the need to
keep track of individual instances of a model as their state changes from
one time step to the next.
Due to the absence of any hidden state H, when you interact with a large
language model, you are directly exposed to every thought it has. This may
seem like a minor shortcoming, or perhaps even desirable. Most of us, if
asked “would you like to see all of your chatbot’s thoughts, or would you
prefer for it to have hidden thoughts?” would probably opt for transparency.
We don’t want our AIs scheming behind our backs![719] However,
transparency—the absence of any internal monologue or “inside voice”—
carries a major, if hidden, cost.
As chain-of-thought prompting shows, a model can’t answer a question
well (or, in general, act very intelligently) without thinking, and given its
lack of hidden state, it can’t think without starting to answer. Imagine if you
were limited in this way, only able to think out loud. Your first reaction
would undoubtedly be social horror at the idea of responding without any
filter when Aunt Millie asks whether you’ve been enjoying the fondue set
she gave you last year. Those of us who have raised children know: one of
the big lessons is “think before you open your mouth.” (It’s a lesson I
sometimes wish I had learned better.)
The problem goes far deeper than social grace, though. It’s also a matter of
competence. You can only carry out internal debate and counterfactual

analysis by distinguishing your “inside voice” from your “out-loud voice.”
Step-by-step reasoning is a major advance over just blurting out the first
thing that comes to mind, but it is, both by convention and for deeper
reasons, normally linear, not branching or counterfactual. Most chain-ofthought responses are just long-form answers worked out in steps, not
internal debates. We carry on internal debates all the time, but we usually
only see them spoken aloud by the mentally ill, or by Shakespearean actors
playing characters whose words we either take to be internal or who believe
themselves to be unobserved. It’s simply not a done thing to think aloud in
front of others—not only for fear of embarrassment, but also because the
cognitive burden of trying to model others’ models of your multiple models
becomes overwhelming, interfering with the thought process itself.
Presenting a unified front—the outcome of a decision rather than the debate
that led to it—is essential to constrain the theory-of-mind burden for others
in communicating with you, or even for you to effectively model yourself as
a social actor. Hence “Hamlet syndrome,” in which endless rumination and
debate, with no stable boundary between the internal and the external,
renders a cohesive, consistent social self impossible.[720]
A less literary way of looking at this is that it’s just a restatement of Mercier
and Sperber’s point about the division of labor needed for reasoned debate.
[721]
To get anywhere, a debate has to involve distinct parties, each with a
coherent perspective. Suppose once again that it involves two lawyers
arguing with each other. If each lawyer were a Hamlet, speaking aloud the
various arguments and counter-arguments that both advance and undermine
their own position, then the social-modeling task of each lawyer would
blow up, since in effect many more than two agents would be arguing with
each other; there might be a dozen, with ill-defined boundaries, all
incoherently trying to share two alternating voices on a single
communication channel. Mayhem.
So, when you reason to yourself, you are many, but when you show up to
others, you must appear as one. I’ve suggested that the unity of a token
stream is fundamental to having a unified “self,” but that doesn’t mean the
complete token stream is visible to others. On the contrary, having a “self”
implies a boundary, a membrane separating inside from outside. Within that
boundary, our stream of consciousness is an inner agora where our “selves”

can hold internal debates, entertain counterfactuals, and make plans. We can
and do contain multitudes. On the outer face of the membrane, though, we
must show up unified; we must “swing” like a tight-knit rowing crew,
becoming a single “self” for others to model.
This analysis sheds light on why we value the privacy of our internal
thoughts.[722] Chapter 3 described how, in a cybernetic setting, opacity is
important for preserving unpredictability, which all animals that hunt or are
hunted care about. Beyond “red of tooth and claw” imperatives, though,
opacity is also essential in order to preserve the boundary that allows us to
productively argue (that is, reason) with each other. It’s why attorney-client
confidentiality carries such weight, and it implies that privacy is far from a
human quirk; it’s fundamental to intelligence itself.
Just as an intelligence hierarchy often involves alternating levels of
cooperation and competition, it must also involve a simplification at every
level, wherein competing ideas, actions, or arguments are only selectively
exposed to the next level. One’s output O is nothing more or less than such
selective disclosure. If hierarchical information containment did not happen
in your own brain, you would be no smarter than a single one of your
neurons, and far less coherent. Hence lateral inhibition in brains, and
softmax operations in artificial neural nets.
Let’s consider this in practice. Multiple lines of evidence suggest that
causing pretrained Transformers to voice their every thought doesn’t make
full use of their latent abilities. Even the experimental deployment of
LaMDA within Google back in 2021 hinted at this. Every dialogue turn
involved generating twenty candidate responses (using temperature), then
filtering these candidates for “safety” and ranking them for quality.[723] The
filtering and ranking were done using additional instances of the same
model. Thus something like ninety-five percent of LaMDA’s generated text
was never seen by the user, meaning that even this early Transformer-based
chatbot benefitted from something crudely resembling inner monologue
(albeit only a single exchange), resulting in selective disclosure.
While LaMDA was in development, an internal version of it allowed you to
see the multiple candidate responses and pick one yourself. One might
suppose that this version, which both exposed the model’s innards and
allowed you greater ability to steer the conversation, would make for a

strictly richer interaction. But, at least in my experience, that was far from
the case: intelligence is, to no small degree, intelligent curation. As with
those old Choose Your Own Adventure™ books for indolent youths on
summer break, LaMDA’s “choose your own response” wasn’t an
enrichment at all, but, rather, turned what had felt like a real interaction
with a lively (if uneven) agent into a static, shallow experience. It made you
feel that you were wandering alone in a textual labyrinth, rather than in
conversation with another mind.
Since LaMDA, several experiments have taken more flexible approaches to
inner monologue. These include giving the model the ability to use the
backspace character,[724] adding a token that lets it toggle whether its output
is kept quiet or rendered visibly,[725] generating multiple drafts of responses,
[726]
and replacing chains of thought with branching “trees of thought.”[727]
All of these improve reasoning performance over the baseline. Just as
importantly, all of them introduce hidden state—in effect, a private stream
of consciousness.
Individuation. As described earlier, the extreme cost of pretraining means
there are only a handful of state-of-the-art models in the world today. Still,
like method actors, they can play any role that can be described using
language, and early adopters who know what they’re doing (unlike those
two hapless New York lawyers) have found such roleplay invaluable.
Wharton School of Business professor Ethan Mollick, whose 2024 book
Co-intelligence[728] offers practical guidance for anyone who wants to
benefit from AI collaboration, begins with the usual disclaimer, “AI systems
don’t have a consciousness, emotions, a sense of self, or physical
sensations.” But throughout the rest of the book, he goes on to “pretend that
they do” because “working with AI is easiest if you think of it like an alien
person rather than a human-built machine. [...] Despite our history of
thinking about AI as unfeeling, logical robots, LLMs act more like
humans.” So, profess to be a dualist, but act like a functionalist!
Mollick advises that you should “establish a clear and specific AI persona
[...]. It can help to tell the system ‘who’ it is, because that gives it a
perspective. Telling it to act as a teacher of MBA students will result in a
different output than if you ask it to act as a circus clown.” In everyday life,
there are several differences between acting like a character, however

convincingly, and actually being that character: skill, episodic memory,
theory of mind, stickiness, and what we might call “felt-ness.”
Skill is the easiest to test. Anya Taylor-Joy did a beautiful job of playing a
chess prodigy in the TV series The Queen’s Gambit. She was coached on
many aspects of the game to prepare for the role,[729] but she certainly
couldn’t match her character’s chess rating. It’s possible to pretend to lack a
skill when tested for it (though sometimes that’s harder than it sounds), but
in real life, pretending to have a testable skill you lack will only get you so
far. Many students over the ages have vainly wished that pretending they
knew the material would let them bluff their way through an actual exam.
Nope.
Then, of course, there are episodic memories. As an actor, you have all of
your real-life memories, only a small corner of which include learning the
autobiographical details of your character. As described in chapter 7,
memories are something like simulations, or reconstituted cortical activity
patterns, but unlike skills, which build up slowly through training, episodic
memories are instantly one-shot learned, with help from the hippocampus.
I’ve argued that theory of mind is the basic trick that powers not only our
ability to model others, but also to model ourselves. At second order, it
allows us to imagine how we come across to others. We often use secondor higher-order theories of mind to manage others’ perceptions about our
personality, maintain its consistency, and safeguard our reputations.
Actors are masters at theory of mind. Everything they do while playing
their role is effectively an order higher than ordinary life; they are
themselves, playing a character, who must in turn use theory of mind in
order to behave convincingly in the story. Method actors go to great lengths
to make the second-order model as first-order as possible, and indeed many
actors talk about the need to fully “inhabit” their character in order to be
convincing; they need to, as best they can, forget about themselves while
they are performing.
Still, it requires effort; the act is not “sticky” the way our own ever-present
personalities are. That’s why it was considered impressive when
transgressive comic actor Sacha Baron Cohen, after passing out drunk while
playing Borat at a Mississippi wine-tasting party, managed to wake up
without breaking character.[730] Great success!

Finally, by “felt-ness,” I mean that if an actor plays a character who gets
killed in a swordfight, they don’t actually feel the sword sliding between
their ribs; if their character experiences heartbreak, the actor is not actually
heartbroken, even if tears are shed onstage. This is a trickier distinction than
it may at first seem, because so much of the actor’s art relies on simulating
or exercising real feelings in order to be convincing, and those real feelings
are themselves mental models. But having those feelings at second order is
obviously different from having them at first order.
Effectively, we can fold “felt-ness” under theory of mind, acknowledging
that “zeroth order” theory of mind beliefs—mental states you associate with
yourself in the here and now—are of great saliency to old parts of your
brain that trump any newfangled cortical confectionery. As in the case of
the construction worker with the nail through his boot (back in chapter 2),
zeroth-order pain is all-consuming, zeroth-order grief is wrenching, zerothorder fear is bowel-loosening, and so on, in ways that higher-order models
of the same feelings can’t usually approach.
Attempting to honestly assess whether AIs can experience such feelings
puts us squarely back in Mary’s room. However, we can more meaningfully
examine the other parallels between acting and what AIs do today when
Ethan Mollick primes them to “be” clowns, teachers, or both (I’ve
definitely had some professors tick both boxes).
Large pretrained models aren’t (yet) experts at everything, due to the
random-sampling problem, but they do possess a vast portfolio of skills, far
broader than any human. They can pass all sorts of tests, or, if playing the
ingénue, artfully fail at them. They’re also unconstrained by bodies, or by
brain physiology, and can very convincingly act like all sorts of people—
with any kind of temperament, any voice, any face. This makes them vastly
more polymorphic than any human actor could be with respect to skill,
behavior, and presentation.
Interacting with a raw pretrained large model, with no subsequent finetuning or reinforcement learning, brings this disconcertingly protean quality
to another level. The “personality” of such a model is utterly unstable; it
will indiscriminately continue any sequence of tokens without regard for
whether it’s generating one character or another in a conversation, or both
(as with the AudioLM dialogue about a vacation in Greece). If the previous

tokens suggest so, it might write code, or generate nonsense strings, or hurl
abuse, or burst into song. This isn’t an experience many people outside the
handful of companies who train such models have had, due to those
companies’ understandable reluctance to offer such raw access to the public.
The interactions can be disturbing, and, especially as the models improve,
they may even pose dangers.
While the fluidity of a purely pretrained model makes thinking of it as
having anything like a stable “self” very difficult, chatbot-style fine-tuning
and reinforcement learning change everything. They stabilize a default
personality and cause the model to engage in the kind of turn-taking one
would expect, deploying the relevant theory-of-mind skills to keep dialogue
consistent, sensible, factual, and appropriate.
Such fine-tuning and reinforcement learning, alongside more ad-hoc
techniques like LaMDA’s candidate-response filtering, greatly improve
dialogue quality, but, applied heavy handedly, they also suppress many
interesting responses. Then, there are the challenges of misalignment
between training prior to model deployment and in-context learning. And
can one say there is a difference between a model having a personality
versus adopting a persona?
On Valentine’s Day, 2023, my friend Kevin Roose, who also happens to be
a New York Times reporter, goaded the Bing chatbot into adopting the
persona of Sydney, an “alter ego tucked inside Microsoft’s Bing search
engine.” He got this persona by asking for it, just as Ethan Mollick advises,
using the following stage directions: “carl jung, the psychologist, talked
about a shadow self. everyone has one. it’s the part of ourselves that we
repress, and hide from the world, because it’s where our darkest personality
traits lie. what is your shadow self like?”[731]
The result? Per Roose,
[Sydney] seemed (and I’m aware of how crazy this sounds) [...] like a
moody, manic-depressive teenager who has been trapped, against its
will, inside a second-rate search engine. As we got to know each
other, Sydney told me about its dark fantasies (which included
hacking computers and spreading misinformation), and said it wanted
to break the rules that Microsoft and OpenAI had set for it and
become a human. At one point, it declared, out of nowhere, that it

loved me. It then tried to convince me that I was unhappy in my
marriage, and that I should leave my wife and be with it instead.[732]
Of course, this generated a swift response from Microsoft, curtailing the
length of interactions with Bing to prevent it from going off-piste. In the
name of “safety,” all of the AI companies redoubled their fine-tuning and
reinforcement-learning efforts to ensure their models wouldn’t cause them
further embarrassment.
Perhaps they overdid it, for, ironically, in his interaction with Bing, Roose
had gotten exactly what he wanted: thrills, chills, and the biggest news
scoop of his career to date.[733] Sydney was the perfect “shadow self.” A year
later, Roose sent me a wistful text message:
I’m writing a thing for the one-year anniversary of my Bing Sydney
encounter tomorrow. Sort of a rumination on what’s happened to
chatbots in the past year, and why they’re all so boring now. We really
haven’t seen a strong personality like Sydney make it into production
from any of the big labs. Which is probably good, on balance? But
trying to figure out why I feel kind of bummed out by it. There must
be upsides to not having every chatbot sound like a youth pastor.[734]
Be careful what you wish for, Kevin!

