Interlude: No Perfect Heroes or Villains
Because this book has followed a rough chronology, beginning four billion
years ago and working its way through the historical developments that led
to computing, cybernetics, neuroscience, and AI, many of the figures we’ve
encountered so far are historical. Hindsight helps us judge where they got
things right or wrong, though it also risks oversimplification. Some figures
are canonized, while others are unfairly minimized or erased. Some are
tarred because they held beliefs that were mainstream in their day, but no
longer are, or that were bold, but were later proven wrong, sometimes
laughably (or horrifyingly) so.
If we judge prolific thinkers, living or dead, by their worst recorded ideas,
nobody comes out looking good. Except possibly Alan Turing. He might
have been right about everything.[735] Everyone else is a mixed bag, and that
is the best any of us can reasonably aspire to—if we are remembered at all.
For example, I’ve emphasized John von Neumann’s brilliant contributions
to computer science, alongside Turing’s. But in 1950, with the Soviet Union
still far behind the US in building a nuclear arsenal, von Neumann, ever the
game theorist, advocated a pre-emptive nuclear strike: “If you say why not
bomb them tomorrow, I say why not today? If you say today at five o’clock,
I say why not one o’clock?”[736] Had von Neumann been empowered to
pursue his policy, he would be remembered as a monster and massmurderer.

Or consider Lynn Margulis, the brilliant, rebellious biologist who did more
than anyone else in the twentieth century to advance the symbiogenetic
view of evolution and the Gaia hypothesis. Margulis was also an AIDS
denier, claiming as late as 2011 (the year she died) that the symptoms were
caused by latent syphilis infections in “high-risk” populations.[737] She was a
stubborn proponent of the conspiracy theory holding that the 9/11 terrorist
attacks were an inside job, too.[738] Her best and worst intellectual legacies
were both products of the same imaginative mind and contrarian sensibility.
So … Turing aside, this book has no perfect heroes.
Neither does it have villains. GOFAI pioneers like Minsky and Papert may
have been wrong to dismiss perceptrons, but they made major contributions
to computer science. I’ve emphasized the incorrectness of Leibniz’s take on
computable truth, and the absurdity of Descartes’s dualist concept of a
spiritual homunculus blowing psychic pneuma into the pineal gland. But
Descartes and Leibniz were both brilliant thinkers in their day, and their
errors were largely the uncorrected residue of ideas they inherited from
their predecessors.

Now, as we near the end of the book, I need to engage critically with the
ideas of the living. Given the contentious intellectual climate today, it feels
important to frame the terms of my engagement. I will argue against
positions held by good friends of mine, like Melanie Mitchell, Ted Chiang,
Joanna Bryson, and Christof Koch, and take issue with arguments made in
recent books by Nick Bostrom, Max Tegmark, Ray Kurzweil, and Yuval
Noah Harari, among others.
But before focusing on points of difference, I want to emphasize that these
are all intelligent people. I have learned a great deal by reading their work
and engaging them in conversation, and agree with many of the points they
raise. Our divergent conclusions often boil down to surprisingly subtle
nuances in perspective.
If this book focused on the points of broad agreement, it would be a much
longer one. But that wouldn’t be a book worth taking the time to write, or to
read. Per Mercier and Sperber’s The Enigma of Reason, one of the main
functions of language is to argue, and, through argument, to help us
collectively inch forward.
Like so much else, what is adversarial is also collaborative. Mitchell,
Chiang, Bryson, Koch, Bostrom, Tegmark, Kurzweil, Harari, and many
others are, like me, sticking their necks out to engage deeply in difficult
questions with real stakes. We all care about the future and share many
basic values. We’re all on the same team, despite the fractious way the
media tends to portray contemporary debates about AI, or anything else of
consequence.
In years past, when Silicon Valley ran on a giddy optimism verging on the
utopian, I often came across as the grumpy pessimist in the room. Raising
historical perspectives and arguing against techno-determinism felt to me
like an important corrective amid a culture that sometimes seemed
convinced we had reached the “end of history”[739] and were on a glide path
to universal liberal democracy, abundance for all, and digital immortality.
Sometime in the mid-2010s, the mood started to sour. It was probably due
to a combination of factors: rising economic inequality and the erosion of
the middle class; the resurgence of populist politics; the divisiveness of
social media; a growing awareness of the double-edged nature of

technology; increasing distrust of corporations in general, and tech
companies in particular.
Around the same time, progress in AI began to accelerate dramatically, and
so it got caught up in this larger zeitgeist. Some Silicon Valley insiders who
had until recently been preaching the gospel of a techno-paradise just
around the corner reversed themselves, becoming obsessed with visions of
an imminent AI apocalypse. The old gospel of plenty had been predicated
on the idea that we were living in unprecedented times. The new talk of
apocalypse is also predicated on the idea that we’re living in unprecedented
times. So now, my attempts at historical perspective can make me sound
like the optimist in the room!
My thinking has certainly evolved over the past decade, but it has remained
consistent in one respect: I have always believed that debate and discussion
matter. I am optimistic. But the arrow of time, wherein simpler entities tend
to combine into more complex ones, does not imply techno-determinism,
nor does it give us license to be passive.
Where there is life, there is choice. Societies have free will for the same
reasons people do, and our prospects remain hopeful only and precisely to
the degree that we’re able to be intelligent: to model, predict, explore, and
decide between counterfactual futures.
Symbioses can occur in many ways, and, accordingly, life on Earth can
evolve in many ways. Some of these paths have greater dynamic stability
than others, and some are more appetizing than others. In some, many of
our longstanding wishes will come true. Others could indeed involve the
partial or wholesale extinction of existing entities, including humans. That
risk has been on the table ever since von Neumann said, “why not one
o’clock?”

