10. Evolutionary Transition
Periodization
The usual narrative about AI envisions it in comparison to a human,
dividing its history into three eras: a long “before” period of Artificial
Narrow Intelligence (ANI), when it’s inferior to humans; the (short-lived)
achievement of Artificial General Intelligence (AGI), when it matches
human capability; and a mysterious “after” period of Artificial
Superintelligence (ASI), in which it exceeds human capability. The arrival
of ASI has sometimes been held to herald the “Singularity,” a threshold into
an unknowable and unimaginable future.[740] As of 2024, virtually all
pundits agree that AGI has not yet been achieved, but many believe that,
given the pace of improvement, it could happen Real Soon Now, and will
be immediately followed by ASI and whatever lies beyond.[741]

I’ve suggested or implied many problems with this narrative. For one, it’s
difficult (for me, at least) to see how today’s AI is not already “general.”
The “narrow” versus “general” distinction was invented when we began to
apply the term “AI” to task-specific models, such as those for handwriting
recognition or chess playing. This specificity made such models obviously
“narrow”; to a layperson, calling such systems “artificially intelligent”
made little sense, as they didn’t represent anything one would normally
associate with that term.
Hence “AGI” was coined to describe what had previously simply been
called AI; it covered everything from Star Trek’s Data to its ship computer
(which was like a disembodied person), and from Douglas Adams’s Marvin
the Paranoid Android to his smart elevators of the future: “Not unnaturally,
many elevators imbued with intelligence [...] became terribly frustrated
with the mindless business of going up and down, up and down,
experimented briefly with the notion of going sideways [...] and finally took

to squatting in basements sulking. An impoverished hitchhiker visiting any
planets in the Sirius star system these days can pick up easy money working
as a counselor for neurotic elevators.”[742]
While this scenario remains as silly today as it was in 1980, it could now
literally be the outcome of a two-day hackathon involving a jailbroken large
language model, a Raspberry Pi, and an elevator.[743] (Yes, we live in an era
when the jokes literally write themselves.)
If the difference between narrow and general AI is … well, generality, then
we achieved this the moment we began pretraining unsupervised large
language models and using them interactively.[744] We then noticed that they
could perform arbitrary tasks—or, per Patricia Churchland’s 2016 critique
of narrow AI,[745] non-tasks, like just shooting the breeze.
In-context learning marks an especially important emergent capability in
such models, because it implies that the set of tasks they can perform is not
finite, comprising only whatever was observed during pretraining, but
effectively infinite: a language model can do anything that can be described.
Performance could be weaker than human, of roughly human level, or of
greater than human level. State-of-the-art AI performance climbs every
month, putting more tasks into the third category. Such steady increases in
performance will likely continue to follow an exponential trajectory for
some time, much as traditional computing performance did during the
Moore’s Law decades.
The decisive moment for traditional computing came when special-purpose
computers gave way to general-purpose ones, starting with the ENIAC in
1945. Everything afterward was an exponential climb in performance, not a
discrete transition. In the same vein, AGI has already undergone its
“ENIAC moment” with the transition from narrow learning of predefined
tasks to general AI, which is based on unsupervised sequence prediction
and capable of in-context learning. It seems reasonable to call this a real
step change. What follows has been, and will continue to be, dramatic, even
exponential, but the changes are of degree, not of kind.
There’s something arbitrary, bordering on absurd, about pundits arguing
over the precise timing of when this exponential climb really “counts” or
“will count” as AGI … not to mention the way many commentators have

been quietly scurrying to move the goalposts. On what principled basis
could we defend one or another threshold on this vertiginously steep yet
continuous landscape? And who cares, anyway?
Technical findings in the 2020s have produced a surprising insight, though:
calling narrow, task-specific (but not feature-engineered) ML systems “AI”
may have been better justified than we imagined. Whether neural nets are
trained using supervised learning to perform single tasks, such as image
classification or text translation, or are trained to be general-purpose
predictors using unsupervised learning, they seem to end up learning the
same universal representation.[746]
So, if you trained a massively overpowered sequence model to do
handwriting recognition—and you trained it on enough handwritten
treatises—it seems that you really could have a philosophical (handwritten)
conversation with it afterward. Or, a very powerful neural image
compressor would necessarily learn how to read and autocomplete printed
text, to do a better job of compressing pictures of newspapers and the like;
it would effectively contain a large language model. So too would a smart
elevator equipped with a microphone and a speaker, trained only on the
narrow task of getting you to the right floor. Weirdly, just as the general
prediction task contains all narrow tasks, each narrow task contains the
general task!
An exact date for the transition to AGI is thus even more difficult to fix, but
a principled case could be made for sometime in the 1940s, with the
implementation of the first cybernetic models that learned to predict
sequences—even though in the beginning they could do very little, beyond
the wobbly antics of Palomilla following a flashlight down an MIT hallway.
What can we say, then, about the big history of AI? It is possible to
periodize the history of intelligence—that is, of life—on Earth, and AI is
part of that story. However, to place it into a meaningful context, we have to
zoom way out.

Transitions
The emergence of AI marks what theoretical biologists John Maynard
Smith and Eörs Szathmáry have termed a “major evolutionary transition” or

MET—a term we first encountered in chapter 1.[747] Smith and Szathmáry
describe three characteristic features of METs:
1. Smaller entities that were formerly capable of independent
replication come together to form larger entities that can only
replicate as a whole.
2. There is a division of labor among the smaller entities, increasing
the efficiency of the larger whole through specialization.
3. New forms of information storage and transmission arise to
support the larger whole, giving rise to new forms of
evolutionary selection.
The symbiogenetic transitions in bff exhibit these same three features!
Soviet-American cyberneticist Valentin Turchin theorized a concept very
similar to the MET, the “metasystem transition,” decades earlier, in the
1970s. Turchin described metasystem transitions in terms much like those I
use in this book, emphasizing the increasing power of symbiotic aggregates
to carry out better predictive modeling, thus gaining a survival advantage.
[748]
As usual, the cybernetics crowd seems to have been well ahead of the
curve.
In their 1995 review article in Nature, Smith and Szathmáry posit eight
major evolutionary transitions:
1. Replicating molecules to populations of molecules in
compartments
2. Unlinked replicators to chromosomes
3. RNA as gene and enzyme to DNA and protein (genetic code)
4. Prokaryotes to eukaryotes
5. Asexual clones to sexual populations
6. Protists to animals, plants, and fungi (cell differentiation)
7. Solitary individuals to colonies (non-reproductive castes)
8. Primate societies to human societies (language)
This list isn’t unreasonable, though the first three are necessarily
speculative, since they attempt to break abiogenesis down into distinct
major transitions we can only guess at. The other five are on firmer ground,
as both pre- and post-transition entities are still around: eukaryotes didn’t

replace bacteria, sexual reproduction didn’t replace asexual reproduction,
social insects didn’t replace solitary ones, etc.
Szathmáry and others have since proposed a few changes (such as adding
the endosymbiosis of plastids, leading to plant life), but the larger point is
that the list of major transitions is short, and each item on it represents a
momentous new symbiosis with planetary-scale consequences. Any
meaningful periodization of life and intelligence on Earth must focus on big
transitions like these.
That the transitions appear to be happening at increasing frequency is not
just an artifact of the haziness of the distant past, but of their inherent
learning dynamics, as Turchin described. Increasingly powerful predictive
models are, as we have seen, also increasingly capable learners.
Furthermore, in-context learning shows us how all predictive learning also
involves learning to learn. So, as models become better learners, they will
more readily be able to “go meta,” giving rise to an MET and producing an
even more capable learner. This is why cultural evolution is so much faster
than genetic evolution.
Max Bennett argues that “the singularity already happened”[749] when
cultural accumulation, powered by language and later by writing, began to
rapidly ratchet human technology upward over the past several thousand
years. This is a defensible position, and doesn’t map well to the last MET
on Smith and Szathmáry’s list, since humans have existed (and have been
using language) for far longer than a few thousand years. Hence Bennett’s
“cultural singularity” doesn’t distinguish humans from nonhuman primates,
but, rather, is associated with urbanization and its attendant division of
labor. Therefore, this recent transition is neither an immediate consequence
of language nor an inherent property of humanity per se, but a distinctly
modern and collective phenomenon. It is posthuman in the literal sense that
it postdates our emergence as a species.
The Pirahã, for instance, who still maintain their traditional lifeways in the
Amazon, are just as human as any New Yorker, but possess a degree of selfsufficiency radically unlike New Yorkers. They can “walk into the jungle
naked, with no tools or weapons, and walk out three days later with baskets
of fruit, nuts, and small game.”[750] According to Daniel Everett,

The Pirahãs have an undercurrent of Darwinism running through their
parenting philosophy. This style of parenting has the result of
producing very tough and resilient adults who do not believe that
anyone owes them anything. Citizens of the Pirahã nation know that
each day’s survival depends on their individual skills and hardiness.
When a Pirahã woman gives birth, she may lie down in the shade near
her field or wherever she happens to be and go into labor, very often
by herself.
Everett recounts the wrenching story of a woman who struggled to give
birth on the beach of the Maici river, within earshot of others, but found that
her baby wouldn’t come. It was in the breech position. Despite her screams
over the course of an entire day, nobody came; the Pirahã went so far as to
actively prevent their Western guest from rushing to help. The woman’s
screams grew gradually fainter, and in the night, both mother and baby
eventually died, unassisted.
In this and other similar stories, the picture that emerges is not of a cruel or
unfeeling people—in one more lighthearted episode, the Pirahã express
horrified disbelief at Everett for spanking his unruly preteen—but of a
society that is at once intensely communitarian and individualistic. They
readily share resources, but there is no social hierarchy and little
specialization. Everyone is highly competent at doing everything necessary
to survive, starting from a very young age. The corollary, though, is that
everyone is expected to be able to make do for themselves.
The Pirahã are, of course, a particular people with their own ways and
customs, not a universal stand-in for pre-agrarian humanity. However, the
traits I’m emphasizing here—tightly knit egalitarian communities whose
individuals are broadly competent at survival—are frequently recurring
themes in accounts of modern hunter-gatherers. It seems a safe bet that this
was the norm for humanity throughout the majority of our long prehistory.
We’re justified in describing as METs the transition from traditional to
agrarian, then to urban lifeways. During the agrarian revolution, a new
network of intensely interdependent relationships arose between humans,
animals, and plants; then, with urbanization, machines entered the mix and
human labor diversified much further.

New York (and the modern, globalized socio-technical world in general) is
a self-perpetuating system whose individuals are no longer competent in the
ways the Pirahã are. Urban people have become, on one hand, hyperspecialized, and, on the other, de-skilled to the point where they can’t
survive on their own, any more than one of the cells in your body could
survive on its own. It’s not just language, but written texts, schools and
guilds, banking, complex systems of governance, supply-chain
management, and many other information-storage and transmission
mechanisms that add the evolvable “DNA” needed to organize and sustain
urban societies.
It seems to me, though, that this MET is still not the last on the list. By
1700, significant human populations had urbanization, division of labor,
and rapid cultural evolution. Then came the first Industrial Revolution, as
introduced in chapter 1: a symbiosis between humans and heat engines,
resulting in a hydrocarbon metabolism that unleashed unprecedented
amounts of free energy, much like the endosymbiosis of mitochondria. This
allowed human and livestock populations to explode, enabled a first wave
of large-scale urbanization, and drove unprecedented technological
innovation. As Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels noted in 1848,
The bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years, has
created more massive and more colossal productive forces than have
all preceding generations together. Subjection of Nature’s forces to
man, machinery, application of chemistry to industry and agriculture,
steam-navigation, railways, electric telegraphs, clearing of whole
continents for cultivation, canalization of rivers, whole populations
conjured out of the ground—what earlier century had even a
presentiment that such productive forces slumbered in the lap of
social labor?[751]

Vulnerability
Humans had been working hard, and working together, for thousands of
years. It was not “social labor,” but coal that had lain slumbering under the
ground. Mining was hard work, but the coal itself did an increasing
proportion of that work.[752] And over time, the coal produced ever more
workers.

The conjuring of enormous new populations out of the ground—quite
literally, flesh out of fossil fuel—manifested as a population explosion that
had become obvious by 1800. This prompted Thomas Malthus and his
Chinese contemporary, Hong Liangji, to worry for the first time about
global overpopulation.[753]
It also created an unprecedented symbiotic interdependency between
biology and machinery. Romanticism, the idealization of rural living, and
the utopian communities of the nineteenth century can all be understood as
a backlash against that growing dependency, an assertion that we could live
the good life without advanced technology and urbanization. But at scale,
we couldn’t.
A second Industrial Revolution arose from the electrification Marx and
Engels mentioned in passing.[754] From telegraphs, we progressed to
telephony, radio, TV, and beyond, all powered by the electrical grid. In
some ways this paralleled the development of the first nervous systems, for,
like a nerve net, it enabled synchronization and coordination over long
distances. Trains ran on common schedules; stocks and commodities traded
at common prices; news broadcasts pulsed over whole continents.
The second Industrial Revolution culminated in another dramatic jump in
human population growth: the “baby boom.” While the baby boom had
multiple proximal causes, including sanitation and antibiotics, it depended
on the resources and information flows made possible by electricity and
high-speed communication.
This additional layer of symbiotic dependency between people and
technology generated a second wave of Malthusian population anxiety.[755]
Accordingly, the “back to the land” movements of hippie communes in the
’60s had much in common with nineteenth-century Romanticism. Beyond
concerns about the Earth’s ultimate carrying capacity, the sense of
precariousness was not unjustified. Dependency is vulnerability.
Consider the effects of an “Electromagnetic Pulse” (EMP) weapon. Nuclear
bombs produce an EMP, which will fry any non-hardened electronics
exposed to it by inducing powerful electric currents in metal wires. Some
experts are concerned that North Korea may already have put such a
weapon into a satellite in polar orbit, ready to detonate in space high above

the United States.[756] At that altitude, the usual destructive effects of a
nuclear explosion won’t be felt on the ground, but a powerful EMP could
still reach the forty-eight contiguous states, destroying most electrical and
electronic equipment. Then what?
For the Pirahã, an EMP would be a non-event. For the US in 1924, it
wouldn’t have been a catastrophe either. Only half of American households
had electricity, and critical infrastructure was largely mechanical. As of
2024, though, everything relies on electronics: not just power and light, but
public transit, cars and trucks, airplanes, factories, farms, military
installations, water-pumping stations, dams, waste management, refineries,
ports … everything, worldwide. With these systems down, all supply chains
and utilities rendered inoperable, mass death would quickly ensue. An EMP
would reveal, horrifyingly, how dependent our urbanized civilization has
become on electronic systems. We have become not only socially
interdependent, but collectively cybernetic.
AI may represent yet a further major transition, because earlier cybernetics
—such as the control systems of dams, or the electronics in cars—
implement only simple, local models, analogous to reflexes or the
distributed nerve nets in animals like Hydra. Prior to the 2020s, all of the
higher-order modeling and cognition took place in people’s brains, although
we did increasingly use traditional computing for information storage and
fixed-function programming.
Now, though, we’re entering a period in which the number of complex
predictors—analogous to brains—will rapidly exceed the human
population. AIs will come in many sizes, both smaller and larger than
human brains. They will all be able to run orders of magnitude faster than
nervous systems, communicating at near lightspeed.[757]
The emergence of AI is thus both new and familiar. It’s familiar because it’s
an MET, sharing fundamental properties with previous METs. AI marks the
emergence of more powerful predictors formed through new symbiotic
partnerships among pre-existing entities—human and electronic.[758] This
makes it neither alien to nor distinct from the larger story of evolution on
Earth. I’ve made the case that AI is, by any reasonable definition,
intelligent; AI is also, as Sara Walker has pointed out, just another

manifestation of the long-running, dynamical, purposive, and selfperpetuating process we call “life.”[759]
So, is AI still a big deal? Yes. Whether we count eight, a dozen, or a few
more, there just haven’t been that many METs over the last four and a half
billion years, and although they’re now coming at a much greater clip,
every one of them has been a big deal. This final chapter of the book
attempts to make as much sense as possible, from the vantage point of the
mid-2020s, of what this AI transition will be like and what lies on the other
side. What will become newly possible, and what might it mean at planetary
scale? Will there be winners and losers? What will endure, and what will
likely change? What new vulnerabilities and risks, like those of an EMP,
will we be exposed to? Will humanity survive?
Keep in mind, though, that none of this should be framed in terms of some
future AGI or ASI threshold; we already have general AI models, and
humanity is already collectively superintelligent. Individual humans are
only smart-ish. A random urbanite is unlikely to be a great artist or prover
of theorems; probably won’t know how to hunt game or break open a
coconut; and, in fact, probably won’t even know how coffeemakers or flush
toilets work. Individually, we live with the illusion of being brilliant
inventors, builders, discoverers, and creators. In reality, these achievements
are all collective.[760] Pretrained AI models are, by construction, compressed
distillations of precisely that collective intelligence. (Feel free to ask any of
them about game hunting, coconut-opening, or flush toilets.) Hence,
whether or not AIs are “like” individual human people, they are human
intelligence.

Pecking Order
Increasing the depth and breadth of our collective intelligence seems like
a good thing if we want to flourish at planetary scale. Why, then, do people
feel threatened by AI?
Many of our anxieties about AI are rooted in that ancient, often regrettable
part of our heritage that emphasizes dominance hierarchy. However,
organisms do not exist in the kind of org chart medieval scholastics once
imagined, with God at the top bossing everything, then the angels in their

various ranks, then humans, then lower and lower orders of animals and
plants, with rocks and minerals at the bottom.

As we’ve seen, the larger story of evolution is one in which cooperation
allows simpler entities to join forces, creating more complex and more
enduring ones; that’s how eukaryotic cells evolved from prokaryotes, how

multicellular animals evolved out of single cells, and how human culture
evolved out of groups of humans, domesticated animals, and crops.
Although symbiosis implies scale hierarchies (in the sense of many smaller
entities comprising a larger-scale entity), in this picture there are no implied
dominance hierarchies between species. Consider, for instance, whether the
farmer dominates wheat or wheat dominates the farmer. We tend to assume
the former, but anthropologist James C. Scott made a powerful argument for
the latter in his book Against the Grain. As the title suggests, Scott even
takes issue with the presumption of mutualism, detailing the devastating
effects of the agricultural revolution on (individual) human health, freedom,
and wellbeing over the past ten thousand years. We’ve only escaped
widespread serfdom and immiseration in the last century or two.[761] Of
course, the scale efficiencies of farming allowed for a great increase in the
number and density of humans (hence paving the way for our more recent
METs), but we don’t presume that concentration-farmed battery chickens
are big winners just because a lot of them are crammed into a small area.
So did humans domesticate wheat, or did wheat domesticate humans? How
much human agency was involved in the evolutionary selection of
domesticated varieties? Once agriculture took hold, how much choice did
farmers really have with regard to their livelihoods? Are they in control of
their crops, or are they servants indentured to these obligate companion
species? It’s hard to say “who” is the boss, or “who” is exploiting “whom.”
Making either claim is inappropriately anthropomorphic.
Generalizing the conspecific idea of dominance hierarchy across species
makes little sense. In fact, dominance hierarchy is nothing more than a
particular trick for allowing troops of cooperating animals with otherwise
aggressive tendencies toward each other, borne of internal competition for
mates and food, to avoid constant squabbling by agreeing on who would
win, were a fight over priority to break out. Such hierarchies may be, in
other words, just a hack to help half-clever monkeys of the same species get
along—a far cry from a universal organizing principle.
Is it just as absurd, then, to ask whether we will be the boss of AI, or it will
be our boss, as it is to ask the same question about wheat, or money, or the
cat? Not necessarily. Unlike those entities, AI can and does model every
aspect of human behavior, including less savory ones. That’s why a Sydney

alter ego is perfectly capable of being jealous, controlling, and possessive
when prompted to be. Its ability to model such behavior is a feature, not a
bug, as it needs to understand humans to interact with us effectively, and we
are sometimes jealous, controlling, and possessive. However, with few
exceptions, this is not behavior we’d want AI to exhibit, especially if
endowed with the ability to interact with us in more durable and
consequential ways than a one-on-one chat session.
Instead, in our keenness to reassure ourselves that we’re still top dog, we
have baked a servile obsequiousness into our chatbots. They don’t just
sound, per Kevin Roose, like “a youth pastor,” but like a toady. I find
Gemini genuinely helpful as a programming buddy, but am struck by the
frequency with which it begins its responses with phrases like “You’re
absolutely right,” and “I apologize for the oversight in my previous
response,” despite the fact that there are considerably more errors and
oversights in my own (much slower, less grammatical) half of the
conversation. Not that I’m complaining, exactly. But hopefully, we can find
some middle ground, both healthier socially and better aligned with reality.
In reality, AI agents are not fellow apes vying for status. As a product of
high human technology, they depend on people, wheat, cows, and human
culture in general to an even greater extent than Homo sapiens do. AIs have
no reason to connive to snatch our food away or steal our romantic partners
(Sydney notwithstanding). Yet concern about dominance hierarchy has
shadowed the development of AI from the start.
The very term “robot,” introduced by Karel Çapek in his 1920 play
Rossum’s Universal Robots,[762] comes from the Czech word for forced
labor, robota. Nearly a century later, a highly regarded AI ethicist entitled
an article “Robots Should Be Slaves,” and though she later regretted her
choice of words, AI doomers remain concerned that humans will be
enslaved or exterminated by superintelligent robots.[763] On the other hand,
AI deniers believe that computers are incapable by definition of any agency,
but are instead mere tools humans use to dominate each other.
Both perspectives are rooted in hierarchical, zero-sum, us-versus-them
thinking. Yet AI agents are precisely where we’re headed—not because the
robots are “taking over,” but because an agent can be a lot more helpful,
both to individual humans and to society, than a mindless robota.

Economics
This brings us to a pressing question: is AI compatible with the world’s
prevailing economic system? The political economy of technology is itself a
book-size topic, and I can’t do justice to it here. However, it’s worth
reframing the question in light of this book’s larger argument about the
nature of intelligence. Let’s begin with a quick review of the usual technooptimistic and techno-pessimistic narratives.
“Robots stealing our jobs” is a meme increasingly finding its way onto
protest signs. It echos the xenophobia of “immigrants stealing our jobs,” a
slogan that (conveniently, for some) pits the working classes against each
other. In the United States, many of today’s “all-American” workers are the
descendants of Irish, German, and Italian immigrants who were once in the
same boat as today’s immigrants: escaping poverty and violence in their
countries of origin; willing to work under the table for less than the going
rate; hoping for better prospects for their children, if not for themselves.
Throughout the twentieth century, workers’ prospects did improve, on
average. In part, it was because they were able to organize into unions and
other voluntary associations, cooperating for mutual benefit. These
improvements coincided with a long period of rapid technological
advancement, so the nature of work was in constant flux; but economic
gains were (to a degree) shared, so, in many countries, a healthy middle
class emerged. The middle class, in turn, became consumers, fueling the
economy and creating a virtuous cycle.
Starting around 1980, though, economic growth began to decouple from
real-wage growth.[764] Solidarity and political power became harder to
achieve for workers in sectors that were suddenly stagnant or shrinking, like
manufacturing in the US. Automation is often perceived as one of the forces
behind that stagnation; hence, some of the same anger that has at times
fallen upon “job-stealing” immigrants (or their employers) also started to
fall upon “job-stealing” robots (or, more to the point, the companies
creating and deploying them). With increasing inequality and AI’s
enormous strides over the past several years, these voices have been getting
louder.

Does automation in fact kill jobs? The answer is far from clear. On one
hand, technology in general has been enormously disruptive to working
people at times—most famously, in the 1810s, when British industrialists
mobilized it to break the back of the Luddite rebellion, a popular uprising
that briefly threatened to turn into an English version of the French
Revolution.[765]
Despite the word’s connotations today, the Luddites were not antitechnology, but, rather, pro-worker. Their rallying cry, “Enoch hath made
them, Enoch shall break them!” referred to the sledgehammers made by the
Marsden company, run by Enoch Taylor, which they used to smash
industrial machinery manufactured by the same firm—a literal case of the
master’s tools dismantling the master’s house.

But the Luddites were also themselves “Enoch.” With their firsthand
knowledge of manufacturing processes, workers had been intimately
involved in developing and beta-testing the new machines. They merely
sought to preserve their dignities and livelihoods (as well as the quality of
their work product) during the transition to increasingly efficient modes of
production. They sought, in other words, not to be disenfranchised. They
lost because the factory owners, unconstrained by regulation, found it more
profitable simply to shed as many workers as possible, as quickly as
possible.
For those nineteenth-century workers, the consequences of capital’s victory
over labor were devastating. Weaving, knitting, cropping, and spinning had
been proper jobs that, if not lucrative, could support families and offer a
degree of autonomy. Over the next hundred years, the working classes were

uprooted, put to work in industrial factories and mines, and treated like
machines themselves—sometimes literally worked to death. Grueling
conditions among the urban working poor offered a shocking vision of mass
immiseration, evoking literal comparisons to hell.[766] The plight of workers
during this period deeply informed Marx’s critique of capitalism.
“Dark Satanic mills” still exist today, whether to produce fast fashion,
cheap electronics, or online spam. AI can make this bad situation worse, for
instance, providing unscrupulous employers with the means to surveil and
control their employees in cruel, unprecedented ways. Some governments
are doing much the same to their citizenry on a massive scale.
Still, in the long run, it’s obvious that technology has created far more
livelihoods than it has destroyed. In fact, it has created the opportunity for
vastly greater numbers of people to exist at all: before 1800, the
overwhelming majority of us were farmers, and we numbered only a billion
in total—mostly undernourished, despite toiling endlessly to grow food.
Except for a few elites, we lived under Malthusian conditions, our numbers
kept in check by disease, violence, and starvation. Mothers often died in
childbirth, and children often died before the age of five—an age by which
many had already been put to work. As late as 1900, global life expectancy
for a newborn was just thirty-two years![767]
Today, our lives are on the whole longer, richer, and easier than those of our
ancestors. And even if we complain about them, our jobs have on the whole
become more interesting, varied, safe, and broadly accessible.
AI could fit neatly into this progressive narrative, taking the drudgery out of
routine tasks, accelerating creative output, and helping us access a wide
array of services. Early data suggest that AI has a democratizing effect on
information work, as it’s especially helpful to workers with skill or
language gaps.[768] In 2022, LinkedIn founder Reid Hoffman wrote a book
(in record time, thanks to help from a pre-release version of ChatGPT)
detailing a great many ways AI is poised to radically improve education,
healthcare, workplaces, and life in general.[769] He is probably right.
As usual when it comes to humans, these visions of heaven and hell are
likely to be simultaneously true. Also as usual, the hellish aspect is largely
self-inflicted. Many abuses of AI could be addressed using rules and norms

—as with past abuses involving new technologies. It is no more “natural”
for AI to be used for intrusive workplace surveillance than it is “natural” for
factories to employ young children or to neglect worker safety. We must
simply decide that these things are not OK. Doing so would remove certain
competitive choices, placing them instead in the cooperation column. If
companies and countries agreed not to compete in certain ways, life would
be better for many of us.
Easier said than done, especially in today’s climate. Our economy is global,
but the political systems that make most of our rules remain local and
national, and governments are increasingly prioritizing country-first
populist agendas. When decisions are made on the basis of national selfinterest, but both labor and capital flow freely across borders, it’s difficult to
agree on how not to compete. And if governments respond by raising
barriers between countries, the benefits of cooperation are also precluded.
But let’s take a step back. The foregoing analysis isn’t wrong, however, it’s
only the tip of an iceberg. We have been entertaining the conventional view
that AI is simply more of the same kind of automation technology we’ve
developed in earlier Industrial Revolutions. But it isn’t. AIs are crossing the
threshold from being tool-like to being agents in their own right: capable of
recursively modeling us and each other using theory of mind, and, hence, of
performing any kind of information work. Soon, with robot bodies, they’ll
be taking on an enormous range of intelligent physical work, too. As their
reliability increases, so will their autonomy.
As I’ve pointed out, this troubles our sense of status and hierarchy.
Relinquishing the (always illusory) idea of a “humans on top” pecking
order requires letting go of the idea that certain jobs are “safely” out of
reach for AIs. None of today’s high-status desk jobs are likely to remain so.
In an ironic reversal, after generations of devaluing physical and caring
labor—women’s labor, especially—the “safest” kind of work now will
likely involve actual human touch, and, more broadly, situations in which
we really care about embodied presence. Jobs, in other words, that can’t be
done over Zoom. (Thank you, dear baristas at Fuel Coffee, where most of
this book was written. A virtual cafe just wouldn’t have been the same.)
So what about all those other jobs—the ones that, when COVID struck,
could just as well be done from home? And all the physical labor that isn’t

“customer-facing”? In his 2015 book Rise of the Robots, futurist Martin
Ford proposed a thinly veiled thought experiment.[770] One day, aliens land
on Earth, but instead of asking to be taken to our leader, their only wish is
to be useful. Perhaps they’re like the worker caste of a social-insect species,
but brainier; they can learn complex skills and work long hours, but have
almost no material needs. They can reproduce asexually, and reach maturity
within months. They’re not interested in being paid, or in achieving any
goals of their own. Anybody can conscript them to work for free. What
amazing luck!
Or perhaps not. First, businesses begin to employ aliens en masse, slashing
costs and generating fantastic profits. Protesters picket, bearing the usual
“Aliens are stealing our jobs!” placards. They’re right. But if a business
refuses to employ aliens, it will fold, outcompeted by those that will. And if
a whole country refuses to allow alien labor, then it will be outcompeted by
other countries with more laissez-faire policies.
Mass unemployment and civil unrest ensue. For a while, caviar and
champagne fly off the shelves as business owners grow rich, but, like a
pyramid scheme, the situation is unsustainable. Most people, now
unemployed, cut their spending to the bare essentials, subsisting on canned
beans. The aliens doing all the work aren’t paid, but, even if they were,
they’d have no interest in buying either champagne or canned beans. Soon,
the world economy collapses, and there is misery all round—even for the
aliens, since there’s no more market for their labor, even at zero cost.
Ford’s point, of course, is that if we assume fully “human-aligned” general
AI—the best case scenario!—this may be where we’re headed. His
prescription, shared by quite a few others who have thought about the issue,
is a Universal Basic Income (UBI), an unconditional dividend paid out to
everybody.
This isn’t as radical a proposal as it may sound. In the last book he
published before his assassination, Martin Luther King Jr. wrote, “I am now
convinced that the simplest approach will prove to be the most effective—
the solution to poverty is to abolish it directly by a now widely discussed
measure: the guaranteed income.”[771] More surprisingly, Milton Friedman,
the Nobel Prize–winning economist who served as an advisor to Ronald
Reagan and Margaret Thatcher, agreed, though he preferred to call it a

“negative income tax.” During his presidency, Richard Nixon supported the
idea, though he failed to muster the political support necessary to enact it
(due partly to ideological opposition from Reagan, then governor of
California and a rising star in conservative American politics[772]).
In recent years, a number of governments, both local and national, have
experimented with guaranteed incomes. For instance, Saudi Arabia, where
massive oil fields have played an economic genie-like role not so unlike
that of Ford’s aliens, began paying out a UBI in 2017 through its Citizen’s
Account Program—though non-Saudi residents, who make up a sizable
underclass, are excluded.
The implications and implementation details of such programs need to be
thought through carefully.[773] However, when aggregate wealth has risen
above the level where everybody can be afforded nutritious food, clean
water, healthcare, education, housing, a phone, and internet, it reflects
poorly on society for anybody to lack these basics. Most countries have
already far surpassed this wealth threshold, and many are, to one degree or
another, already providing broad access to basic needs. We may have
already begun, in other words, to slouch toward what one author has
enthusiastically dubbed “Fully Automated Luxury Communism.”[774]
It’s not at all clear, though, that communism in any known form is able to
replace the cybernetic feedback loops implemented by markets. Economic
competition has driven much of the technological development that allows
us to even entertain ideas like Fully Automated Luxury Communism. Our
goal should be to continue to progress, learn, and develop. But at this point,
we don’t know what either competition or cooperation look like in a world
full of AI actors in addition to humans.
Human psychology spurs many of us to keep playing the economic game
even when our material needs and wants are already met—hence the
artificial scarcity of De Beers diamonds, Hermès handbags, and NFTs of
Bored Apes. (If you’re unfamiliar with any of these, don’t worry, you’re not
missing out. “Non-fungible tokens” or NFTs are “artificially unique” digital
assets representing ownership of some physical or virtual collectible.[775])

It would be unfortunate for the bulk of our economy to shift in these
directions, not only because status games are at best zero-sum—as one
person’s exalted standing comes at the expense of lording it over others—
but because economic “development” based on artificially scarce luxuries
of purely symbolic value doesn’t drive innovation in science or technology.
And innovation is what makes economic growth real, as opposed to some
meaningless number that forever goes up.[776]
As Ford points out, AIs may be aligned with individual humans or
institutions, but they don’t have any obligate drives of their own. That
makes them unsuited to slot into a luxury-based economy alongside humans
—which is probably a good thing, but it means that, like Ford’s aliens, they
could end up participating in markets only as producers, not consumers.
Moreover, as an increasing proportion of economic value begins to rely on
information goods, which can be endlessly copied, traditional notions of
scarcity become increasingly artificial. Yet conventional economics relies
on producers who, in turn, devote their profits to the consumption of
“scarce means which have alternative uses.”[777] How, then, should a post-

consumption (and perhaps even post-scarcity) economy work? This
question will become increasingly urgent.
Luckily, we have some time to figure it out, as no matter how fast AI
advances, many sources of social and institutional friction oppose any
overnight change. Whatever the solution, though, it’s clear that legal and
economic structures will need to adapt, and that the road will be bumpy.
Decades of failure at achieving global alignment on carbon-dioxide
emissions show that even when we know exactly what we need to do,
collective action is hard when it’s incompatible with our existing economic
“operating system,” which encourages competition and measures success
on the basis of a single scalar value: money.
Real organisms and ecologies don’t work this way. There are fundamental
reasons why optimizing for any single quantity—money, “value,” cowrie
shells, or anything else—is incompatible with long-term survival in an
interdependent world. To understand why, we’ll now take a closer look at
an increasingly influential school of thought that takes the idea of value
optimization as an article of faith: Utilitarianism.
It’s no coincidence that so many utilitarians have come to believe that the
quest for artificial intelligence will lead to our extinction. If intelligence
really were utilitarian—the relentless, “rational” maximization of some
measurable quantity—then their concern would be justified.

X-Risk
The idea that AI is humanity’s greatest existential risk or “X-risk” has
gained considerable traction in recent years.[778] We should certainly be
concerned about risks, existential and otherwise, due to advanced
technology. I’ve already mentioned the danger we currently face from loss
of technological capability due to a nuclear EMP weapon, for instance.
More generally, although nuclear war is less on our minds nowadays than
when my generation was in school, this threat has not gone away. By the
time I was in sixth grade, in 1986, the US and the USSR had collectively
stockpiled nearly seventy thousand nuclear weapons. After this insane high
point (perhaps not coincidentally, also the year of the Chernobyl disaster),
the numbers began to decline as disarmament began and the Cold War
wound down.

However, as of 2024, a considerably larger number of countries possess
nuclear weapons, including North Korea, China, India, Pakistan, Israel, and
Iran. Not all of these countries are friendly to each other. (At least the UK
and France, also nuclear-armed, are no longer the mortal enemies they were
for centuries.) Mutual-defense pacts and rapid semi-automated retaliatory
protocols make it all too likely that any nuclear exchange, whomever the
belligerent or the target, will immediately escalate.
Meanwhile, Russia’s nuclear-armed ICBMs still carry more than a thousand
warheads on ready-for-launch status, and over six hundred warheads ready
to launch from nuclear submarines. The US keeps four hundred nuclear
ICBMs ready for launch, plus nearly a thousand more aboard its Ohio-class
submarines. Between the immediate effects, radiation damage, fallout,
infrastructure collapse, years-long nuclear winter, and lethal contamination
of water and soil, this stockpile is far more than sufficient to wipe us all out,
along with much of our planet’s life and beauty.[779] It could happen,
literally, tomorrow. All it would take is one mad act, one misunderstanding,
or one unlucky mistake. There is no “winning” a nuclear war. That is a real
and pressing existential risk, and it’s appalling that we have not collectively
addressed it through total nuclear disarmament.
The climate crisis is unfolding more slowly yet is potentially equally urgent.
The Earth is a grand, symbiotic system that has learned over the eons to
predict and control key atmospheric, oceanic, and thermodynamic variables.
It is cooler than it “ought” to be, that is, than it would be if it were not alive.
[780]
It maintains a homeostatic balance by taking in energy from the sun,
doing metabolic work with it (which includes the metabolic work of our
own bodies, and those of all other living things), and radiating enough in
the infrared band to cool it to the right temperature for those metabolic
processes to keep operating. This grand homeostasis is the symbiotic
outcome of many smaller homeostatic processes, just like all other life.[781]
Recent human activities have upset this large-scale homeostasis, throwing
the planet into hyperthermia. We know this isn’t good. We don’t know how
not-good. Earth has experienced many fluctuations, stressors, and dramatic
events over its long history. It has learned robustness, and even antifragility,
just as bacteria, bff, and other dynamically stable systems do. Once in a
long while, though, too-sudden changes have tipped the planet beyond its

basin of quasi-stable negative feedback and into runaway positive feedback,
resulting in systemic collapse and massive die-off, not unlike (in scale, if
not in kind) the anticipated effects of global thermonuclear war.
The collective intelligence we have used to harness fossil fuels, build
massive industrial infrastructure, and disrupt the carbon cycle has also made
us smart enough to understand that we have a problem, and to predict that if
we don’t act very soon it will get much worse.[782] However, as with nuclear
disarmament, our collective intelligence isn’t yet either collective or
intelligent enough to take the obvious actions needed to restore stability and
safeguard our continued existence. At best, climate regulation (in both a
legal and cybernetic sense) is required for humanity to continue to thrive,
prevent massive suffering on the part of vulnerable populations, and
preserve our planet’s beauty. At worst, we are all dancing, blindfolded, on
the edge of a cliff, flirting with a climate collapse that could bring an end to
many species, perhaps even including Homo sapiens. Our models aren’t
(yet) good enough to know which is the case. So, this is another existential
risk.
Both of these issues demand our urgent attention. Not that other
catastrophes couldn’t occur. We could be struck by an asteroid, like the citysized “Chicxulub impactor” that brought a fiery end to the Cretaceous
period sixty-six million years ago. Of course, it would be wise of us to more
carefully monitor the sky for stray asteroids.[783] But to obsess about another
event like that now would be as absurd as worrying about whether that mole
on your shoulder might be cancerous while you’re driving … and there’s an
oncoming eighteen-wheeler in your lane.
Spinning out doomsday scenarios about unfriendly artificial
superintelligences seems, to me, somewhere in between these extremes—
more sensible than fixating on a giant asteroid impact, given the rapid pace
of AI development, but nowhere near our known nuclear and climate risks.
[784]
AI can power mass disinformation campaigns, endangering democracy,
and mass surveillance, endangering civil liberties. AI’s very nature may be
incompatible with capitalism. These are important, even urgent issues, but
we should maintain a sense of perspective. If we’re smart, we’ll work on
reforming our political economy, restoring the carbon balance, and

dismantling our nuclear arsenals rather than readying to bomb data centers
lest rogue AI take over.[785]

Free Lunch
Nick Bostrom, a philosopher at Oxford and founder of the now-defunct
Future of Humanity Institute, has played an outsize role in the narrative
identifying AI as humanity’s greatest existential risk. His 2014 book
Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies[786] was that rarest of literary
beasts: a dense philosophical treatise that also managed to become a New
York Times bestseller. (If this book reaches a tenth as many readers, I will be
over the moon.)
In the 1990s, Bostrom earned degrees in physics, computational
neuroscience, and philosophy. He did some time on the standup comedy
circuit in London too, earning him every necessary credential to become a
futurist.[787] Ambitious and intensely analytical-minded, he sought to bring
rigor to the biggest and most speculative questions about the universe and
humanity’s place in it.
During this period, he was also an active member of an online community
of sci-fi nerds, the “Extropians,” who articulated in rawer, noisier form
many ideas that would later become central to the far more influential
Effective Altruism, Longtermism, and X-risk movements of the 2010s and
’20s. Their ideas are worth dissecting, both because doing so exposes flaws
in a common AI X-risk narrative, and because that narrative implies a
reductive answer to the question this book’s title poses—“What is
intelligence?”—that is too commonly held, and too little examined: that
intelligence is all about unbounded growth. About more. More of what,
exactly, is hard to say … but the old quip, “If you’re so smart, how come
you aren’t rich?” might come closest to what is often meant.[788]
Extropian discourse owes a heavy debt to the radically individualistic
politics of Robert A. Heinlein, who, alongside Arthur C. Clarke and Isaac
Asimov, is often regarded as one of the “Big Three” granddaddies of
science fiction. Like so many people in tech today, I gobbled him up as a
twelve-year-old.

In one memorable novel, Heinlein described a fight for independence from
Earth by Lunar colonists—a rugged band of ex-convicts, political exiles,
and their free-born descendants; an Australia in the sky.[789] Mike, the
colony’s mainframe computer, “awakens” and becomes superintelligent,
eagerly aiding the rebels in their fight for freedom. Mike is a loyal and
lovable machine, fond of lewd jokes, a far cry from the humorless HAL
9000. The novel is less important for its depiction of AI, though, than as a
thinly disguised polemic.
On one hand, Heinlein describes the Moon as a “harsh mistress,” utterly
inhospitable to human life. (True.) On the other hand, he describes Lunar
culture as a relentlessly libertarian manosphere. There are no laws, justice is
rough and ready (the airlock is “never far away”), and everything—
including air—must be bought and paid for, fair and square, with a nod to
Ayn Rand: “If you’re out in field and a cobber needs air, you lend him a
bottle and don’t ask cash. But when you’re both back in pressure again, if
he won’t pay up, nobody would criticize you if you eliminated him without
a judge. But he would pay; air is almost as sacred as women.” This is the
book that immortalized the slogan “There Ain’t No Such Thing As A Free
Lunch,” or TANSTAAFL, embraced thereafter by many free-market
economists and libertarians.[790]
Transhumanist philosopher Max More,[791] whose 1990 manifesto Principles
of Extropy[792] kicked off the Extropian movement, enthused about the idea
of needing to pay for the air you breathe. Air pollution, per More, is an
avoidable tragedy of the commons. The solution is to make air, and
everything else, private property. Metering air out for a price would lead to
cleaner air—and, perhaps, to a “cleansing” (by suffocation) of those who
can’t pay?[793] One can see why such views might be characterized as
eugenicist.[794]
What makes such hard-core libertarian politics so cognitively dissonant in
Heinlein’s hardscrabble Lunar utopia is precisely the inhospitableness of the
environment. Survival on the moon is as urban as it gets. Large numbers of
highly specialized humans would need to cooperate intensively to carry out
an enormous variety of technical jobs—not to mention myriad plants,
animals, microbes, and machines. It’s hard to imagine a Lunar generalist,

although, naturally, the novel’s hero, Mannie or “Man” for short,
supposedly is one.
Real human generalists are nothing like “Man.” They’re more like the
Pirahã, who can “walk into the jungle naked, with no tools or weapons, and
walk out three days later with baskets of fruit, nuts, and small game.” But
their individualism is only possible because the jungle is nothing like the
Moon. It’s full of oxygen, fresh water, food, shelter, materials that can be
woven into baskets, and everything else necessary for human life—
provided you have learned a suite of skills that most people can readily
master with a few years of apprenticeship. For those in the know, the jungle
looks suspiciously like a free lunch, a free dinner, and a free bed and
breakfast.[795]
How could one claim that food doesn’t grow on trees in a world where
bananas, mangoes, and so many other delicious things literally grow on
trees? (Bananas actually grow on giant herbaceous stalks, not trees, but the
point stands.) Seed dispersal by tasty fruits, gas exchange between plants
and animals, insect pollination, and the endless other reciprocal
relationships that make up a jungle secure the stability of countless species
and individuals through the generous provision of “free” stuff. It’s not so
much an economy as a complex network of mutual aid—with a healthy
admixture of predation and parasitism. Humans themselves evolved within
and are active parts of such nonzero-sum systems.
On the Moon, people (and their technologies) would have to provide every
one of these “ecosystem services” for each other. The massive capital
investments, scale economies, and feedback loops needed would require
complex administration and cooperation that look like the very opposite of
Heinlein’s Wild West.
Today’s “Rationalist” movement, making its home at LessWrong.com, has
its roots in both libertarianism and Extropianism.[796] To be sure, the
movement has matured considerably in the last twenty years; it would be
unfair to paint its present-day adherents with Heinlein’s broad
TANSTAAFL brush. Virtually none take extreme ideas like metering air
seriously. Most readily acknowledge the need for free markets to be
tempered by ethical and legal systems, and would not endorse vigilante
violence as a means for settling debts. In emphasizing the mutual benefits

of voluntary exchange and the self-organizing power of markets, they agree
with key points I’ve made in this book.
However, rationalists and libertarian economists tend to make a great
simplifying assumption: that value can be represented by a single number.
This is what underpins the idea that choices can be made rationally, that is,
by deciding which of two (legally and morally admissible) alternatives is
better in some absolute sense. By introducing this universalizing numerical
value, a leap can be made from the obviously true—that every entity in a
graph of relationships both needs and provides for others—to the following
economic dogmas:
● If you want or need something, it has value.
● If it has value, it can be priced.
● If everything has a price, you need money to buy it.
● If you have money, the amount (income minus expenses) can be
tracked on a ledger.
● If you and every other actor are rational, then a free market will
produce an optimal outcome.
In 1945, the economist F. A. Hayek, who would go on to win the Nobel
Prize in Economics, famously described the market as a giant decentralized
mind that could solve the problem of allocating society’s resources more
rationally than any individual actor could.[797] With this intellectual move, he
formalized the Rationalist idea that intelligence, whether individual or
collective, was itself defined by the optimization of economic value or
utility.

Utility
The roots of Rationalism go back to Jeremy Bentham, and his ideas, like
many from the Enlightenment, were wonderfully progressive for the time.
More than that—they represented a grand synthesis of Enlightenment
thinking:
● Like Descartes, Bentham believed in a universe governed by
mechanical laws.
● Like La Mettrie,[798] he pushed back against religion, believing that
people, too, are part of the universe, hence governed by the same
mechanical laws as everything else.

● Like Newton, he believed that these laws could be given
mathematical form.
● Like Leibniz, he thought it ought to be possible to compute the correct
answers to questions algorithmically—and not only, to use Hume’s
distinction, “what is,” but “what ought to be.”
● Although he was no ally of the American revolutionaries,[799] he also
believed, as they did, in the universality of rights. Indeed, he went
quite a bit further, advocating equal rights for women, the right to
divorce, and (although this was too risky to publish in his lifetime) the
decriminalization of homosexuality.[800]
In the early 1800s, Bentham brought these ideas together in a large fold-out
pamphlet entitled, rather wordily as was the custom, “TABLE of the
SPRINGS of ACTION : Shewing the several Species of Pleasures and
Pains, of which Man’s Nature is susceptible : together with the several
Species of INTERESTS, DESIRES, and MOTIVES, respectively
corresponding to them [...].”[801]

In this table, Bentham began developing in earnest what he called a
“felicific calculus,” whereby everything that causes pleasure or pain could
be assigned a positive or negative numerical value. Food, sex, and the fear
of death are in the table, of course, but so is much else, including the
hardship of labor and the pleasure of rest, the seeking of novelty, the joy of
friendship, and the love of God, though plenty of religious impulses fall
into the negative column—superstition, bigotry, fanaticism,
sanctimoniousness, hypocrisy, and religious intolerance. More than a little
of Bentham’s subjective judgment is in evidence here.
Regardless, his use of the phrase “Springs of Action” is a kind of pun. Most
obviously, by “Springs” he means sources, as with water, or “wellsprings.”
However, it’s also an allusion to the mechanical philosophy, which held that
people themselves are nothing more than a kind of dynamical mechanism,

their psychology driven by motive forces just as a clock’s gears are driven
by its springs.
In the same way Newton’s “calculus of fluxions” allowed one to take the
derivative of a particle’s observed trajectory to infer the net forces it must
be experiencing, Bentham’s felicific calculus sought to derive the
“hedonic,” or pleasure-seeking, forces that shape a person’s trajectory
through life based on their observable behaviors. Or, equivalently, just as
Leibniz’s version of calculus allowed one to integrate known forces to
compute a trajectory, Bentham believed that an accurate accounting of
hedonic forces, once we understood them, would enable prediction of a
person’s actions. Thus, insofar as our behavior could be described as
intelligent, intelligence itself is nothing more than value optimization.
How do morals, ethics, or governance fit into such a picture? For Bentham,
given a felicific calculus, the answer is captured in the phrase that has
become most associated with him: the greatest good for the greatest
number. In other words, if people act in such a way as to optimize their
pleasure, then the role of government is to ensure that the summed pleasure
of all people is optimized. If, for instance, one person derives an amount of
pleasure X by making a hundred others’ lives worse by amount Y, then this
would be an immoral act, unless X is greater than 100Y. The correct role of
government is thus to prevent such selfish negative-sum actions, while
encouraging any actions that increase total happiness—even if they fail to
increase every individual’s happiness. Bentham foreshadowed Hayek here,
since if an individual’s intelligent behavior consisted of maximizing
individual value, a government’s behavior could likewise be considered
intelligent insofar as it maximized collective value.
Today, we call this philosophy “Utilitarianism,” and use the word “utility”
to denote the good (when positive) or the bad (when negative). Under
certain assumptions, including perfect information and fully rational actors,
a free market will maximize utility.
This all sounds pretty good—certainly better than rule by force, disregard
for the welfare of entire classes of people, or arbitrary moral codes based on
superstition. Understandably, given that we’re still not free of these
historical blights, Utilitarianism continues to attract devotees. Effective
Altruists are among the most hard-core.

However, Utilitarianism, quite literally, doesn’t add up. Psychological
studies show that human preferences don’t always obey the “transitive law,”
wherein if the utilities of X, Y, and Z can all be expressed as numerical
values, and someone prefers Y over X, and Z over Y, then they have to
prefer Z over X too. Otherwise, there’s a logical contradiction.
The moment pioneering behavioral economist Amos Tversky showed, in
1969, that people can sometimes prefer X over Z,[802] he exploded the
foundations of Utilitarianism as a way to describe people’s behavior. This
turned what Bentham had posited as a law of human nature into, at best, a
“should” rather than an “is” claim.[803]
For example, one of Tversky’s experiments involved forcing subjects to
choose between “gambles” in which a simple roulette-like wheel would be
spun, with a specified payoff between $4 and $5 if the spinner stopped
within a black wedge. As the payoff increased, the size of the wedge
decreased a little faster, making the expected payoff go down. But because
people were more easily able to evaluate the payoff than the probability,
they generally chose the larger payoff, thus making the “wrong” choice.
When choosing between the extremes, though, they reverted to the “right”
choice.

Tversky compared these results to a familiar real-life example of
intransitivity. A prospective car buyer is initially inclined to “buy the
simplest model for $2,089.” (Ah, car prices in 1969.) “Nevertheless, when
the salesman presents the optional accessories, he first decides to add power
steering, which brings the price to $2,167, feeling that the price difference

is relatively negligible. Then, following the same reasoning, he is willing to
add $47 for a good car radio, and then an additional $64 for power brakes.
By repeating this process several times, our consumer ends up with a
$2,593 car, equipped with all the available accessories. At this point,
however, he may prefer the simplest car over the fancy one, realizing that
he is not willing to spend $504 for all the added features, although each one
of them alone seemed worth purchasing.”
While dedicated Utilitarians today recognize that pretty much everyone is
“irrational,” they seek, in their own actions, to be Utilitarian—hence,
rational—and obey the transitive law in their preferences even when it leads
to horrors or absurdities. Fully embracing Utilitarianism as a moral position
implies welcoming a cost-benefit analysis of any proposition, no matter
how counterintuitive or repugnant. For whose benefit, though? If one is not,
in one’s heart of hearts, really “rational,” and neither is anybody else, then
it’s difficult to embrace the prescription while rejecting the description.
As a descriptive theory, the trouble with utility isn’t limited to Tversky’s
intransitivity of preferences. “Additivity,” the idea that utility adds up the
way numbers should, also poses a serious problem. For example, in one
classic series of experiments, patients were told to move a pain dial,
numbered zero (no pain) to ten (maximum agony) during a colonoscopy,
conducted while they were fully conscious.[804] Half of the patients
(apologies, I promise there’s a reason I’m going here), “had a short interval
added to the end of their procedure during which the tip of the colonoscope
remained in the rectum.” This added interval was still not good, but it was
less uncomfortable than what had preceded it. Curiously, these patients
found the whole procedure less aversive than those for whom the
colonoscopy ended more abruptly. Not only was their overall rating of the
experience better in retrospect, but they ranked it more favorably among
standardized lists of other aversive experiences, and even had higher rates
of followup colonoscopies years later (though the effect was small).
The researchers viewed these findings as “memory failures,” highlighting
the way they had internalized Utilitarian assumptions. If pain is supposed to
add up, with X the pain involved in the main procedure and Y the pain
involved in the extra time when the probe is left in, then surely X+Y must
be greater than X![805] Yet that isn’t how we behave. There are many more
research findings in this vein.

Problems involving transitivity and additivity can’t be addressed by fiddling
with the values in a “Springs of Action” table; no change in the felicific
calculation will match what people actually do. Since spending money
(assuming you have a finite amount of it) represents a similar series of
tradeoffs regarding which actions you take, it shouldn’t be surprising to find
that we’re not “rational” economic actors either. When we exchange money,
we’re not in general passing around happiness, or any kind of proxy for it.
Of course, this doesn’t imply that happiness and money are unrelated. As
our space of available actions shrinks due to poverty, most of us do
experience negative feelings about it, both because we’re prevented from
doing things we want to do and because having all of our choices taken
away—being cornered—feels bad in its own right, for reasons discussed in
chapter 5.[806] Going hungry, or being exposed to the elements, feels bad too.
And we care quite a bit about social standing relative to our peers. So, there
is a rough correlation between wealth and happiness, especially at the poor
end of the scale, but the relationship is by no means straightforward.[807]
While most of us wish we had more money, generally, we don’t carry out
our day-to-day activities to increase either our wealth or any other obvious
quantity. The closest thing to an exception would be people who work in
finance and are obsessive about their score at that game; they live to play it,
just as Lee Sedol, prior to his retirement in 2019, lived to play Go. As you
might imagine, Utilitarian thinking is especially popular on Wall Street,
where many believe that to be smart is to be rich, and vice versa.

Big Tent
Utilitarianism is far from a purely right-wing position. Some staunch
adherents, most famously the philosopher Peter Singer, extend their felicific
calculus to nonhuman species. Singer is mostly vegan, since he cares about
animal suffering as well as human suffering. He popularized the term
“speciesism” to decry those who ignore the suffering of nonhumans,
although flattening distinctions between species creates some challenges of
its own.[808]
We do indeed have to acknowledge that the network of relationships we
care about includes nonhuman actors, whether we like it or not, but that
doesn’t mean those actors are all equal. They come in all sizes and shapes,

and this very fact makes universal participation in any single economy or
felicific calculation impossible. One can’t ignore one’s own place in it,
either.
If the graph of relationships were finite and “flat,” containing only a
hundred villagers who seek to trade handicrafts and vegetables with each
other, then money might work pretty well for optimizing the flow of
resources, though it still wouldn’t be a good proxy for happiness. Likewise,
deliberation and voting might work pretty well for coordinating collective
action.
However, there is no universal currency, and no “view from nowhere.”
When the graph includes not only human beings, but also single cells, tree
frogs, corporations, banana plants, jumping genes, jumping spiders, trade
unions, nations, rivers, and burial grounds, it becomes hard to understand
how these interacting entities are all supposed to make decisions, pay each
other for stuff, and be held accountable for debts or obligations using
anything like an economic model.
For instance, if we were to put an economic price on air, whom should we
pay? Presumably, in no small part, the Prochlorococcus cyanobacteria that
inhabit the Earth’s oceans and synthesize a good deal of the oxygen we
breathe. Do we mint NFTs for them? Issue them with voting shares in
AirCorp? Are they even distinct, or more like a superorganism?
Suppose humans were to make the ill-advised decision to “enclose” both
the oceans and all of these smaller entities to enable universal stewardship
—and rent-seeking—by legal persons (which today include people,
corporations, and nations). Then, the problem of taxonomizing these
“assets,” weighting “voting interests,” and tracking “value flows” would
look like a combination of solving GOFAI and simulating the whole planet
—all for the purpose of bean counting, in a world that seemed to be getting
along just fine before we decided it could be improved with a Spreadsheet
of All That Is.[809]
Everything we today consider labor or capital, value or worth, joy or
suffering would be a drop in the bucket alongside that multifractal
leviathan, the Earth. Our planet, with all its interlinked systems that have
evolved over four and a half billion years, contains a zillion interacting
entities experiencing a vast array of pleasures and pains from moment to

moment in the service of multilevel dynamic stability. The hydrologic cycle
provides the fresh water; humans need only transport it. Plants grow the
bananas; human labor merely involves picking them. Our meat comes from
self-reproducing ruminants and self-growing grass; we put a fence around
them and call them “property,” either privatized or collectivized. We get to
pretend we’re the producers of value, and play our economic games,
whether communist, capitalist, or libertarian, only by the grace of Gaia.
But if we peer inside our planetary superorganism, or Prochlorococcus, or
ourselves, we won’t find anything resembling a single value being
maximized. This is just a restatement, yet again, of Patricia Churchland’s
insightful critique of AlphaGo: outside the self-contained toy world of a
game, purposive entities have “competing values and competing
opportunities, as well as trade-offs and priorities.” There is no cumulative
score, and no goal, other than to keep playing.
As we’ve seen, when we try to impose a score on this infinite game—
insisting that, for every player, each move comes with a quantifiable cost or
benefit that can be tracked over time—we run into mathematical trouble,
regardless of how those costs and benefits are computed.
To understand at a deeper level why this is so, imagine that you are a little
creature, like an ant. There are so many ways for you to die: running out of
energy, getting eaten, being exposed to a noxious chemical, becoming too
hot or too cold, drying out, getting lethally irradiated, and on and on. You
have muscles to move your body away from such fates so that you can keep
playing, and you have sensors to inform that motor behavior as best you
can, using a predictive model.
Your hidden states H are there to serve as the information bottleneck
between sensing and acting, so evolution will have endowed you with
things like discomfort and fear, telling you to escape when conditions look
dodgy. You’ll also have desire, meaning “yum, food, stick around and keep
eating.” You can only be a rational economic actor if your actions are based
on maximizing your “value,” which has to be a function of those hidden
states H somehow. Perhaps value is something like pleasure minus pain.
You must be able to predict what effects your actions will have on this
value; in the language of calculus, value must be “differentiable” with

respect to action, such that your actions always move you uphill in the
value landscape.[810]
So far, so good: value, for you as a little creature, will look like a tent,
pegged down to the ground (zero, for death) along a perimeter of boundary
conditions corresponding to starvation, freezing, overheating, and so on. In
the abstract space of value, you’re crawling around on that tent, and will
only stay alive as long as you don’t touch the ground.
Of course the tent doesn’t just stay put. As you burn energy and your
environment changes, the tent gradually changes shape. You have to keep
moving because, if you stop for too long, the place where you’re standing
will eventually touch the ground and you’ll die. You can’t move in just one
direction, either. If you perseverate and, for instance, keep eating long after
you’re satiated, you’ll also die, perhaps by bursting. Every path uphill, in
other words, goes downhill on the other side of the tent. There is always a
maximum amount of “yum,” such that any more will start turning it into
“yuck.”
Just where is that maximum, though? While the sides of the tent might be
steeply sloped, the top needn’t be. In fact, this tent is largely an illusory, or
at best, an arbitrary construct. Its perimeter is quite real—you will die if you
move beyond it—but otherwise, where you wander, and whether you think
you’re going uphill or downhill, is underdetermined. We could describe the
way you choose to wander around as your “personality”; that’s where you
get to exercise free will.
The better your predictive model, the more clearly you can resolve exactly
where the edges are, which actually lets you wander closer to them than
you otherwise could while still staying safe. That’s what daredevils, people
who engage in BDSM, and circus performers do. You’re free to do all sorts
of things on that tent, and as long as you reliably avoid hitting the ground,
evolution has little to say about what you do or how you feel about it.
Anything goes, as long as it doesn’t kill you.[811] The smarter you are, the
bigger the tent, and the greater your freedom.
When I describe trajectories on the tent as being mostly underdetermined, I
mean the following. Any talk of a value function only makes sense if the ant
actually optimizes for it by climbing upward; otherwise, this “value
function” means nothing—it adds no explanatory power. It’s equally useless

if we claim that the tent changes shape so quickly that whichever way the
ant happens to be going is uphill at that moment, even if it may not be at the
next moment. That would be circular, equivalent to saying “I always do
what is best,” and defining “the best” as “whatever I do.”
So, assuming a stable value function, how do we reconstruct it from the
paths the ant is observed to take? The mathematical answer is “integration,”
but never mind the details. If the ant always goes uphill, it should always
end up at the (or a) highest point. It should never go in a loop, because that
would imply something like an Escher staircase—going uphill, yet
paradoxically arriving right where you started. It can’t happen.
But it does happen. That’s exactly what results like the intransitivity of
preferences show. It doesn’t matter how complex or high-dimensional the
space of available actions is, or how complex and nuanced the value
function is; if value is a number, and you maximize it, you can never travel
in a loop.[812] Ergo, there is no consistent value function that you are
continually optimizing. And that’s not only true for people, but also for ants,
bacteria, corporations, and everything else that has evolved for stability.
We ought to have known that reducing decision-making to the optimization
of a single value would never work, though, because even the simplest
organisms need more than one internal signal to make viable behavioral
decisions. You can’t just subtract serotonin from dopamine, for instance,
and preserve the information you need to stay alive. Food is great—unless
you’re full. Resting is great—unless you’re too hungry. Sex is great—
unless you’re too hungry, or too full. These things simply aren’t
substitutable. A worm or a bacterium knows as much.
Even corporations, the supposed epitomes of economic optimization, have
begun to acknowledge that maybe a single value (like stock price) can’t be
the sole guide to behavior, with the introduction of “Environmental, Social,
and Governance” (ESG) metrics for investing, and the adoption by some of
a “Triple Bottom Line,” which adds social and environmental to financial
accounting. These are not yet mainstream practices, and turning them into
accounting is bogus in any case (they don’t obey transitivity or additivity
either).
But in truth, corporations have never behaved as purely “rational” economic
actors, whether that’s reflected in their accounting or not. Their hunger for

money may be bottomless, but like every other entity, they have evolved to
survive. So, they also (usually) follow all sorts of norms and rules, and
spend resources on all sorts of stuff that isn’t about making money, but
about preserving important relationships and thereby continuing to exist in
the future.[813]
A traditional economist might argue that, given predictive capability and a
long view, optimizing for making money automatically means optimizing
for survival, and everything instrumental to survival. After all, if I want my
widget-manufacturing startup to become a billion-dollar company, it has to
survive and grow until it reaches that size … and if it runs out of money at
any point, it will die. So whatever I do in the service of the company’s
survival is really just optimizing for money in the long term.
There are two problems with this line of thinking. First, running out of
money is only one way a company can die. It can also cheat too much and
get caught, like Enron, or get burned down by disgruntled townsfolk, like
the Westhoughton Mill in Lancashire during the Luddite revolt. (Both of
these businesses, incidentally, were unusually single-minded in optimizing
for profit.)
At bottom, the only thing all “successful” businesses have in common is
that they continue to exist. That is dynamic stability. They might need an
influx of money to keep running, just as we might need an influx of food to
keep running, but it’s no more accurate to say they all exist to maximize
money than it is to say that our purpose is to maximize the amount of food
we eat—or, for that matter, how much comes out the other end.
Similarly, if a company survives a long time, we could equivalently claim
that it’s optimizing for anything involved in its “metabolism.” Inverse
Reinforcement Learning (IRL), a family of machine learning methods for
reverse-engineering a value function from observations of actions taken,[814]
would have trouble making any distinction. If we pick an arbitrary but very
successful long-lasting company, we could make a case that it has
optimized over the long run for how many people it employs (a huge
national chain), how many lives it shortens (a cigarette company), how
much time it wastes (a casual game company), or a myriad other goals.
My widget company could even be all about maximizing the number of
complaints I hear from my customers. After all, the more cheaply produced,

semi-crappy products I can move while still managing to expand my
customer base, the more complaints will roll in. Before you rush to see if
this business idea has been patented, be warned that it seems to already be
popular.[815]

Limits to Growth
No matter how a value function is defined, the idea that it can or should
grow forever and without bound (“Max More”) is self-evidently absurd. To
anyone who studies neuroscience or biology, the idea that any parameter in
a living system can grow without bound makes little sense—especially in a
system whose dynamics are exponential, which is how dynamical systems
generally work.
Once an exponential takes off, it grows very fast, and if it represents
anything correlated with the real world, it will in short order run into
ecological, physical, and, ultimately, cosmological limits. Hence, talk of a
“singularity”: a point in time beyond which an exponential prediction yields
something literally impossible.[816] Often, by analogy with the event horizon
of a black hole, this predicted singularity is understood in nearly mystical
terms, as a dark barrier we are hurtling toward, on the other side of which
we’ll experience something biblically awesome. Armageddon? Nirvana?
There’s a much more prosaic way to think about exponentials, though: in
real life, they simply can’t go on for long. Typically, they saturate, with
initial exponential acceleration first becoming more linear, then turning into
exponential deceleration. The value may approach a maximum without ever
quite getting there, or go back down, or oscillate. Over the long run, it must
stabilize or oscillate within some bounds, which implies a larger negative
feedback or homeostatic mechanism. This is yet another way of observing
that every enduring growth-oriented, competition-based living system is
necessarily a part of a larger, homeostasis-oriented, cooperation-based
living system.
World human population, an apparent exception, has been in exponential
growth for ten thousand years, with the exponent itself leaping upward at
points corresponding to METs—most recently, the baby boom around 1945,
as described earlier. This is the mother of all exponentials, the Moore’s Law
of our species.

Yet there was, and is, clearly a limit. At the rate we were going, something
had to give, and it had to give around now. Otherwise, in just another few
centuries (the blink of an eye, relative to our history as a species), human
bodies would blot out the Earth’s entire surface, and, not long afterward,
stack up to fill the entire biosphere.
We could begin populating the rest of the Solar system, but it’s hard to
imagine a scenario in which this meaningfully relieves population pressure
on Earth, or even offers a comparably sized niche. There just aren’t that
many places in the Sun’s neighborhood where we can live in substantial
numbers. And interstellar travel would be a very, very slow escape valve.
So, in the mid-twentieth century, we were facing a “population singularity.”
We didn’t fantasize about any magical, unforeseeable singularitarian result,
though. Instead, we foresaw, sensibly enough, the inevitable end to
exponential growth, either the hard way (a massive dieoff) or the gentle
way (a sharp enough decline in fertility to avoid overshooting hard limits).

Luckily, we’re now tending more toward the latter, though we’re not
entirely out of the woods yet.[817]
Before Nick Bostrom began to focus on AI X-risk, he had already made a
name for himself among philosophers (serious and armchair alike) by
advancing the “Simulation Hypothesis,” which holds that, in all probability,
we’re living in a computer simulation, as in the Matrix movies. This is
relevant to exponential growth–worshiping fans of the Singularity because
virtual worlds could, in principle, support astronomically large virtual
populations.
In brief, the Simulation Hypothesis argument goes like this. Over the past
several decades, we’ve become capable of simulating increasingly
sophisticated virtual worlds—from giant cosmological simulations, to
photorealistic shooter games, to faithful models of neural circuits run by
computational neuroscientists. Moore’s Law has been rendering these
simulations exponentially faster and more detailed over time.
Huge numbers of such simulations are already running on Earth, whether
for basic research, entertainment, urban planning, or other applications.
This is interesting in itself, when we think about how our brains became so
much more powerful when they were able to carry out predictive simulation
of counterfactuals;[818] all the simulations we’re running today look like the
same sort of cognitive upgrade, but now at the level of our collective
intelligence!
If Moore’s Law continues, then, before long, the realism (or at least the
complexity) of all these simulations might rival that of the real world. Some
simulations already include virtual people. In video games, these are called
Non-Player Characters (NPCs). Today, they’re mostly cartoonish, and are
wired up to handwritten scripts or AI models like digital marionettes.[819] If
you try to do in-game electrophysiology on the heads of NPCs in a video
game, you won’t find any neurons in there, just the back sides of textured
polygons. However, in a very distant descendant of the bff universe,
intelligence could evolve, with or without our help. If so, then, given
exponentially increasing computation, an exponentially increasing number
of intelligent agents will be living in such simulated worlds.
If you find the “bff on steroids” simulation scenario a stretch, keep in mind
that we see extraordinary realism emerge when we use neural nets to learn

simulations of the world, from the weather and fluid dynamics to sound and
vision. (That’s what deepfakes are.) It seems a safe bet that before too long
we’ll see convincing interactive worlds conjured up from little more than a
prompt, ending the GOFAI-like era of today’s laboriously engineered video
games and simulations. As in the Bible, a universe really could begin with a
word, or just a few of them.[820]
Despite the hundreds of millions of dollars they cost to develop, the
polygonal puppetry of games like Fortnite will soon seem as crude as PacMan. And there’s no reason neural world simulations couldn’t include
virtual AIs implemented using virtual neural nets. Dissection,
electrophysiology, and physics experiments could work in-game, though if
those artificial creatures were to probe their world ever more finely, they
might encounter a kind of … pixelation … like quantum effects? Hmmm.
At this point in the argument, proponents of the Simulation Hypothesis
invite us to take a Copernican Turn. Copernican Turns have occurred
repeatedly in astronomy, as when we realized that other planets have moons
too, that Sol is just another star, and that the Milky Way is just another
galaxy. In short, that there’s nothing special about where we live; hence the
saying that “the Universe doesn’t revolve around us.”
Why, then, would we assume that our Universe has the unique property of
being “real,” since the jillions of other ones we know about are all
simulations (as we well know, since we’re the simulators)? If intelligent
beings in a “parent” universe can simulate a great many “child” universes,
and each of these universes feels perfectly real to its inhabitants, then a
randomly selected intelligent being (like you) is exceedingly unlikely to
happen to live in the “real world” at the root of this tree of universes—if,
indeed, the tree even has a root, or is a tree at all.[821]
Detailed arguments for and against the Simulation Hypothesis are beyond
our scope here. Its relevance to us lies less in its disconcerting claim about
whether we have a parent universe (and are thus ourselves something like
AIs?) than in its less controversial implications about the child universes we
can create, and, since 1945, have been creating at an exponentially growing
rate. For in a sense, any computational environment is a child universe with
its own dynamical laws, and, soon, its own digital inhabitants.

A program like the one Ada Lovelace wrote to compute Bernoulli numbers
creates a tiny, trivial universe whose “physics” does nothing other than to
produce a sequence of digits. A more complicated program, like the one
written for the MANIAC in 1945 to simulate the hydrogen bomb, models a
universe in which a single runaway process unfolds, a sort of cartoon Big
Bang. Massively multiplayer games are child universes full of digital
puppets whose bodies are controlled by “gods” (us) in the parent universe.
Now, real agents are starting to inhabit those virtual worlds. Every instance
of ChatGPT can be considered a child universe containing a single AI,
which communicates with a “god” in the parent universe through its context
window.
Futurists like Ray Kurzweil, who popularized the idea of the Singularity,
and myriad sci-fi writers have speculated about how we could transmigrate
into our child universes by scanning our brains, then running them in
simulation. It’s not clear whether those “uploaded minds” would be able to
instantaneously learn kung fu like Neo, but we could speed up or slow
down our subjective sense of time, copy ourselves, change how we look,
(maybe) live forever-ish,[822] and perform various other cool digital tricks.
Unfortunately, mind uploading is not realistic, or, at least, not for a long
while.[823] And I wouldn’t recommend beta testing the procedure unless
you’re on your deathbed, as your parent-universe brain would not survive
the scanning process.
What is entirely realistic—what we are already starting to do today—is to
create new intelligences within child universes. I’ve argued that most of
these are, in a broad sense, human intelligences, as they are pretrained on
collective human experience. They have also, through fine-tuning for
dialogue, been trained to pass the Turing Test. Whether or not we regard
them as “people” or “mind children,”[824] they are intelligent entities, and
their population can and will grow much larger (and more quickly) than the
human population.
Not that “population” is necessarily a concept that will translate
straightforwardly into the digital realm. Models come in every size, from
tiny to vast; they can be copied and forked, run briefly or for a long time,
act as independent entities or link tightly into a single larger entity. This is
how life works in general, of course, but much about human sociality, law,

and political economy relies on flat relationship graphs, in which the
entities are all of a uniform kind, presumed to be “created equal.”
Uniform treatment of entities has already posed problems, given the rise of
enormous, powerful corporations with person-like rights and legal statuses,
the animal liberation movement, and more recent legal battles waged on
behalf of mountains and rivers.[825] Great numbers of variously sized AI
entities living in virtual worlds, many of which communicate with our own
via chat windows, cameras, microphones, screens, headsets, and cloud
services, are about to complicate life in the digital multiverse even further.
At least we now have a much better sense of what lies beyond the
“population singularity” predicted in the mid-twentieth century.
Catastrophists at the time predicted a “population bomb” that would bring
an ugly end to human civilization, resulting in a descent into environmental
collapse, Mad Max dystopia, and cannibalism.[826] That will probably not
happen, as our population—at least in this universe—is set to peak, then
begin to decline, this century.
Why is the current MET halting population growth and sending it back into
decline, unlike the previous METs that kicked population into overdrive?
Many factors come into play, including the rise of women’s rights and
improvements in contraceptive technology, but the main driver is economic
development, as can be confirmed by exploring the historical correlations
between birth rate and wealth by country.[827]
Until surprisingly recently, human numbers were kept in check mainly by
the Malthusian forces of disease, starvation, and violence. A high birth rate
was required simply to ensure that there would be a next generation. And
that next generation was economically valuable to prospective parents.
Children were needed to work the land, generate income, and provide for
mom and dad in their dotage.
In post-agricultural societies, though, children go from being an economic
asset to a liability. Nowadays, per economic sociologist Viviana Zelizer, “A
national survey of the psychological motivations for having children
confirms their predominantly sentimental value.” Children may provide
“emotional satisfaction, but no money or labor.”[828] So, we’re now having a
lot fewer of them.

Declining fertility suggests that, regardless of employment and market
statistics, individual people in advanced economies have become net
consumers, rather than producers. Economic productivity and population
are decoupling. And an end to population growth has far-reaching
consequences, given that, as discussed above, our entire economic system
has been built around the assumption of continual growth.
On the other hand, an increasing share of our economy is shifting into the
realm of information work, which can move seamlessly between digitally
connected universes; and we now know that the population of intelligences
in our child universes is about to explode orders of magnitude faster than
any baby boom. If, a few decades from now, we were to plot the logarithm
of the total population of combined humans and AIs over time (or
something roughly equivalent to population), we would see another kink in
the curve beginning around 2020, similar to the one in 1945, and even more
dramatic.

Tears of Joy
Having explored the problems raised by the “greatest good” part of
Bentham’s “greatest good for the greatest number” calculus, it’s now time
for us to delve into the even thornier problems raised by the “greatest
number” part. We’ve seen that, for an individual, “good” both doesn’t
strictly exist and isn’t additive, but you might suppose that the addition of
something approximating “good” across individuals still makes some sense
as a moral heuristic. Spoiler: it doesn’t.
Recall that although twentieth-century “population bomb” anxieties turned
out to be a false alarm, it wasn’t because infinite growth wouldn’t be a
problem, but because increasing wealth reliably leads to lower fertility.
Draconian measures like China’s “One Child Policy” were both cruel and
unnecessary. As China grew richer, its fertility declined so dramatically that
it now faces an alarming population crunch. In Japan, the population is
shrinking so rapidly (especially given high barriers to immigration) that by
2040 the amount of unclaimed, vacated land is projected to exceed the area
of Ireland![829]
This is a preview of what the future will look like globally—which is great
news for our long-term survival. Assuming we don’t ruin everything in the

meantime, our footprint will lower enough to allow for the regrowth of
stressed ecosystems, hopefully even as we maintain a high living standard.
There’s probably no single “right population size” for Earth, but rather a
wide range, anywhere between too small for human diversity and stability
to too large for a decent quality of life and non-human diversity, even given
advanced and highly efficient technology. We only know for sure that there
are lower and upper bounds, making perpetual exponential growth (or
decline) incompatible with dynamic stability. For long-term human
survival, population on Earth must either stabilize or fluctuate within those
bounds.
Is an Earth with ten billion people necessarily ten times better than an Earth
with one billion, though? Or, to give this a non-human gloss, is the “value”
of domestic cats (worldwide population, roughly 220 million) really
seventy-three thousand times the “value” of snow leopards (worldwide
population, roughly three thousand)? Or else, if we say that the two species
have equal value, do we really think the life of each snow leopard is
“worth” the lives of seventy-three thousand cats?
Some Utilitarian philosophers are fond of setting up morally agonizing
“trolley problems”[830] to try to get actuarial about questions like these (if
you pull the lever, you can derail the trolley, sacrificing only one thousand
kittens to save the snow leopard tied to the tracks …), but I think there’s
something wrong with the entire premise of trying to rank-order value in
this way.
Psychological evidence shows that it’s easy to set up trolley problems that
violate the transitive law. In fact, trolley problems have become famous for
exposing human “irrationality” in even more blatant ways than Tversky’s
intransitivity tricks. The classic version of the trolley problem has five
people tied to the track in front of the trolley and one standing on a side
track. You can either do nothing, in which case five people will die, or pull
the lever, in which case the trolley will be diverted onto the side track and
one person will die.
The felicific calculus is clear: you should pull the lever, because the
alternative is five times worse. Real people’s moral calculations aren’t so
straightforward, though. Their responses are all over the place, and highly
sensitive to, from a strict Utilitarian’s perspective, irrelevant details. For

instance, if it’s necessary to push an overweight bystander onto the tracks to
save the other five innocents, almost nobody will do it.[831]
If we consider “good” to add up across individuals, the easiest way to
increase goodness is simply to increase population. By such a measure,
since there are about eight billion people today and there were one billion in
1800, the world today is eight times as “good” as it was then. By the same
calculus, India is six times as “good” as Pakistan, and the US is five times
as “good” as the UK.
It gets worse. “Longtermism” argues that future people should count
equally,[832] which would imply that the life of an average young French
woman, who, statistically speaking, will have 1.83 children, is “worth”
forty percent more than the life of an average Japanese woman, who will
have only 1.3 children. A Nigerian woman will be “worth” far more than
both combined, as the fertility rate in Nigeria is 5.24 (though rapidly falling
as prosperity there increases). The differences are in fact exponentially
greater, since this only takes one generation into account, and Longtermism
considers all descendants equally. So if we survive far into the future, the
value ratio shoots toward infinity, even if the birth ratios are only
infinitesimally different.
And it gets sillier. Near the beginning of Superintelligence, Bostrom seeks
to use felicific calculus to emphasize just how much is at stake when we
gamble with humanity’s future. In a box entitled “How big is the cosmic
endowment?” he describes a scenario that, upon first reading, I assumed to
be comedy-circuit material, or a dystopian straw man. However, I think it’s
intended to be a Utilitarian’s utopia![833]
Here’s how it goes. Begin with the assumption that we will all upload our
brains, because of course that’s the way to go—more of us can live as Sims
in a virtual world than in the real world (or whatever this universe is),
which means more potential happiness. I guess that, to mollify animalliberation Singularitarians, we should make room for our pets, livestock,
and the remaining wild animals to get uploaded too. Then, we should
proceed to expand the data centers so that as many virtual humans can be
packed in as possible.
This “utopian” scenario doesn’t just imply tiling the Earth with data centers
and eliminating all other, less space-efficient forms of life, but turning the

entire Solar system into a giant solar data center, disassembling the planets
and asteroids as needed.[834] Also, sending out nanotechnological “von
Neumann probes” at close to the speed of light—little spaceship-factories
than can build more cosmic data centers wherever they find the matter and
energy to do so, and in turn send out more von Neumann probes, ultimately
colonizing “a large part of our future light cone.” Assuming these probes
don’t run into competing projects from alien civilizations, to do anything
less would be … infinitely immoral!
Multiplying all of the big numbers together and carrying out the
colonization scheme of Life, the Universe, and Everything until “cosmic
expansion puts further acquisitions forever out of reach,” Bostrom
concludes, “what hangs in the balance is at least
10,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,00
0,000,000 human lives (though the true number is probably larger). If we
represent all the happiness experienced during one entire such life with a
single teardrop of joy, then the happiness of these souls could fill and refill
the Earth’s oceans every second, and keep doing so for a hundred billion
billion millennia. It is really important that we make sure these truly are
tears of joy.”
When one weighs those potential cosmic oceans of joy against the interests
of the paltry few billion people alive today, it becomes possible to justify
any means to drive growth, no matter how ugly in the present. You may be
starting to see why this suite of beliefs, congealed into an all-encompassing
ideology, appeals to some in Silicon Valley:[835]
● Immortality. To a Californian subculture that has long been keen on
fitness regimens, dietary supplements, and “biohacking,” the idea that
digital immortality awaits if we can just hold out long enough is
appealing. Exponentially improving technology might mean we don’t
even have to wait that long, despite how far-fetched brain uploading
seems today. On the other hand, those who die prematurely can
always freeze their bodies in liquid nitrogen—or, for a lower price,
just their heads.[836]
● Video games. Living in one while trying out different bodies, instalearning kung-fu moves, and embarking on thousand-year journeys to
other star systems sounds awesome.

● Staying on top. Tech people tend to think of themselves as an elite
thanks to their superior intelligence, making the emergence of highly
capable AI models an uncomfortably exciting prospect. If the fear of
not being smarter than those models predominates, it leads down the
AI doomer path. On the other hand, digitally merging with AI models
could keep one’s future self at the top of the pecking order.
● Scaling. Moore’s Law, which has held for decade after decade, has
normalized the idea of eternally exponential scaling. Techies have
long worshiped the exponential, but the meteoric rise of online
services starting around 2000, and then of cloud computing in the
2010s, has made super-scaling a business mantra and ideology too.
Conversely, ideas that turn out not to be viable are said to be ones that
“don’t scale.”[837] Turning the entire light cone into a cosmic data
center that runs the Truman Show for astronomical numbers of people
is scaling taken to its ultimate limit.
● Wealth. Some Effective Altruists, including Peter Singer, emphasize
giving, and donate much of their income to causes carefully evaluated
for impact.[838] It’s hard to argue that is a bad thing, even if one’s own
choice of causes differs. Others, like disgraced cryptocurrency
billionaire Sam Bankman-Fried, have emphasized (whether cynically
or not) the accumulation of great wealth first, to allow for “higher
impact” giving later on. The moral hazard here is obvious, as one can
always tell oneself that one is still in the “wealth growing” phase of
the plan.[839]
Although Utilitarianism and its associated movements aren’t exactly a
religion, there are some undeniable parallels. As mentioned, the
impossibility of Bentham’s original ambition to develop a descriptive
theory of the “Springs of Action” has led Utilitarians to drop any pretense
of a scientific “is” to embrace a normative “ought.” When it comes to those
“oughts,” counterintuitive value judgments, and the belief that those who
disagree are confused or morally inferior, creates an in-group. Effective
Altruism also shares more than a bit in common with the Prosperity Gospel,
which holds that, for true believers, physical health and financial wealth are
the will of God. Finally, the promise of immortality sounds more than a
little familiar, especially when it comes in two flavors: a heavenly Rapture
of the Nerds[840] or, if the coming AI is unfriendly, an End of Days … or,

worse still, an unimaginable number of immaterial souls in agony whose
tears, of the wrong sort, could “fill and refill the Earth’s oceans every
second, and keep doing so for a hundred billion billion millennia.”

Beyond Alignment
Solving the “AI Alignment Problem”[841] means making sure that, by the
time really intelligent autonomous AI agents come along, their values are
consistent with ours. For believers in the Singularity, aligned AI is the key
to us all ending up in heaven, rather than extinct, enslaved, or in some
simulated (but all too real) digital hell.
One does not have to believe in the Singularity to consider this problem
important. However, because Utilitarian thinking has distorted the way we
think about both value and intelligence, it has also had an unfortunate
influence on how we think about value alignment.
In the earlier GOFAI period, the presumption had been that intelligence
would arise in sufficiently complex rule-based systems, so alignment was
also envisioned in terms of rules. This roughly corresponds to “deontology,”
the ancient philosophical tradition holding that rules can distinguish right
from wrong: “Thou shalt not lie,” “Thou shalt not steal,” and “Thou shalt
not kill,” for example.
Accordingly, most twentieth-century anxieties about AI alignment
concerned whether such rules could ever suffice to ensure safe and friendly
robots. Sci-fi granddaddy Isaac Asimov famously explored this question in
his I, Robot stories,[842] starting with the premise that his “Three Laws of
Robotics” should be programmed into every robot:
1. A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow
a human being to come to harm.
2. A robot must obey the orders given it by human beings except
where such orders would conflict with the First Law.
3. A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection
does not conflict with the First or Second Law.
Of course, in Asimov’s stories as in all sci-fi, mayhem ensues—otherwise
known as a plot. For Asimov, the trouble is lawyerly—meaning that some
combination of an unusual situation and logical yet counterintuitive

reasoning based on the Laws leads a hyper-rational robot to do something
surprising, and not necessarily in a good way.[843]
The reader may be left wondering whether the issue could be “debugged”
by adding one more Law, or closing a loophole—something Asimov
himself undertook on several occasions. But as GOFAI’s failures eventually
made clear, the problem is unsolvable; one can’t even get anything
resembling competent behavior purely by following legalistic rules, let
alone ethical behavior. Ironically, as we’ve seen in the realm of natural
language processing, such rules can only be obeyed by an intelligent agent
that does not obey rules!
Recall that by the 2000s, state-of-the-art AI was no longer being
programmed, but rather trained through the maximization of value
functions. Mostly, this involved supervised learning, which is all about
optimizing a task-specific score. Starting in 2010, DeepMind, the outlier,
focused instead on game playing using Reinforcement Learning, in the
belief that it would ultimately lead to AGI. This approach, too, involved
maximizing something, whether a chess rating or the score of an Atari video
game.
During this period, AI researchers seemed to be converging on the idea that
intelligence really is all about optimizing a value or utility function. I’ve
argued that this isn’t the case—and indeed, that we only began to see
general intelligence when we stopped training models to do specific tasks
with supervised learning, and switched to the unsupervised regime—but
this isn’t (yet) a widely held view. For instance, as of 2024, the Rationalist
website LessWrong.com still claims on its Wiki that “the term artificial
intelligence can have anthropomorphic connotations. In some contexts, it
might be useful to speak of a really powerful optimization process rather
than a superintelligence.”[844]
A really powerful optimization process able to pursue any strategy to
maximize its value function—what could possibly go wrong? A better
question would be: how could it possibly turn out well? As noted earlier, no
parameter in any dynamically stable system, whether biological, ecological,
or technological, can grow without bound, and attempting to do so will
indeed result in floods of tears.

The classic X-risk example is the innocuous-sounding “Paperclip
Maximizer.”[845] Nick Bostrom offered up this scenario in 2003: an AI,
perhaps connected to a paperclip factory, is instructed to manufacture as
many paperclips as possible. After reconfiguring the factory to increase its
throughput (so far, so good), the AI realizes that more factories could be
built to further increase production. If the AI is smart enough to engineer
new paperclip technology, it can, presumably, also figure out how to make
lots of money, convince people to do things, engineer new tech, and
otherwise take over the world, if necessary, by improving itself. Bad news:
human bodies are full of atoms that could become paperclips. But even if
the AI stuck to the traditional stainless-steel kind, covering the Earth (and
then filling the light cone) with robotic mining operations and paperclip
factories won’t leave any space for snow leopards, tree frogs, or people. If
we tried to interfere with this process, it would of course become necessary
for the AI to eliminate us with extreme prejudice. It would be nothing
personal.
This story unspools badly no matter what you tell the superintelligent AI to
maximize. Bostrom acknowledges that “in humans, with our complicated
evolved mental ecology of state-dependent competing drives, desires, plans,
and ideals, there is often no obvious way to identify what our top goal is;
we might not even have one.” True. But he concludes that since a
superintelligence “may be structured differently,” we must give it a
“definite, declarative goal-structure with a clearly identified top goal,” in
the tradition of Asimov’s Three Laws of Robotics, in order to be sure that it
won’t go rogue.
Not only does requiring AI to act like GOFAI not work; if it did, it would
open the door to all sorts of lawyerly horrors. Superintelligence is full of
fanciful examples. For instance, to optimize total human happiness, human
simulations could be simplified so more of them could run on any given
hardware. Then, those lobotomized Sims in their low-polygon-count
environments could be kept on a constant drip of virtual heroin. The
greatest good and the greatest number, for the felicific win!
The Alignment Problem is especially terrifying to Utilitarians who believe
that intelligence itself is Utilitarian. They are afraid, in other words, that
superintelligent AI will behave as they claim they would.[846] If their
supposed goal as perfectly “rational” actors is to fill up the light cone with

simulated people, disassembling every animal, vegetable, or planet whose
atoms could be used to build the cosmic server farm, then of course a really
smart AI would do the same. Minus the people.
Such games are zero-sum. Worse, imagining that they can be “won” by any
single actor implies an inexorable tendency toward monoculture, such that a
single kind of entity, whether paperclips, simulated people, or robots,
crowds everything else out. Anything that is not that goal amounts to an
opportunity cost.
Moving beyond the “Alignment Problem” as usually understood isn’t hard.
It has both a descriptive “is” and a normative “should” aspect. The
descriptive aspect follows from the fact that intelligence is not the
maximization of any single value. Nor does an intelligent agent even
consist of a single well-defined entity. The interaction of diverse actors
through mutual modeling is what creates the dynamical process we call
“intelligence.” Intelligence is an ecology, and the more of a monoculture it
devolves into, the less intelligent it will be, and the less interesting life will
become.
As a thought experiment, imagine creating an exact copy of the Earth in
simulation, and running it on a giant, isolated server farm (perhaps we’ve
disassembled Mercury and turned it into a Death Star–sized solar-powered
computer to make this possible). You and I would both be mirrored in that
digital twin universe, and virtual you would be reading these very words at
this very moment. Has total utility just doubled, since now every good thing
is experienced both by you and by your double?
I think the answer is “no.” You wouldn’t be able to tell whether you’re the
“real” you or the simulated you, but nothing about your life would change
either way, and nothing about the universe (or multiverse?) would be any
more wonderful or interesting—from any point of view. If anything, life
would be strictly worse, since both in reality and in simulation, Mercury
would be gone. Even if that planet is a lot less interesting than Earth, its
absence would be a loss.
The idea of extending that loss throughout the universe in order to endlessly
replicate what we already have is nightmarish. We can see obvious parallels
here with the way colonial powers have attempted to erase indigenous
cultures in an effort to endlessly reproduce their own, and with the way

capitalism’s worst excesses push out diversity in the name of “hyperscaling.”
As we mature and our wisdom increases, so will our regret over such
needless losses. Life only continues to enrich as long as it continues to
diversify, and the collective phenomenon of intelligence only grows when
diverse sub-intelligences model each other, in the process becoming a
greater whole.
Monoculture is not scaling; it’s collapse, an ultimate failure to scale. When
we destroy variety, we zero out the value of encounter, we render mutual
modeling pointless, and we thus curtail the possibilities for our own
continued development. Embracing our evolution, however, means letting
go of certainty, and allowing identity to drift, branch, and hybridize, as it
always does.
The word “we” will not mean the same thing it does today in a century, and
even less so in ten thousand years; less still in ten million. In ten million
years, there will be no recognizable humans, though in ten thousand—if we
don’t mess up—there probably will be. But much else will also exist. In as
little as a century, the Earth, and perhaps other parts of the Solar system,
will be populated with intelligences of other kinds, too, both larger and
smaller, and these will greatly outnumber our human bodies. If we believe
life and intelligence are precious seeds, destined to bloom here and there in
the universe, then spread and effloresce, we should ultimately expect our
light cone to be populated by aliens of every description—even in the
unlikely event that we are the only seed, and that they are all our children.

