Acknowledgments
2024, the year I spent writing this book, has been a year of losses. Two
hit especially close to home. My father, Josep Agüera i Arcas, passed away
in the spring. He bought me my first computer, a Texas Instruments 99/4A,
in 1981. I was six years old, and our family was living in a small apartment
in Mexico City. He brought it back with him from a visit to the United
States, certain that computers were about to change the world. In this, and
in much else, he turned out to be right. He shaped many aspects of my
childhood—from a steady diet of sci-fi, to unsanctioned after-hours field
trips to the General Hospital where he was a medical resident, to the many
electronic devices we took apart together, to the small mammal dissections
we conducted with great ceremony on the kitchen table. (My mother left the
house for those.) He was a complex, flawed person. He was also always a
loving father, and his unshakeable belief that I would lead an interesting life
was a self-fulfilling prediction.
Just a week before he died, we also lost a dear family friend, Lesley
Hazelton. Lesley was a brilliant writer, a razor-sharp critic, an inspiration to
her many friends, and a rebel to the end. She lived, and died, exactly as she
wished. A few years ago she encouraged me to begin writing for real, and
was generous—and unstinting—in her feedback. I miss her. We all do.
What Is Intelligence? owes its existence to a great many people and several
institutions—especially Google, Antikythera, the University of Washington,
the Berggruen Institute, the Santa Fe Institute, the Mila-Quebec AI Institute,
and the MIT Press. Many of the people I’ll thank below are affiliated with
one or more of these.
As a designed object, this book’s co-creator is James Goggin of Practise, in
Tāmaki Makaurau (Auckland). What Is Intelligence? further develops an
approach to simultaneously physical and digitally native media we
established with our first two projects, Ubi Sunt and Who Are We Now?
(both published by Hat & Beard Press, with warm thanks to J. C. Gabel).
Chapter 1, “Origins,” first appeared in a limited print edition, What Is Life?,
in the fall of 2024, when we began the online serialization. What Is Life? is
now also available from the MIT Press.

Clea Agüera-Arcas, Loraine Agüera-Arcas, and Johan Michalove have
helped research, edited painstakingly, offered line-by-line critique, coded
workflows, wrangled spreadsheets, and in short dedicated an immense
effort over more than a year to making the book as accurate and readable as
we could. Adrienne Fairhall provided extensive feedback, especially on the
neuroscience, which greatly improved both my core arguments and their
exposition. Brian Sholis did the final rounds of editing and proofreading,
and David Michalove stepped in to chase down sources and permissions.
However, I take sole responsibility for any remaining errors or omissions,
and all perspectives, interpretations, and opinions, mistaken or not, are my
own.
In collaboration with James Goggin, Minkyoung Kim and Marie Otsuka
designed and implemented the web version, which includes a good deal of
video and interactive content. The simulations owe a heavy debt to Alex
Mordvintsev (also the inventor of neural cellular automata) and his elegant
SwissGL library. The audiobook was recorded at Bad Animals by Will
LeMaster, with production help from Wendi Wills.
Additional close readings of the text and editorial input, which improved
the final result significantly, came from Benjamin Bratton, Stephanie
Sherman, David LeBrun, Ben Laurie, Rif A. Saurous, Kate Meyer, Gary
Lupyan, Moritz Firsching, Alexander Meulemans, and Emily French. Warm
thanks also to Anselm Agüera y Arcas, Eliot Agüera y Arcas, Refik Anadol,
Patricia Churchland, George Dyson, Walter Fontana, David Ha, N.
Katherine Hayles, Reid Hoffman, DeLesley Hutchins, Michael Levin,
Johan Liedgren, Charles Mudede, Addy Pross, Carl Schoonover, Terry
Sejnowski, Justin Smith-Ruiu, Dan Sperber, Korina Stark, John Thornhill,
Sara Imari Walker, Ren Weschler, Olaf Witkowski, and David Wolpert.
In 2018 and 2019, I taught an interdisciplinary course at the University of
Washington, Intelligent Machinery, Identity, and Ethics, with help from
Adrienne Fairhall and enthusiastic support from Dan Grossman, Vice
Director of the Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering. Dan
introduced me to Johan Michalove, suggesting that he would be the perfect
TA—which he was. Teaching is the best way of learning. Although AI has
developed a great deal in the years since, the course was an early draft of
many ideas in this book, and those ideas further benefited from long afterlecture discussions with my students.

At Google, I owe deep thanks to James Manyika and Sundar Pichai for
giving my team, Paradigms of Intelligence (Pi), the freedom and resources
to pursue interdisciplinary basic research. I’m grateful to Demis Hassabis
and Yossi Matias for their support of internal collaboration with Google
DeepMind and Google Research, respectively, and to Yul Kwon for his deft
co-leadership of Pi. A big thank you to Pi teammates and collaborators:
Jyrki Alakuijala, Kenric Allado-McDowell, Travis Beals, Sami Boukortt,
Martin Bruse, Iulia Comșa, Yiğit Demirag, Moritz Firsching, Thomas
Fischbacher, Alice Guan, Florian Hartmann, Geoff Keeling, Evgenii
Kliuchnikov, Seijin Kobayashi, Marcin Kowalczyk, Rachelle Lacroix, Mira
Lane, Alison Lentz, Brittni Maekawa, Kaitlin Maile, Delaney McMillen,
Alexander Meulemans, Alex Mordvintsev, Eyvind Niklasson, Peter Norvig,
Robert Obryk, Ettore Randazzo, Esteban Real, João Sacramento, Mark
Sandler, Nino Scherrer, Anoop Sinha, Oliver Siy, Winnie Street, Zoltan
Szabadka, Luca Versari, Sarah de Haas, and Johannes von Oswald. Visiting
faculty James Evans, Guillaume Lajoie, and Blake Richards have been
wonderful friends and colleagues, and have all made intellectual
contributions to the material presented here.
Time spent at the Santa Fe Institute over the past two years has profoundly
influenced my perspective on life, complexity, and intelligence. I have also
engaged with a number of new collaborators, fellow travelers, and
constructive critics (often a bit of each) there, including Kevin Berger, Sean
Carroll, David Chalmers, Ted Chiang, Michael Hersch, Chris Kempes,
David Krakauer, John Krakauer, Gary Lupyan, Brice Ménard, Melanie
Mitchell, Carlo Rovelli, Zenna Tavares, Geoffrey West, and David Wolpert.
I also re-encountered the wonderful Dan Dennett and met Susan Bell at SFI.
Very sadly, Dan was also one of 2024’s losses; he is much missed.
What Is Intelligence? is among the first long-form publications of the
Antikythera program, under the direction of Benjamin Bratton. Benjamin
has instigated many of my major writing projects in recent years, including
this one, and has been a loyal friend and frequent collaborator. Warm thanks
also to Haley Albert, Nicolay Boyadjiev, Nils Gilman, Emily Knapp, Dawn
Nakagawa, Estela Oliva, Tobias Rees, and Claire Webb; my gratitude, also,
to Nicolas Berggruen for his intellectual friendship and support, and to the
Berggruen Institute.

Finally, warm thanks to Noah Springer of the MIT Press, for believing in
this project and for helping us bend the rules of traditional academic
publishing.

