The Antikythera Book Series
Antikythera develops a philosophy of technology that seeks to better
understand, and thereby orient, planetary computation as a philosophical,
scientific, and geopolitical force. The research program takes its name from
the first known computer, the Antikythera mechanism, an ancient tool for
orientation, navigation, planning, and prediction across planets. The
program understands the future of computation as more than calculation. It
is a technology to think with, an instrument for discovery.
In collaboration with the MIT Press, the Antikythera book series publishes
unique titles by writers from diverse disciplines: computer science,
philosophy, history, architecture, physics, science fiction, and more. These
books investigate the creative and curious uses of our computational tools
—or what we might more precisely call artificial computation. With those
tools it is revealed that otherwise imperceivable building blocks of our
reality and of our own flesh are themselves computational. The planet
discovers itself through computation, and computation discovers itself
through us.
At some moments in history, human imagination of technological
accomplishment far outpaces what is possible, and, at others, technological
capabilities overflow the concepts available to understand them. This
moment in history is more the latter, and so the work of philosophy is less
to project truisms onto reality than to generate new conceptual tools to align
with what is already emerging.
This is a pre-paradigmatic moment, which necessarily means one that is on
uncertain footing. As things we recognize as alive, intelligent, and
technological combine in new ways, contemporary definitions of “life,”
”intelligence,” and “technology” converge as well. As the world is
transformed through computation, our fundamental understanding of it (and
ourselves) adapts in turn.
The Antikythera school of thought is neither utopian nor dystopian.
Solutionism—technological or political—is not the focus. Instead, the
project is epistemological, compositional, and existential: How does
computation reveal fundamental qualities of this living, thinking planet, and

what are its capacities as the now primary means by which complex
intelligence remakes its worlds through interpretation, speculation, and
construction?
The humanities are perhaps too content with reflexive critique, especially
when it comes at the expense of deeper engagement. For Antikythera, the
most necessary philosophy of technology (and as more technologies are
computational, thereby the philosophy of computation) is one that
contributes directly to the formation of that emergent paradigm. To do so is
to draw fundamental philosophical positions from direct encounters with
theoretical biology, information theory, planetary sciences, speculative
engineering, and design, and the intellectual histories of all these.
If the Western philosophy of technology canon is darkened by the shadow
of Martin Heidegger’s intuition that the essence of technology is an
alienation of being, our approach leans more on the lessons of Copernicus
(and so many others) who employed technological abstraction to achieve a
precious allocentric awareness of where, when, how, and who we—in the
broadest possible sense—are and may become. The estrangement that
comes with the reformation of thought as it is bent through the prisms of
machine perception, is not what prevents philosophical insight: rather, this
is its foundation.
For this, the locus is not the singular thinking subject, nor even a species as
a whole. Much more general and precious forces are at work. The
philosophy of the next century is one for which life as such, intelligence as
such, cognition as such, and computation as such all combine in new ways
that allow them to both comprehend and transform themselves. Humans
may be the agents of this combination, and this makes us genuinely
exceptional within the biosphere and technosphere. Ultimately, however, we
are not the protagonist; we are the vehicle.
Alongside an online platform, the Antikythera book series connects new
ideas with new forms of digital information design. Both the books and the
platform are interfaces to the ideas that constitute the Antikythera school of
thought and, hopefully, its contribution to the philosophy of the future.
Benjamin Bratton
La Jolla, California

November 2024

