[pdf page 045]
[page 1]

On a New List of Categories

P 32: Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences 7 (1868):287-98. [Also published in W2:49-59 (with the four other papers in the so-called PAAAS Series and with references to related manuscripts published in W1) and in CP1:545-59. Peirce completely rewrote the paper to serve as the opening chapter of his 1894 "How to Reason" (MS 403).] Presented to the Academy on 14 May 1867, this paper is, according to Peirce, "perhaps the least unsatisfactory, from a logical point of view, that I ever succeeded in producing" and, with item 3 below, one of his two "strongest philosophical works." The culmination of a ten-year effort and the keystone of Peirce's system of philosophy, it argues for a new post-Kantian set of categories (or universal conceptions) by demonstrating that they are required for the unification of experience. Peirce's argument is essentially a logical derivation, though it depends on a type of mental separation he called 'prescision,' which is also required for his later phenomenological derivation of the categories.

§1. This paper is based upon the theory already established,1 that the function of conceptions is to reduce the manifold of sensuous impressions to unity, and that the validity of a conception consists in the impossibility of reducing the content of consciousness to unity without the introduction of it.

§2. This theory gives rise to a conception of gradation among those conceptions which are universal. For one such conception may unite the manifold of sense and yet another may be required to unite the conception and the manifold to which it is applied; and so on.

§3. That universal conception which is nearest to sense is that of the present, in general. This is a conception, because it is universal. But as the act of attention has no connotation at all, but is the pure denotative power of the mind, that is to say, the power which directs the mind to an object, in contradistinction to the power of thinking any predicate of that object,--so the conception of what is present in general, which is nothing but the general recognition of what is contained in
