[pdf page 050]
[page 6]

Reference to an interpretant cannot be prescinded from reference to a correlate; but the latter can be prescinded from the former.

§10. Reference to an interpretant is rendered possible and justified by that which renders possible and justifies comparison. But that is clearly the diversity of impressions. If we had but one impression, it would not require to be reduced to unity, and would therefore not need to be thought of as referred to an interpretant, and the conception of reference to an interpretant would not arise. But since there is a manifold of impressions, we have a feeling of complication or confusion, which leads us to differentiate this impression from that, and then, having been differentiated, they require to be brought to unity. Now they are not brought to unity until we conceive them together as being ours, that is, until we refer them to a conception as their interpretant. Thus, the reference to an interpretant arises upon the holding together of diverse impressions, and therefore it does not join a conception to the substance, as the other two references do, but unites directly the manifold of the substance itself. It is, therefore, the last conception in order in passing from being to substance.

§11. The five conceptions thus obtained, for reasons which will be sufficiently obvious, may be termed categories. That is,

BEING,

Quality (Reference to a Ground),

Relation (Reference to a Correlate),

Representation (Reference to an Interpretant),

SUBSTANCE.

The three intermediate conceptions may be termed accidents.

§12. This passage from the many to the one is numerical. The conception of a third is that of an object which is so related to two others, that one of these must be related to the other in the same way in which the third is related to that other. Now this coincides with the conception of an interpretant. An other is plainly equivalent to a correlate. The conception of second differs from that of other, in implying the possibility of a third. In the same way, the conception of self implies the possibility of an other. The Ground is the self abstracted from the concreteness which implies the possibility of an other.

§13. Since no one of the categories can be prescinded from those above it, the list of supposable objects which they afford is,

What is.

Quale--that which refers to a ground,

Relate--that which refers to ground and correlate,

Representamen--that which refers to ground, correlate,
and interpretant.

It.
