[pdf page 053]
[page 9]

or correlate is not the important one. In the same way, the conception of reference to an interpretant or third, is always prominent in the definitions of argument.

In a proposition, the term which separately indicates the object of the symbol is termed the subject, and that which indicates the ground is termed the predicate. The objects indicated by the subject (which are always potentially a plurality,--at least, of phases or appearances) are therefore stated by the proposition to be related to one another on the ground of the character indicated by the predicate. Now this relation may be either a concurrence or an opposition. Propositions of concurrence are those which are usually considered in logic; but I have shown in a paper upon the classification of arguments that it is also necessary to consider separately propositions of opposition, if we are to take account of such arguments as the following:--

Whatever is the half of anything is less than that of which it is the half;

    A is half of B:
    ∴ A is less than B.

The subject of such a proposition is separated into two terms, a "subject nominative" and an "object accusative."

In an argument, the premises form a representation of the conclusion, because they indicate the interpretant of the argument, or representation representing it to represent its object. The premises may afford a likeness, index, or symbol of the conclusion. In deductive argument, the conclusion is represented by the premises as by a general sign under which it is contained. In hypotheses, something like the conclusion is proved, that is, the premises form a likeness of the conclusion. Take, for example, the following argument:--

    M is, for instance, P', P'', P''', and P^iv;
    S is P', P'', P''', and P^iv:
    ∴ S is M.

Here the first premise amounts to this, that "P', P'', P''', and P^iv" is a likeness of M, and thus the premises are or represent a likeness of the conclusion. That it is different with induction another example will show.

    S', S'', S''', and S^iv are taken as samples of the collection M;
    S', S'', S''', and S^iv are P:
    ∴ All M is P.

Hence the first premise amounts to saying that "S', S'', S''', and S^iv" is an index of M. Hence the premises are an index of the conclusion.

The other divisions of terms, propositions, and arguments arise from the distinction of extension and comprehension. I propose to
