[pdf page 055]
[page 11]

Questions Concerning Certain Faculties Claimed for Man

P 26: Journal of Speculative Philosophy 2 (1868):103-14. [Also published in W2:193-211 (with related letters and earlier attempts at this article and the two that follow) and in CP 5.213-63.] Item 2 is the first of three articles usually referred to as the JSP Cognition Series, in which Peirce develops some of the results and consequences of item 1 and attempts "to prove and to trace the consequences of certain propositions in epistemology tending toward the recognition of the reality of continuity and of generality and going to show the absurdity of individualism and of egoism." (In "The Law of Mind" [item 23], he indicates that this is an early attempt at developing his doctrine of synechism.) Peirce's opposition to Cartesianism results in the following four denials: (1) we have no power of introspection, but all knowledge of the internal world is derived by hypothetical reasoning from our knowledge of external facts, (2) we have no power of intuition, but every cognition is determined logically by previous cognitions, (3) we have no power of thinking without signs, and (4) we have no conception of the absolutely incognizable.

Question 1. Whether by the simple contemplation of a cognition, independently of any previous knowledge and without reasoning from signs, we are enabled rightly to judge whether that cognition has been determined by a previous cognition or whether it refers immediately to its object.

Throughout this paper, the term intuition will be taken as signifying a cognition not determined by a previous cognition of the same object, and therefore so determined by something out of the consciousness.* Let me request the reader to note this. Intuition here will be

*The word intuitus first occurs as a technical term in St. Anselm's Monologium. He wished to distinguish between our knowledge of God and our knowledge of finite things (and, in the next world, of God, also); and thinking of the saying of St. Paul, Videmus nunc per speculum in aenigmate: tunc autem facie ad faciem, he called the former speculation and the latter intuition.1 This use of "speculation" did not take root, because that word
