[pdf page 057]
[page 13]

of intuitively distinguishing intuitions from other cognitions has not prevented men from disputing very warmly as to which cognitions are intuitive. In the middle ages, reason and external authority were regarded as two coördinate sources of knowledge, just as reason and the authority of intuition are now; only the happy device of considering the enunciations of authority to be essentially indemonstrable had not yet been hit upon. All authorities were not considered as infallible, any more than all reasons; but when Berengarius said that the authoritativeness of any particular authority must rest upon reason, the proposition was scouted as opinionated, impious, and absurd. Thus, the credibility of authority was regarded by men of that time simply as an ultimate premise, as a cognition not determined by a previous cognition of the same object, or, in our terms, as an intuition. It is strange that they should have thought so, if, as the theory now under discussion supposes, by merely contemplating the credibility of the authority, as a Fakir does his God, they could have seen that it was not an ultimate premise! Now, what if our internal authority should meet the same fate, in the history of opinions, as that external authority has met? Can that be said to be absolutely certain which many sane, well-informed, and thoughtful men already doubt?*

Every lawyer knows how difficult it is for witnesses to distinguish between what they have seen and what they have inferred. This is

*The proposition of Berengarius is contained in the following quotation from his De Sacra Coena: "Maximi plane cordis est, per omnia ad dialecticam confugere, quia confugere ad eam ad rationem est confugere, quo qui non confugit, cum secundum rationem sit factus ad imaginem dei, suum honorem reliquit, nec potest renovari de die in diem ad imaginem dei."2 The most striking characteristic of medieval reasoning, in general, is the perpetual resort to authority. When Fredegisus3 and others wish to prove that darkness is a thing, although they have evidently derived the opinion from nominalistic-Platonistic meditations, they argue the matter thus: "God called the darkness, night"; then, certainly, it is a thing, for otherwise before it had a name, there would have been nothing, not even a fiction to name. Abelard thinks it worth while to cite Boëthius, when he says that space has three dimensions, and when he says that an individual cannot be in two places at once.4 The author of De Generibus et Speciebus, a work of a superior order, in arguing against a Platonic doctrine, says that if whatever is universal is eternal, the form and matter of Socrates, being severally universal, are both eternal, and that, therefore, Socrates was not created by God, but only put together, "quod quantum a vero deviet, palam est." The authority is the final court of appeal. The same author, where in one place he doubts a statement of Boëthius, finds it necessary to assign a special reason why in this case it is not absurd to do so. Exceptio probat regulam in casibus non exceptis.5 Recognized authorities were certainly sometimes disputed in the twelfth century; their mutual contradictions insured that; and the authority of philosophers was regarded as inferior to that of theologians. Still, it would be impossible to find a passage where the authority of Aristotle is directly denied upon any logical question. "Sunt et multi errores eius," says John of Salisbury, "qui in scripturis tam Ethnicis, quam fidelibus poterunt inveniri: verum in logica parem habuisse non legitur."6 "Sed nihil adversus Aristotelem," says Abelard, and in another place, "Sed si Aristotelem Peripateticorum principem culpare possumus, quam amplius in hac arte recepimus?"7 The idea of going without an authority, or of subordinating authority to reason, does not occur to him.
