[pdf page 072]
[page 28]

Some Consequences of Four Incapacities

P 27: Journal of Speculative Philosophy 2 (1868):140-57. [Also published in W2:211-42 and in CP 5.264-317.] With item 1 above, one of Peirce's two "strongest philosophical works," this article develops an account of mind and reality from the ground prepared in item 2. Peirce asserts that all mental events are valid inferences, and claims that as every thought is a sign, so man himself is a sign. He also gives a fairly detailed account of his theory of signs as of 1868, and makes his first published declaration for scholastic realism. (Peirce's philosophy of mind as developed here is, according to Christopher Hookway, a type of functionalism.)

Descartes is the father of modern philosophy, and the spirit of Cartesianism--that which principally distinguishes it from the scholasticism which it displaced--may be compendiously stated as follows:

1. It teaches that philosophy must begin with universal doubt; whereas scholasticism had never questioned fundamentals.

2. It teaches that the ultimate test of certainty is to be found in the individual consciousness; whereas scholasticism had rested on the testimony of sages and of the Catholic Church.

3. The multiform argumentation of the middle ages is replaced by a single thread of inference depending often upon inconspicuous premises.

4. Scholasticism had its mysteries of faith, but undertook to explain all created things. But there are many facts which Cartesianism not only does not explain, but renders absolutely inexplicable, unless to say that "God makes them so" is to be regarded as an explanation.

In some, or all of these respects, most modern philosophers have been, in effect, Cartesians. Now without wishing to return to scholasticism, it seems to me that modern science and modern logic require us to stand upon a very different platform from this.

1. We cannot begin with complete doubt. We must begin with all the prejudices which we actually have when we enter upon the study
