[pdf page 078]
[page 34]

ise of a syllogism, so hypothesis may be regarded as the inference of the minor premise, from the other two propositions. Thus, the example taken above consists of two such inferences of the minor premises of the following syllogisms:

1. Every English writing of some length in which such and such characters denote e, t, a, and s, has about 11¼ per cent of the first sort of marks, 8½ of the second, 8 of the third, and 7½ of the fourth;

This secret writing is an English writing of some length, in which such and such characters denote e, t, a, and s, respectively:

∴ This secret writing has about 11¼ per cent of its characters of the first kind, 8½ of the second, 8 of the third, and 7½ of the fourth.

2. A passage written with such an alphabet makes sense when such and such letters are severally substituted for such and such characters.

This secret writing is written with such an alphabet.

∴ This secret writing makes sense when such and such substitutions are made.

The function of hypothesis is to substitute for a great series of predicates forming no unity in themselves, a single one (or small number) which involves them all, together (perhaps) with an indefinite number of others. It is, therefore, also a reduction of a manifold to unity.* Every deductive syllogism may be put into the form

*Several persons versed in logic have objected that I have here quite misapplied the term hypothesis, and that what I so designate is an argument from analogy.2 It is a sufficient reply to say that the example of the cipher has been given as an apt illustration of hypothesis by Descartes (Rule 10, Œuvres choisies: Paris, 1865, page 334), by Leibniz (Nouveaux Essais, lib. 4, ch. 12, §13, Ed. Erdmann, p. 383 b), and (as I learn from D. Stewart; Works, vol. 3, pp. 305 et seqq.)3 by Gravesande, Boscovich, Hartley, and G. L. Le Sage. The term Hypothesis has been used in the following senses:--1. For the theme or proposition forming the subject of discourse. 2. For an assumption. Aristotle divides theses or propositions adopted without any reason into definitions and hypotheses.4 The latter are propositions stating the existence of something. Thus the geometer says, "Let there be a triangle." 3. For a condition in a general sense. We are said to seek other things than happiness ἐξ ὑποθέσεως, conditionally. The best republic is the ideally perfect, the second the best on earth, the third the best ἐξ ὑποθέσεως, under the circumstances. Freedom is the ὑπόθεσις or condition of democracy. 4. For the antecedent of a hypothetical proposition. 5. For an oratorical question which assumes facts. 6. In the Synopsis of Psellus,5 for the reference of a subject to the things it denotes. 7. Most commonly in modern times, for the conclusion of an argument from consequence and consequent to antecedent. This is my use of the term. 8. For such a conclusion when too weak to be a theory accepted into the body of a science.

I give a few authorities to support the seventh use:

Chauvin.--Lexicon Rationale, 1st Ed.--"Hypothesis est propositio, quæ assumitur ad probandam aliam veritatem incognitam. Requirunt multi, ut hæc hypothesis vera esse cognoscatur, etiam antequam appareat, an alia ex eâ deduci possint. Verum aiunt alii, hoc unum desiderari, ut hypothesis pro vera admittatur, quod nempe ex hac talia deducitur, quæ respondent phænomenis, et satisfaciunt omnibus difficultatibus, quæ hac parte in re, et in iis quæ de ea apparent, occurrebant."6

Newton.--"Hactenus phænomena cœlorum et maris nostri per vim gravitatis exposui, sed causam gravitatis nondum assignavi. . . . Rationem vero harum gravitatis
