[pdf page 079]
[page 35]

    If A, then B;
    But A:
    ∴ B.

And as the minor premise in this form appears as antecedent or reason of a hypothetical proposition, hypothetic inference may be called reasoning from consequent to antecedent.

The argument from analogy, which a popular writer upon logic9 calls reasoning from particulars to particulars, derives its validity from its combining the characters of induction and hypothesis, being analyzable either into a deduction or an induction, or a deduction and a hypothesis.

But though inference is thus of three essentially different species, it also belongs to one genus. We have seen that no conclusion can be legitimately derived which could not have been reached by successions

proprietatum ex phænomenis nondum potui deducere, et hypotheses non fingo. Quicquid enim ex phænomenis non deducitur, hypothesis vocanda est. . . . In hâc Philosophiâ Propositiones deducuntur ex phænomenis, et redduntur generales per inductionem." Principia. Ad fin.7

Sir Wm. Hamilton.--"Hypotheses, that is, propositions which are assumed with probability, in order to explain or prove something else which cannot otherwise be explained or proved."--Lectures on Logic (Am. Ed.), p. 188.

"The name of hypothesis is more emphatically given to provisory suppositions, which serve to explain the phenomena in so far as observed, but which are only asserted to be true, if ultimately confirmed by a complete induction."--Ibid., p. 364.

"When a phenomenon is presented which can be explained by no principle afforded through experience, we feel discontented and uneasy; and there arises an effort to discover some cause which may, at least provisionally, account for the outstanding phenomenon; and this cause is finally recognized as valid and true, if, through it, the given phenomenon is found to obtain a full and perfect explanation. The judgment in which a phenomenon is referred to such a problematic cause, is called a Hypothesis."--Ibid., pp. 449, 450. See also Lectures on Metaphysics, p. 117.

J. S. Mill.--"An hypothesis is any supposition which we make (either without actual evidence, or on evidence avowedly insufficient), in order to endeavor to deduce from it conclusions in accordance with facts which are known to be real; under the idea that if the conclusions to which the hypothesis leads are known truths, the hypothesis itself either must be, or at least is likely to be true."--Logic (6th Ed.), vol. 2, p. 8.

Kant.--"If all the consequents of a cognition are true, the cognition itself is true. . . . It is allowable, therefore, to conclude from consequent to a reason, but without being able to determine this reason. From the complexus of all consequents alone can we conclude the truth of a determinate reason. . . . The difficulty with this positive and direct mode of inference (modus ponens) is that the totality of the consequents cannot be apodeictically recognized, and that we are therefore led by this mode of inference only to a probable and hypothetically true cognition (Hypotheses)."--Logik by Jäsche, Werke, ed. Rosenkranz and Schubert, vol. 3, p. 221.

"A hypothesis is the judgment of the truth of a reason on account of the sufficiency of the consequents."--Ibid., p. 262.

Herbart.--"We can make hypotheses, thence deduce consequents, and afterwards see whether the latter accord with experience. Such suppositions are termed hypotheses."--Einleitung; Werke, vol. 1, p. 53.8

Beneke.--"Affirmative inferences from consequent to antecedent, or hypotheses."--System der Logik, vol. 2, p. 103.

There would be no difficulty in greatly multiplying these citations.
