[pdf page 103]
[page 59]

    by the X of some," to its correlate, where X
    is any relative I please.

    Every relation of "man" to "animal" is a
    relation of a subject to its predicate.
    ∴ Every relation of "man" to "animal" is a relation
    of the relative "not X'd, except by the X of
    some," to its correlate, where X is any
    relative I please.

    Every relation of the relative "not X'd, except
    by the X of some," to its correlate, where X
    is any relative I please, is a relation of the
    relative "not headed, except by the head of
    some," to its correlate.
    ∴ Every relation of "man" to "animal" is a relation
    of the relative "not headed, except by the
    head of some," to its correlate.*

At the same time, as will be seen from this example, the proof of the validity of these inferences depends upon the assumption of the truth of certain general statements concerning relatives. These formulae can all be deduced from the principle, that in a system of signs in which no sign is taken in two different senses, two signs which differ only in their manner of representing their object, but which are equivalent in meaning, can always be substituted for one another. Any case of the falsification of this principle would be a case of the dependence of the mode of existence of the thing represented upon the mode of this or that representation of it, which, as has been shown in the article in the last number, is contrary to the nature of reality.

The next formula of syllogism to be considered is the following:

    S is other than P; M is P.
    ∴ S is other than M.

The meaning of "not" or "other than" seems to have greatly perplexed the German logicians, and it may be, therefore, that it is used in different senses. If so, I propose to defend the validity of the above formula only when other than is used in a particular sense. By saying that one thing or class is other than a second, I mean that any third whatever is identical with the class which is composed of that third and of whatever is, at once, the first and second. For example, if I say that rats are not mice, I mean that any third class as dogs is identical

*"If any one will by ordinary syllogism prove that because every man is an animal, therefore every head of a man is a head of an animal, I shall be ready to--set him another question."--De Morgan: "On the Syllogism No. IV, and on the Logic of Relations."
