[pdf page 127]
[page 83]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley

P 60: North American Review 113 (October 1871):449-72. [Also published in W2:462-87 (with Chauncey Wright's criticism and Peirce's response [pp. 487-90]) and in CP 8.7-38.] In what may be the most important of all his reviews, Peirce discusses the realist-nominalist controversy (which he believed to be of fundamental significance for philosophy as well as life) and gives a detailed account of his already slightly modified scholastic realism. Peirce's common-sense account of truth and reality contains important elements of his developing pragmatism.

The Works of George Berkeley, D.D., formerly Bishop of Cloyne: including many of his Writings hitherto unpublished. With Prefaces, Annotations, his Life and Letters, and an Account of his Philosophy. By Alexander Campbell Fraser, M.A., Professor of Logic and Metaphysics in the University of Edinburgh. In Four Volumes. Oxford: At the Clarendon Press. 8vo. 1871.

This new edition of Berkeley's works is much superior to any of the former ones. It contains some writings not in any of the other editions, and the rest are given with a more carefully edited text. The editor has done his work well. The introductions to the several pieces contain analyses of their contents which will be found of the greatest service to the reader. On the other hand, the explanatory notes which disfigure every page seem to us altogether unnecessary and useless.

Berkeley's metaphysical theories have at first sight an air of paradox and levity very unbecoming to a bishop. He denies the existence of matter, our ability to see distance, and the possibility of forming the simplest general conception; while he admits the existence of Platonic ideas; and argues the whole with a cleverness which every reader admits, but which few are convinced by. His disciples seem to think the present moment a favorable one for obtaining for their philosophy a more patient hearing than it has yet got. It is true that we of this day
