[pdf page 150]
[page 106]

On a New Class of Observations, Suggested by the Principles of Logic

MS 1104. [First published, as MS 311, in W3:235-37.] Written in the summer of 1877, apparently for presentation, this brief paper recommends the observational study of sensations (as Peirce recommended for all sciences, even mathematics). Opposed to the "ordinary" view that "there are ultimate sensations without any general relations between them," Peirce argues that, although we can never completely capture in general descriptions the differences between different sensations, we can "make an indefinite progress toward such a result." But if that is unconvincing, Peirce goes on to say, perhaps we should try a phenomenological approach. Whether there are pure and completely determinate individual sensations is a question that can be dealt with by observational science; "here then," he concludes, "is a whole world of observation, to which we have been systematically blind, simply because of a wrong metaphysical prejudice."

It is usually admitted that there are two classes of mental representations, Immediate Representations or Sensations and Mediate Representations or Conceptions. The former are completely determinate or individual objects of thought; the latter are partially indeterminate or general objects. Granting that both these classes of objects exist, the question of the principle of Individuation or of the respect in which the individual differs from the general becomes one of extreme difficulty. Duns Scotus after a masterly criticism of all the attempts at answering it, puts forward the theory that the distinction is a peculiar one without any general character, and therefore itself presenting this peculiar aspect of individuality. Occam denies that any general objects of thought exist, which implies that no objects of thought have any resemblances, differences, or relations of any kind.1 I on the other hand have undertaken to show that just the reverse of this is the case. That
