[pdf page 151]
[page 107]

no object is individual but that the things the most concrete have still a certain amount of indeterminacy. Take, Phillip of Macedon for example. This object is logically divisible into Phillip drunk and Phillip sober; and so on; and you do not get down to anything completely determinate till you specify an indivisible instant of time, which is an ideal limit not attained in thought or in re.

It follows from this doctrine that we have no pure sensations, but only sensational elements of thought. Thus, the difference between blue and red, since it contains a sensational element, cannot be fully represented by any general description. As the sensational element is in this case very large, the failure of any attempt to describe the difference between blue & red in general terms is very striking. But, according to my theory of logic, since no pure sensations or individual objects exist, it follows that there must be some relation between blue & red & some general respect in which they differ, & therefore a step can be made towards a general description of their difference and if that general description is unsatisfactory, as it must be, then another relation must exist between the two colors, & an addition based on it may be made to the general description, & so on ad infinitum.

Here, then, are two metaphysical theories; the ordinary one and mine. According to the former, there are ultimate sensations without any general relations between them; according to the latter, although the differences between different sensations can never be completely covered by a general description, yet we may make an indefinite progress toward such a result. Which is true? I have no need to make any special observations to determine that, any more than I would in a question of a Perpetual Motion. I rest upon general principles which are deduced by irrefragable reasoning, from facts so general as to be admitted by all the world. But, for those who cannot understand this reasoning, I point to some facts which are not far to seek.

Different sensations resemble one another. That is sufficiently patent, & there is already a relation between sensations which at once totally & irretrievably overthrows the ordinary theory. Different sensations also differ in intensity. There is another class of relations between them, irreconcileable with their individual character. But it is commonly said that of relations of kind between different elementary sensations there are none. What none? When our ordinary language classifies them according to their kinds into colors, sounds, tastes, smells, feelings? This is not commonly noticed, but it is commonly said (I mean by physicists) that there is no meaning in the comparison of the intensity of a red and green light. Here I have 74 pieces of different coloured ribbons each one numbered upon which I have made frequent photometric experiments extending over a period of 12 months.2 Now I say that a red and green can be compared in intensity with a considerable degree of accuracy. On another occasion, when the fig-
