[pdf page 168]
[page 124]

How to Make Our Ideas Clear

P 119: Popular Science Monthly 12 (January 1878):286-302. [Also published in W3:257-76 and in CP 5.388-410. Peirce intended to use this paper as essay 9 of his 1893 "Search for a Method" and as chapter 16 of his 1894 "How to Reason" (MS 422); the changes in MS 422 are recorded in the Notes.] Written between 13 and 24 September 1877, while Peirce was sailing to Plymouth, England, this paper criticizes Descartes' doctrine of the clearness of ideas and goes on to develop Peirce's own theory, according to which there are three levels or grades of clearness. The theory of meaning associated with the third grade of clearness is represented in the pragmatic maxim (and is sometimes thought of as an operationalist theory). Peirce ends the paper by applying the pragmatic maxim in his examination of the meaning of several conceptions, including 'realism'. (He later thought that his early pragmatism was too nominalistic.)

I

Whoever has looked into a modern treatise on logic of the common sort, will doubtless remember the two distinctions between clear and obscure conceptions, and between distinct and confused conceptions. They have lain in the books now for nigh two centuries, unimproved and unmodified, and are generally reckoned by logicians as among the gems of their doctrine.

A clear idea is defined as one which is so apprehended that it will be recognized wherever it is met with, and so that no other will be mistaken for it. If it fails of this clearness, it is said to be obscure.

This is rather a neat bit of philosophical terminology; yet, since it is clearness that they were defining, I wish the logicians had made their definition a little more plain. Never to fail to recognize an idea, and under no circumstances to mistake another for it, let it come in how recondite a form it may, would indeed imply such prodigious force and clearness of intellect as is seldom met with in this world. On the other hand, merely to have such an acquaintance with the idea as to
