[pdf page 186]
[page 142]

The Doctrine of Chances

P 120: Popular Science Monthly 12 (March 1878):604-15. [Also published in W3:276-89 and in CP 2.645-60. Although the third and fourth “Illustrations” were intended as one paper, the PSM editors published it in two parts in two successive months. In 1893, Peirce retyped the third paper to serve as essay 10 of “Search for a Method” and chapter 18 of “How to Reason” (MS 424) and, in 1910, he wrote several “Notes to C.S.P.'s Third Paper in the Pop. Sci. Monthly. 1878, March” (in MSS 703 and 704); some of the changes in the typescript and one of the notes of 1910 are recorded in the Notes.] In an early discussion of what will later become his synechism, Peirce argues that the assumption of continuity provides a powerful engine for logic, and he develops his theory of probabilities as the science of logic quantitatively treated (or as general logic). To be logical, Peirce says, men must not be selfish, for logic requires the identification of one's interests with those of an unlimited community. (Peirce also discusses the probability of a non-repeatable event in a case that Hilary Putnam has named “Peirce's Puzzle.”)

I

It is a common observation that a science first begins to be exact when it is quantitatively treated. What are called the exact sciences are no others than the mathematical ones. Chemists reasoned vaguely until Lavoisier showed them how to apply the balance to the verification of their theories, when chemistry leaped suddenly into the position of the most perfect of the classificatory sciences. It has thus become so precise and certain that we usually think of it along with optics, thermotics, and electrics. But these are studies of general laws, while chemistry considers merely the relations and classification of certain objects; and belongs, in reality, in the same category as systematic botany and zoology. Compare it with these last, however, and the advantage that it derives from its quantitative treatment is very evident.1
