[pdf page 199]
[page 155]

The Probability of Induction

P 121: Popular Science Monthly 12 (April 1878):705-18. [Also published in W3:290-305 and in CP 2.669-93.] In this paper, Peirce continues to develop his theory of probability and gives rules for calculating the probability of multiple events. He compares the conceptualistic view (which refers probabilities to events) with the materialistic view (which makes probability the ratio of the frequency of favorable cases to all cases) and differentiates chance from probability. He argues for the frequency view (which he held until nearly the turn of the century) and then connects his views on probability with the nature of inductive (or synthetic) reasoning and the problem of induction, for which he considers the need for an appeal to possible worlds. I We have found that every argument derives its force from the general truth of the class of inferences to which it belongs; and that probability is the proportion of arguments carrying truth with them among those of any genus. This is most conveniently expressed in the nomenclature of the mediaeval logicians. They called the fact expressed by a premise an antecedent, and that which follows from it its consequent; while the leading principle, that every (or almost every) such antecedent is followed by such a consequent, they termed the consequence. Using this language, we may say that probability belongs exclusively to consequences, and the probability of any consequence is the number of times in which antecedent and consequent both occur divided by the number of all the times in which the antecedent occurs. From this definition are deduced the following rules for the addition and multiplication of probabilities:

Rule for the Addition of Probabilities.— Given the separate probabilities of two consequences having the same antecedent and incompatible consequents. Then the sum of these two numbers is the probability of the consequence, that from the same antecedent one or other of those consequents follows.
