[pdf page 200]
[page 156]

Rule for the Multiplication of Probabilities.— Given the separate probabilities of the two consequences, “If A then B,” and “If both A and B, then C.” Then the product of these two numbers is the probability of the consequence, “If A, then both B and C.” Special Rule for the Multiplication of Independent Probabilities.— Given the separate probabilities of two consequences having the same ante cedents, “If A, then B,” and “If A, then C.” Suppose that these consequences are such that the probability of the second is equal to the probability of the consequence, “If both A and B, then C.” Then the product of the two given numbers is equal to the probability of the consequence, “If A, then both B and C.” To show the working of these rules we may examine the probabilities in regard to throwing dice. What is the probability of throwing a six with one die? The antecedent here is the event of throwing a die; the consequent, its turning up a six. As the die has six sides, all of which are turned up with equal frequency, the probability of turning up any one is \. Suppose two dice are thrown, what is the probability of throwing sixes? The probability of either coming up six is obviously the same when both are thrown as when one is thrown— namely, The probability that either will come up six when the other does is also the same as that of its coming up six whether the other does or not. The probabilities are, therefore, independent; and, by our rule, the probability that both events will happen together is the product of their several probabilities, or g X What is the probability of throwing deuce-ace? The probability that the first die will turn up ace and the second deuce is the same as the probability that both will turn up sixes— namely, the probability that the second will turn up ace and the first deuce is likewise these two events—first, ace; second, deuce; and, second, ace; first, deuce— are incompatible. Hence the rule for addition holds, and the probability that either will come up ace and the other deuce is 3^ -f or In this way all problems about dice, etc., may be solved. When the number of dice thrown is supposed very large, mathematics (which may be defined as the art of making groups to facilitate numeration) comes to our aid with certain devices to reduce the difficulties.

II

The conception of probability as a matter of fact, i.e., as the proportion of times in which an occurrence of one kind is accompanied by an occurrence of another kind, is termed by Mr. Venn the materialistic view of the subject.1 But probability has often been regarded as being simply the degree of belief which ought to attach to a proposition; and this mode of explaining the idea is termed by Venn the conceptualistic
