[pdf page 211]
[page 167]

The probability of drawing no white ball would be that of drawing one white ball would be S; that of drawing two would be that of drawing three would be that of drawing four would be that of drawing five would be only etc. Thus we should be tolerably certain of not being in error by more than one ball in 100. It appears, then, that in one sense we can, and in another we cannot, determine the probability of synthetic inference. When I reason in this way: Ninety-nine Cretans in a hundred are liars; But Epimenides is a Cretan; Therefore, Epimenides is a liar:— I know that reasoning similar to that would carry truth 99 times in 100. But when I reason in the opposite direction: Minos, Sarpedon, Rhadamanthus, Deucalion, and Epimenides, are all the Cretans I can think of; But these were all atrocious liars, Therefore, pretty much all Cretans must have been liars; I do not in the least know how often such reasoning would carry me right. On the other hand, what I do know is that some definite proportion of Cretans must have been liars, and that this proportion can be probably approximated to by an induction from five or six instances. Even in the worst case for the probability of such an inference, that in which about half the Cretans are liars, the ratio so obtained would probably not be in error by more than So much I know; but, then, in the present case the inference is that pretty much all Cretans are liars, and whether there may not be a special improbability in that I do not know.

V

Late in the last century, Immanuel Kant asked the question, “How are synthetical judgments a priori possible?” 4 By synthetical judg ments he meant such as assert positive fact and are not mere affairs of arrangement; in short, judgments of the kind which synthetical reasoning produces, and which analytic reasoning cannot yield. By a priori judgments he meant such as that all outward objects are in space, every event has a cause, etc., propositions which according to him can never be inferred from experience. Not so much by his answer to this question as by the mere asking of it, the current philosophy of that time was shattered and destroyed, and a new epoch in its history was begun. But before asking that question he ought to have asked the more general one, “How are any synthetical judgments at all possible?” How is it that a man can observe one fact and straightway pronounce judgment concerning another different fact not involved in the first? Such reasoning, as we have seen, has, at least in the usual sense of the
