[pdf page 216]
[page 172]

world without one mention of its author, replied, very logically, “Je n’avais pas besoin de cette hypothese-la.” 2 But, in truth, there is nothing atheistical in the theory, any more than there was in this answer. Matter is supposed to be composed of molecules which obey the laws of mechanics and exert certain attractions upon one another; and it is to these regularities (which there is no attempt to account for) that general arrangement of the solar system would be due, and not to hazard. If any one has ever maintained that the universe is a pure throw of the dice, the theologians have abundantly refuted him. “How often,” says Archbishop Tillotson, “might a man, after he had jumbled a set of letters in a bag, fling them out upon the ground before they would fall into an exact poem, yea, or so much as make a good dis course in prose! And may not a little book be as easily made by chance as this great volume of the world?” 3 The chance world here shown to be so different from that in which we live would be one in which there were no laws, the characters of different things being entirely independent; so that, should a sample of any kind of objects ever show a prevalent character, it could only be by accident, and no general prop osition could ever be established. Whatever further conclusions we may come to in regard to the order of the universe, thus much may be regarded as solidly established, that the world is not a mere chancemedley. But whether the world makes an exact poem or not, is another question. When we look up at the heavens at night, we readily perceive that the stars are not simply splashed on to the celestial vault; but there does not seem to be any precise system in their arrangement either. It will be worth our while, then, to inquire into the degree of orderliness in the universe; and, to begin, let us ask whether the world we live in is any more orderly than a purely chance-world would be. Any uniformity, or law of Nature, may be stated in the form, “Every A is B”; as, every ray of light is a non-curved line, everybody is accelerated toward the earth’s centre, etc. This is the same as to say, “There does not exist any A which is not B”; there is no curved ray; there is nobody not accelerated toward the earth; so that the uniformity consists in the non-occurrence in Nature of a certain combination of characters (in this case, the combination of being A with being non-B).* And, conversely, every case of the non-occurence of a combination of characters would constitute a uniformity in Nature. Thus, suppose the quality A is never found in combination with the quality *For the present purpose, the negative of a character is to be considered as much a character as the positive, for a uniformity may either be affirmative or negative. I do not say that no distinction can be drawn between positive and negative uniformities.
