[pdf page 219]
[page 175]

of the same character, then we may say that there will be precisely one character for each possible group of objects. Thus, suppose a world to contain five things, a, /3, y, S, €. Then it will have a separate character for each of the 31 groups (with non-existence making up 32 or 25) shown in the following table: Table II aß aßy aßyS a ay aß8 aßye ß aS aße aßde y ae ay8 ayde 8 ßy aye ßy8e € ß8 a8e ße ßy8 y 8 ßye ye ß8e 8e yde This shows that a contradiction is involved in the very idea of a chance-world, for in a world of 32 things, instead of there being only 35 or 243 characters, as we have seen that the notion of a chance-world requires, there would, in fact, be no less than 232, or 4,294,967,296 characters, which would not be all independent, but would have all possible relations with one another. We further see that so long as we regard characters abstractly, without regard to their relative importance, etc., there is no possibility of a more or less degree of orderliness in the world, the whole system of relationship between the different characters being given by mere logic; that is, being implied in those facts which are tacitly admitted as soon as we admit that there is any such thing as reasoning. In order to descend from this abstract point of view, it is requisite to consider the characters of things as relative to the perceptions and active powers of living beings. Instead, then, of attempting to imagine a world in which there should be no uniformities, let us suppose one in which none of the uniformities should have reference to characters interesting or important to us. In the first place, there would be nothing to puzzle us in such a world. The small number of qualities which would directly meet the senses would be the ones which would afford the key to everything which could possibly interest us. The whole universe would have such an air of system and perfect regularity that there would be nothing to ask. In the next place, no action of ours, and no event of Nature, would have important consequences in such a world. We should be perfectly free from all responsibility, and there would be nothing to do but to enjoy or suffer whatever happened to
