[pdf page 246]
[page 202]

At the same time that this process of inference, or the spontaneous development of belief, is continually going on within us, fresh periph eral excitations are also continually creating new belief-habits. Thus, belief is partly determined by old beliefs and partly by new experi ence. Is there any law about the mode of the peripheral excitations? The logician maintains that there is, namely, that they are all adapted to an end, that of carrying belief, in the long run, toward certain predestinate conclusions which are the same for all men. This is the faith of the logician. This is the matter of fact, upon which all maxims of reasoning repose. In virtue of this fact, what is to be believed at last is independent of what has been believed hitherto, and therefore has the character of reality. Hence, if a given habit, considered as determin ing an inference, is of such a sort as to tend toward the final result, it is correct; otherwise not. Thus, inferences become divisible into the valid and the invalid; and thus logic takes its reason of existence. §2. Syllogism and Dialogism. The general type of inference is P. C, where.'. is the sign of illation. The passage from the premise (or set of premises) P to the conclu sion C takes place according to a habit or rule active within us. All the inferences which that habit would determine when once the proper premises were admitted, form a class. The habit is logically good provided it would never (or in the case of a probable inference, seldom) lead from a true premise to a false conclusion; otherwise it is logically bad. That is, every possible case of the operation of a good habit would either be one in which the premise was false or one in which the conclusion would be true; whereas, if a habit of inference is bad, there is a possible case in which the premise would be true, while the conclu sion was false. When we speak of a possible case, we conceive that from the general description of cases we have struck out all those kinds which we know how to describe in general terms but which we knownever will occur; those that then remain, embracing all whose non occurrence we are not certain of, together with all those whose non occurrence we cannot explain on any general principle, are called possible. A habit of inference may be formulated in a proposition which shall state that every proposition c, related in a given general way to any true proposition py is true. Such a proposition is called the leading principle of the class of inferences whose validity it implies. When the inference is first drawn, the leading principle is not present to the mind, but the habit it formulates is active in such a way that, upon
