[pdf page 247]
[page 203]

contemplating the believed premise, by a sort of perception the conclusion is judged to be true.* Afterwards, when the inference is sub jected to logical criticism, we make a new inference, of which one premise is that leading principle of the former inference, according to which propositions related to one another in a certain way are fit to be premise and conclusion of a valid inference, while another premise is a fact of observation, namely, that the given relation does subsist between the premise and conclusion of the inference under criticism; whence it is concluded that the inference was valid. Logic supposes inferences not only to be drawn, but also to be subjected to criticism; and therefore we not only require the form P.'.C to express an argument, but also a form, P. — < C., to express the truth of its leading principle. Here P f. denotes any one of the class of premises, and the corresponding conclusion. The symbol -< is the copula, and signifies prim arily that every state of things in which a proposition of the class P. is true is a state of things in which the corresponding propositions of the class C- are true. But logic also supposes some inferences to be invalid, and must have a form for denying the leading premise. This we shall write P^ ^ C., a dash over any symbol signifying in our notation the negative of that symbol t Thus, the form P? -< C. implies either, 1, that it is impossible that a premise of the class P^. should be true, or, 2, that every state of things in which P. is true is a state of things in which the corresponding C. is true. The form P f. ^ C? implies both, 1, that a premise of the class P. is possible, and, 2, that among the possible cases of the truth of a P^ there is one in which the corresponding C? is not true. This acceptation of the copula differs from that of other systems of syllogistic in a manner which will be explained below in treating of the negative. In the form of inference P.'.C the leading principle is not ex pressed; and the inference might be justified on several separate princi ples. One of these, however, P f. -< C^, is the formulation of the habit which, in point of fact, has governed the inferences. This principle contains all that is necessary besides the premise P to justify the conclusion. (It will generally assert more than is necessary.) We may, therefore, construct a new argument which shall have for its premises the two propositions P and P f. — < C? taken together, and for its conclu *Though the leading principle itself is not present to the mind, we are generally conscious of inferring on some general principle. tThis dash was used by Boole [Laws of Thought, p. 119], but not over other than class-signs.
