[pdf page 248]
[page 204]

sion, C. This argument, no doubt, has, like every other, its leading principle, because the inference is governed by some habit; but yet the substance of the leading principle must already be contained implicitly in the premises, because the proposition P. -< C • contains by hypothesis all that is requisite to justify the inference of C from P. Such a leading principle, which contains no fact not implied or observable in the premises, is termed a logical principle, and the argument it governs is termed a complete, in contradistinction to an incomplete, argument, or enthymeme. The above will be made clear by an example. Let us begin with the enthymeme, Enoch was a man, Enoch died. The leading principle of this is, “All men die.” Stating it, we get the complete argument, All men die, Enoch was a man; Enoch was to die. The leading principle of this is nota notae est nota rei ipsius.2 Stating this as a premise, we have the argument, Nota notae est nota rei ipsius, M ortality is a mark of humanity, which is a mark of Enoch; M ortality is a mark of Enoch. But this very same principle of the nota notae is again active in the drawing of this last inference, so that the last state of the argument is no more complete than the last but one. There is another way of rendering an argument complete, namely, instead of adding the leading principle P. — < conjunctively to the premise P, to form a new argument, we might add its denial disjunc tively to the conclusion; thus, P Either C or P ^ C. i i A logical principle is said to be an empty or merely formal proposition, because it can add nothing to the premises of the argument it governs, although it is relevant; so that it implies no fact except such as is presupposed in all discourse, as we have seen in §i that certain facts are implied. We may here distinguish between logical and extralogical validity; the former being that of a complete, the latter that of an incomplete argument. The term logical leading principle we may take to mean the principle which must be supposed true in order to sustain the logical validity of any argument. Such a principle states that
