[pdf page 249]
[page 205]

among all the states of things which can be supposed without conflict with logical principles, those in which the premise of the argument would be true would also be cases of the truth of the conclusion. Nothing more than this would be relevant to the logical leading princi ple, which is, therefore, perfectly determinate and not vague, as we have seen an extralogical leading principle to be. A complete argument, with only one premise, is called an immediate inference. Example: All crows are black birds; therefore, all crows are birds. If from the premise of such an argument everything redundant is omitted, the state of things expressed in the premise is the same as the state of things expressed in the conclusion, and only the form of expression is changed. Now, the logician does not undertake to enu merate all the ways of expressing facts: he supposes the facts to be already expressed in certain standard or canonical forms. But the equivalence between different ones of his own standard forms is of the highest importance to him, and thus certain immediate inferences play the great part in formal logic. Some of these will not be reciprocal inferences or logical equations, but the most important of them will have that character. If one fact has such a relation to a different one that, if the former be true, the latter is necessarily or probably true, this relation consti tutes a determinate fact; and therefore, since the leading principle of a complete argument involves no matter of fact (beyond those em ployed in all discourse), it follows that every complete and material (in opposition to a merely formal) argument must have at least two premises. From the doctrine of the leading principle it appears that if we have a valid and complete argument from more than one premise, we may suppress all premises but one and still have a valid but incomplete argument. This argument is justified by the suppressed premises; hence, from these premises alone we may infer that the conclusion would follow from the remaining premises. In this way, then, the original argument P Q Jt S T.. C is broken up into two, namely, i st,
