[pdf page 250]
[page 206]

By repeating this process, any argument may be broken up into argu ments of two premises each. A complete argument having two premises is called a syllogism. * An argument may also be broken up in a different way by substitut ing for the second constituent above, the form T -< C Either C or not T. In this way, any argument may be resolved into arguments, each of which has one premise and two alternative conclusions. Such an argument, when complete, may be called a dialogism. §3. Forms of Propositions. In place of the two expressions A -< B and B -< A taken together we may write A = B;t in place of the two expressions A -< B and B =< A taken together we may write A < B or B > A; and in place of the two expressions A:=< B and B ^ A taken together we may write A MB. De Morgan, in the remarkable memoir with which he opened his *The general doctrine of this section is contained in my paper, “On the Classifica tion of Arguments,” 1867. [^¥2:23-48.] tThere is a difference of opinion among logicians as to whether -< or = is the simpler relation. But in my paper on the “Logic of Relatives,” 3 I have strictly demon strated that the preference must be given to -< in this respect. The term simpler has an exact meaning in logic; it means that whose logical depth is smaller; that is, if one conception implies another, but not the reverse, then the latter is said to be the simpler. Now to say that A = B implies that A ^ B, but not conversely. Ergo, etc. It is to no purpose to reply that A — < B implies A = (A that is B); it would be equally relevant to say that A -< B implies A = A. Consider an analogous case. Logical sequence is a simpler conception than causal sequence, because every causal sequence is a logical sequence but not every logical sequence is a causal sequence; and it is no reply to this to say that a logical sequence between twof acts implies a causal sequence between some twof acts whether the same or different. The idea that = is a very simple relation is probably due to the fact that the discovery of such a relation teaches us that instead of two objects we have only one, so that it simplifies our conception of the universe. On this account the existence of such a relation is an important fact to learn; in fact, it has the sum of the importances of the twof acts of which it is compounded. It frequently happens that it is more convenient to treat the propositions A -< B and B — < A together in their form A = B; but it alsofrequently happens that it is more convenient to treat them separately. Even in geometry we can see that to say that twofigures A and B are equal is to say that when they are properly put together A will cover B and B will cover A; and it is generally necessary to examine these facts separately. So, in comparing the numbers of two lots of objects, we set them over against one another, each to each, and observe that for every one of the lot A there is one of the lot B, and for every one of the lot B there is one of the lot A. In logic, our great object is to analyze all the operations of reason and reduce them to their ultimate elements; and to make a calculus of reasoning is a subsidiary object. Accordingly, it is more philosophical to use the copula -<, apart from all considerations of convenience. Besides, this copula is intimately related to our natural logical and metaphysical ideas; and it is one of the chief purposes of logic to show what validity those ideas have. Moreover, it will be seen further on that the more analytical copula does in point of fact give rise to the easiest method of solving problems of logic.
