[pdf page 251]
[page 207]

discussion of the syllogism (1846, p. 380), has pointed out that we often carry on reasoning under an implied restriction as to what we shall consider as possible, which restriction, applying to the whole of what is said, need not be expressed.4 The total of all that we consider pos sible is called the universe of discourse, and may be very limited. One mode of limiting our universe is by considering only what actu ally occurs, so that everything which does not occur is regarded as impossible. The forms A -< B, or A implies B, and A =< B, or A does not imply B, embrace both hypothetical and categorical propositions. Thus, to say that all men are mortal is the same as to say that if any man possesses any character whatever then a mortal possesses that charac ter. To say, ‘if A, then B’ is obviously the same as to say that from A, B follows, logically or extralogically. By thus identifying the relation expressed by the copula with that of illation, we identify the proposition with the inference, and the term with the proposition. This identi fication, by means of which all that is found true of term, proposition, or inference is at once known to be true of all three, is a most important engine of reasoning, which we have gained by beginning with a con sideration of the genesis of logic.* Of the twoforms A B and A B, no doubt the former is the more primitive, in the sense that it is involved in the idea of reasoning, while the latter is only required in the criticism of reasoning. The two kinds of proposition are essentially different, and every attempt to reduce the latter to a special case of the former must fail. Boole at tempts to express ‘some men are not mortal’, in the form ‘whatever men have a certain unknown character v are not mortal’.5 But the propositions are not identical, for the latter does not imply that some men have that character v; and, accordingly, from Boole’s proposition we may legitimately infer that ‘whatever mortals have the unknown character v are not men’; yet we cannot reason from ‘some men are not mortal’ to ‘some mortals are not men’.t On the other hand, we can rise to a more general form under which A — < B and A ^ B are both included. For this purpose we write A ^ B in the form A -< B, where A is some-A and B is not-B. This more general form is equivocal in so far as it is left undetermined whether the proposition would be true if the subject were impossible. When the subject is general this is the case, but when the subject is particular (i.e., is subject to the modifica *In consequence of the identification in question, in S -< P, I speak of S indifferently as subject, antecedent, or premise, and of P as predicate, consequent, or conclusion. +Equally unsuccessful is Mr. Jevons’s attempt to overcome the difficulty by omitting particular propositions, “because we can always substitute for it [some] more definite expressions if we like.” The same reason might be alleged for neglecting the consid eration of not. But in fact the form A ^ B is required to enable us to simply deny A -< B.6
