[pdf page 254]
[page 210]

Introductory Lecture on the Study of Logic P225: Johns Hopkins University Circulars 2:19 (Novem ber 1882)111-12. [Also published in W4:378-82, in CP 7.39-76, and in HPPLS 940-44.] In this “Outline of the Remarks made by Prof. C. S. Peirce, at the beginning of his Course, September; 1882,” Peirce reflects on the achievements of Dar win (who had died in April) and attributes them mainly to Darwin's method. In describing the lecture to his eldest brother, James Mills, zw # 4 October 1882 letter, Peirce said: “I spoke of our time as the age of method and said that the highest honors could no longer be paid to the mere scientific specialist but to those who adapted the methods of one science to the uses of another. That a liberal education sof a r as it regards the intellect means logic, considered as the method of methods,—the via ad principia methodorum. That the stu dent ought tofeelfrom the beginning to the end of his course, that in whatever lecture room he is, it is logic he is studying.” Peirce is now defining his task as applying the methods of logic, especially induction and hypothesis, to philosophy and science. 1 It might be supposed that logic taught that much was to be accom plished by mere rumination, though every one knows that experiment, observation, comparison, active scrutiny of facts, is what is wanted, and that mere thinking will accomplish nothing even in mathematics. Logic had certainly been defined as the “art of thinking,” and as the “science of the normative laws of thought.” 2 But those are not true definitions. “Dyalectica,” says the logical text-book of the middle ages, “est ars artium et scientia scientiarum, ad omnium aliarum scientiarum me thodorumprincipia viam habens,” 3 and although the logic of our day must naturally be utterly different from that of the Plantagenet epoch, yet this general conception that it is the art of devising methods of research,— the method ofmethods, — is the true and worthy idea of the science. Logic will not undertake to inform you what kind of experiments you ought
