[pdf page 255]
[page 211]

to make in order best to determine the acceleration of gravity, or the value of the Ohm;4 but it will tell you how to proceed to form a plan of experimentation. It is impossible to maintain that the superiority of the science of the moderns over that of the ancients is due to anything but a better logic. No one can think that the Greeks were inferior to any modern people whatever in natural aptitude for science. We may grant that their opportunities for research were less; and it may be said that ancient astronomy could make no progress beyond the Ptolemaic sys tem until sufficient time had elapsed to prove the insufficiency of Ptolemy’s tables. The ancients could have no dynamics so long as no important dynamical problem had presented itself; they could have no theory of heat without the steam-engine, etc. Of course, these causes had their influence, and of course they were not the main reason of the defects of the ancient civilization. Ten years’ astronomical observa tions with instruments such as the ancients could have constructed would have sufficed to overthrow the old astronomy. The great me chanical discoveries of Galileo were made with no apparatus to speak of. If, in any direction whatever, the ancients had once commenced research by right methods, opportunities for new advances would have been brought along in the train of those that went before. But read the logical treatise of Philodemus;5 see how he strenuously argues that inductive reasoning is not utterly without value, and you see where the fault lay. When such an elementary point as that needed serious ar gumentation it is clear that the conception of scientific method was almost entirely wanting. Modern methods have created modern science; and this century, and especially the last twenty-five years, have done more to create new methods than any former equal period. We live in the very age of methods. Even mathematics and astronomy have put on new faces. Chemistry and physics are on completely new tracks. Linguistic, his tory, mythology, sociology, biology, are all getting studied in new ways. Jurisprudence and law have begun tofeel the impulse, and must in the future be more and more rapidly influenced by it. This is the age of methods; and the university which is to be the exponent of the living condition of the human mind, must be the university of methods. Now I grant you that to say that this is the age of the development of new methods of research is so far from saying that it is the age of the theory of methods, that it is almost to say the reverse. Unfortu nately practice generally precedes theory, and it is the usual fate of mankind to get things done in some boggling way first, and find out afterward how they could have been done much more easily and per fectly. And it must be confessed that we students of the science of modern methods are as yet but a voice crying in the wilderness, and
