[pdf page 256]
[page 212]

saying prepare ye the way for this lord of the sciences which is to come.6 Yet even now we can do a little more than that. The theory of any act in no wise aids the doing of it, so long as what is to be done is of a narrow description, so that it can be governed by the unconscious part of our organism. For such purposes, rules of thumb or no rules at all are the best. You cannot play billiards by analytical mechanics nor keep shop by political economy. But when new paths have to be struck out, a spinal cord is not enough; a brain is needed, and that brain an organ of mind, and that mind perfected by a liberal education. And a liberal education— so far as its relation to the understanding goes— means logic. That is indispensable to it, and no other one thing is. I do not need to be told that science consists of specialties. I know all that, for I belong to the guild of science, have learned one of its trades and am saturated with its current notions. But in my judgment there are scientific men, all whose training has only served to belittle them, and I do not see that a mere scientific specialist stands intellectu ally much higher than an artisan. I am quite sure that a young man who spends his time exclusively in the laboratory of physics or chemis try or biology, is in danger of profiting but little more from his work than if he were an apprentice in a machine shop. The scientific specialists— pendulum swingers and the like— are doing a great and useful work; each one very little, but altogether something vast. But the higher places in science in the coming years are for those who succeed in adapting the methods of one science to the investigation of another. That is what the greatest progress of the passing generation has consisted in. Darwin adapted to biology the methods of Malthus and the economists;7 Maxwell adapted to the theory of gases the methods of the doctrine of chances, and to electric ity the methods of hydrodynamics. Wundt adapts to psychology the methods of physiology; Galton adapts to the same study the methods of the theory of errors; Morgan adapted to history a method from biology; Cournot adapted to political economy the calculus of varia tions. The philologists8 have adapted to their science the methods of the decipherers of dispatches. The astronomers have learned the meth ods of chemistry; radiant heat is investigated with an ear trumpet; the mental temperament is read off on a vernier.9 Now although a man needs not the theory of a method in order to apply it as it has been applied already, yet in order to adapt to his own science the method of another with which he is less familiar, and to properly modify it so as to suit it to its new use, an acquaintance with the principles upon which it depends will be of the greatest benefit. For that sort of work a man needs to be more than a mere specialist; he needs such a general training of his mind, and such knowledge as
