[pdf page 260]
[page 216]

make a careful & serious examination of the matter no waste of time; and that the bias that formerly existed and was rightly entertained in favor of the dicta of common sense upon this subject, is sensibly weak ened and rightly weakened by its having been proved that the axioms of geometry are mere empirical laws whose perfect exactitude we have no reason whatever tofeel confident of. The scientific world will not be disturbed because all the weakminded persons whose mental equilibrium was shaken by spiritualism during the period when it was in fashion will now turn round and say, we investigated these things long ago and always told you you were wrong not to investigate them,— and now we are glad you see your error. The scientific world was entirely right before, when it declined to waste time in absurd inquiries; and it is quite consistent in saying,— as I think it is about to say,— that the pretended facts seem now to deserve examination. More than that, as a general maxim in scientific method, I maintain that at one stage of inquiry it is quite right to insist strongly on the exactitude of established laws, to question which would only lead to confusion, while at a later stage it is proper to question the exactitude of those same laws when we are in possession of a guiding idea which shows us in what manner they may possibly be corrected. I may illustrate this point by something which comes within the experience of every man. Every man at some time mislays something; I for my part, I am ashamed to confess, am rather apt to do so. I entirely forget what I did with the object and am obliged to hunt it up. Now at the beginning of my hunt, I am guided by the knowledge that I have of my own habits; I look for the object where the ordinary rule of my action would have led me to place it, and I rightly decline to spend my time in looking where I almost know I should never have left it. But at a later stage of my search when the likely places are exhausted I begin to look in the unlikely ones, and in doing so I am equally in the right. In a somewhat similar way, when we first begin to question an axiom, we do not say that it is likely to be inexact;— far from it. We only say that the question whether it is exact or not has come to have a claim to consideration greater than it had had in a former state of science. What I propose to do tonight is, following the lead of those mathe maticians who question whether the sum of the three angles of a triangle is exactly equal to two right angles, to call in question the perfect accuracy of the fundamental axiom of logic. This axiom is that real things exist or in other words, what comes to the same thing, that every intelligible question whatever is suscepti ble in its own nature of receiving a definitive and satisfactory answer, if it be sufficiently investigated by observation and reasoning. This is
