[pdf page 261]
[page 217]

the way I should put it; different logicians would state the axiom differently. Mill, for instance, throws it into the form: Nature is uni form. 5 I am not now concerned with inquiring how it ought to be stated. It is the axiom itself whatever be the proper form of it which I wish to call into doubt. Let me be quite understood. As far as all ordinary and practical questions go I insist upon this axiom as much as ever,— as much as anybody can do. I should think that any man who proposed to go on any other principle as a maxim of reasoning would be as insane as Gauss, Lobachewsky, Riemann or Helmholtz would hold that geode sist to be, who should think that he could detect any departure from the accepted laws of geometry, in any triangle measured on this earth. It is worth while to notice how much it means to question the exacti tude of an axiom. There are 25 stars whose parallaxes have been determined by unexceptionable methods. According to ordinary geometry, this parallax should slightly exceed zero. According to the non-Euclidean geometry, it might be either more or less than zero, and the value the nearest possible to zero should be proportional to the area of the triangle. Now of the 25 stars, there is but one for which the parallax comes out negative. It is a Cygni of which there is but one determination and the probable error is more than half the value of the negative parallax. There are however several whose parallax is less than o."i, among them Groombridge 1830, one of the best determined of all. We may therefore conclude that for a star so far distant that the area of the triangle is over a thousand millions of millions of millions of square miles the error of the ordinary Geometry is a quantity less than 5^ of the smallest speck that can be seen on the broad horizon, and the extinction of the human race is to be expected sooner than the applicability of the non-Euclidean geometry to any geodesic triangle. It is a doubt comparable to this which I propose in regard to the axiom of logic. In order to explain what I mean, let us take one of the most familiar, although not one of the most scientifically accurate statements of the axiom viz.: that every event has a cause. I question whether this is exactly true. Bodies obey sensibly the laws of mechanics; but may it not be that if our means of measurement were inconceivably nicer, or if we were to wait inconceivable ages for an exception, exceptions irreducible in their own nature to any law would be found? In short, may it not be that chance, in the Aristotelian sense, mere absence of cause, has to be admitted as having some slight place in the universe. Is this a mere idle doubt? Are there any considerations which lead to such a supposition and can any use be made of it if it be granted? In the first place for the motive of the doubt. If we are to admit that every event has a cause, we are bound by every maxim of consistency to grant that every fact has an explanation, a reason. When we detect
