[pdf page 262]
[page 218]

a motion among bodies, the demand for a cause is held to be just. Suppose then we find that cause to be that the bodies repel one another inversely as the fifth power of the distance, according to Maxwell’s theory about molecules. Now that force is itself not an event; but are we, merely because it is not an event, but is a different kind of fact, not entitled to ask why molecules should repel one another inversely as the fifth power of the distance, with the confidence that some reason for it there must be? Gravitation seems less strange in its law, which is that of an emanation. In the case of heat we have energy radiated from the sun; but the energy of gravity does not follow the law of radiation. The singular analogy, therefore, between the acceleration of gravitation and the energy of heat demands an explanation. There has been an attempt to explain gravitation by the impact of particles, but the law of impact is as unreasonable as that of gravity or more so. Among the things that demand explanation, then, are the laws of physics; and not this law or that law only but every single law. Why are the three laws of mechanics as they are and not otherwise? What is the cause of the restriction of extended bodies to three dimensions? And then the general fact that there are laws, how is that to be explained? The general idea of evolution governs science more and more; and every system of philosophy since Kant, however idealistic or however materialistic has strongly felt its influence. Evolution is the postulate of logic, itself; for what is an explanation but the adoption of a simpler supposition to account for a complex state of things. Every theory of evolution that I have seen is more or less special. It is true that in order to be scientifically grounded a theory must be special; but nevertheless evolutionist science and evolutionist philoso phy are more closely connected in logic than scientists //commonly suppose/are apt to think// them to be. Upon this subject, I refer to the remarks of Clifford’s concerning very general conclusions a propos of Spontaneous Generation.6 A most important premise, playing a great part in the establishment of the Nebular Hypothesis or the Theory of Natural Selection, is that things must on the whole have proceeded from the Homogeneous to the Heterogeneous. Now the theories of evolution that have hitherto been set forth, at least to the very limited extent, I am sorry to confess it, with which I am familiar with them, while they do go to make it probable that organisms and worlds have taken their origin from a state of things indefinitely homogeneous, all suppose essentially the same basis of physical law to have been operative in every age of the universe. But I maintain that the postulate that things shall be explicable extends itself to laws as well as to states of things. We want a theory of the evolution of physical law. We ought to suppose that as we go back into the indefinite past not merely special laws but law itself is
