[pdf page 263]
[page 219]

found to be less and less determinate. And how can that be if causation was always as rigidly necessary as it is now? But let me state the point in all its generality. That very postulate of logic whose rigid accuracy I call in question, itself demands that every determinate fact shall have an explanation, and there is no rea son in making any exception. Now among the determinate facts which ought thus to be explained is the very fact supposed in this postulate. This must also be explained, must be among the things which have been somehow brought about. How then can it be absolutely, rigidly & immoveably true? So much for the motive of the doubt. Now for the question to what useful result will this hypothesis lead? It is not my purpose to offer any determinate explanation of a single one of the laws of nature. All that I can do is to suggest that they may perhaps be explicable by means of hypotheses having a certain general [.. J It has always seemed to me singular that when we put the question to an evolutionist, Spencerian, Darwinian, or whatever school he may belong to, what are the agencies which have brought about evolution, he mentions various determinate facts and laws, but among the agen cies at work he never once mentions Chance. Yet it appears to me that chance is the one essential agency upon which the whole process depends. About the nature of the ordinary phenomena of chance there can be no dispute whatever. A certain antecedent, for example that I throw a die from a box, determines the general character of a conse quent, namely that a number is turned up, but does not specifically determine the character of the consequent, that is what number that is to be; but that is determined by other causes which cannot be taken into account. I suppose that on excessively rare sporadic occasions a law of nature is violated in some infinitesimal degree; that may be called absolute chance; but ordinary chance is merely relative to the causex that are taken into account. The laws of the two kinds of chance are in the main the same. Speaking first of ordinary and relative chance, a man with an indefinite number of silver dollars who sits down to a perfectly fair game and bets one dollar on every throw of the dice will go on losing and winning in about equal measure. Speaking of absolute chance, the same thing will happen, for if not there would ipso facto be a definite tendency toward winning or losing. The only difference between the two cases is this, that the hypothesis of absolute chance is part and parcel of the hypothesis that everything is explicable, not absolutely, rigidly without the smallest inexactitude or sporadic exception, for that is a self-contradictory supposition but yet explicable in a general way. Explicability has no determinate & absolute limit. Everything being explicable, everything has been brought about; and conse quently everything is subject to change and subject to chance. Now
