[pdf page 264]
[page 220]

everything that can happen by chance, sometime or other will happen by chance. Chance will sometime bring about a change in every condi tion; or, at least, this is as near a correct statement of the matter as can readily be drawn up, for quite correct it certainly is not. Now I propose to prove that the operation of chance will always present this phenomenon when the objects operated upon are very manifold. A million players sit down to play a fair game. Each bets one dollar each time which he has an even chance of winning or losing. Let each player be provided at the outset with a pile of a million silver dollars. Now it is a curious & apparently paradoxical result that although everything is supposed to happen by pure chance yet we know very closely how those million players will stand at the end of a million bets. About 10 will have lost $2000 or more, no one over $3000; and half of them after playing day and night for nearly a fortnight at the rate of one bet a second will stand within $300 of where they started. But now we will suppose that the dice used by the players become worn down in the course of time. Chance changes everything & chance will change that. And we will suppose that they are worn down in such a way that every time a man wins, he has a slightly better chance of winning on subsequent trials. This will make little difference in the first million bets, but its ultimate effect would be to separate the players into two classes those who had gained and those who had lost with few or none who had neither gained nor lost and these classes would separate themselves more and more, faster and faster. If on the other hand the wearing down of the dice were to have the opposite effect and were to tend to make him lose who had heretofore gained and vice versa, the tendency would be to prevent the separation of rich and poor. But chance will act in various ways. At one time it will have one effect at another time another. If these effects were to be alternated after billions of trials, the effect would be to make numbers of distinct classes of players. It would be easy if I had time to state the solutions to a number of similar problems in probabilities. Suffice it to say that as everything is subject to change everything will change after a time by chance, and among these changeable cir
