[pdf page 265]
[page 221]

cumstances will be the effects of changes on the probability of fur ther change. And from this it follows that chance must act to move things in the long run from a state of homogeneity to a state of het erogeneity. These are unlikely states of things. It is unlikely that a player should go on winning money billions of times and never be poorer than he began. But this is the effect of chance. Nor can you prevent it by killing the player whom you see taking such a course. You deprive chance of one means but it supplies another in the person of another player and the ultimate result is unaffected. The operation of chance, therefore, does show a definite tendency to bring about unlikely events by varying means under varying cir cumstances. I have no time to give more than a slight inkling of the conse quences upon science and philosophy of attention to this principle. You have all heard of the dissipation of energy. It is found that in all transformations of energy a part is converted into heat and heat is always tending to equalize its temperature. The consequence is that the energy of the universe is tending by virtue of its necessary laws toward a death of the universe in which there shall be noforce but heat and the temperature everywhere the same. This is a truly astounding result, and the most materialistic the most anti-teleological conceiv able. We may say that we know enough of the forces at work in the universe to know that there is none that can counteract this tendency away from every definite end but death. But although noforce can counteract this tendency, chance may and will have the opposite influence. Force is in the long run dissipa tive; chance is in the long run concentrative. The dissipation of energy by the regular laws of nature is by those very laws accompanied by circumstances more and more favorable to its reconcentration by chance. There must therefore be a point at which the two tendencies are balanced and that is no doubt the actual condition of the whole universe at the present time. Certain laws of nature, the laws of Boyle and Charles,7 the second law of thermodynamics, and some others are known to be results of chance,— statistical facts so to say. Molecules are so inconceivably numerous, their encounters so inconceivably frequent, that chance with them is omnipotent. I cannot help believing that more of the molecular laws— the principles of chemistry for example— will be found to involve the same element, especially as almost all these laws present the peculiarity of not being rigidly exact. Now when we take into account that feature of chance which I have been bringing to your notice we find that this agent, although it
