[pdf page 266]
[page 222]

can only work upon the basis of some law or uniformity, or more or less definite ratio towards a uniformity, has the property of being able to produce uniformities far more strict than those from which it works. It is therefore possible to suppose that not only the laws of chemis try but the other known laws of matter are statistical results. Thomson supposes matter to consist of eddies in fluid. If a fluid is composed again of molecules its laws will be mainly due to chance. Now I will suppose that all known laws are due to chance and repose upon others far less rigid themselves due to chance and so on in an infinite regress, the further we go back the more indefinite being the nature of the laws, and in this way we see the possibility of an indefinite approximation toward a complete explanation of nature. Chance is indeterminacy, is freedom. But the action of freedom issues in the strictest rule of law. / D e s i g n a n d C h a n c e (A)/ Epicurus makes the Gods consist of atoms but their superiority is due to the finer material of which they are composed. Thus, divineness comes from a special cause & does not originate by chance from ele ments not containing it. Darw in’s view is nearer to mine. Indeed, my opinion is only Dar winism analyzed, generalized, and brought into the realm of On tology. But Darwin holds the development of Animals and Plants to be due to certain special characters, Reproduction, Spontaneous Varia tion, Heredity, etc. Herbert Spencer and many other evolutionists hold that the opera tion of chance is an important factor in the development of self-consciousness. But they all admit other primordial elements, the conserva tion of energy and the like, to be necessary factors. Whereas my principle is that [...]* holds a place in Nature independent of every accident of matter. Before I can prove my proposition I must first show what it means. I must analyze the conception of Design or Intelligence and find what it consists in. In the first place, then, to eliminate the element offeeling as being either no essential element of intelligence or at least only a subsidiary one. The internal sense, reflection, which makes us aware of what we think, is, in truth, the main thing which distinguishes us from the brutes. It is by this means that we control our thoughts, and conquer impulses which we do not approve. But because it happens to be thus valuable to us, because it happens to be the instrument by which we make ourselves rational, it does not follow that it is essential to ratio
