[pdf page 267]
[page 223]

nality. What is essential is that all our cognitions should be gathered into a unity and that our actions should proceed from the entirety of our knowledge. Because our thought is only imperfectly brought to unity, it requires effort to collect it, and it requires a watchful eye to be directed to the imperfections of this unity. But were we so happily constituted that we should always without reflection completely as similate everything we learned, so as to take due account of it in every act, we might well be spared the trouble of reflecting; and we should be only the more rational if we could thus behave with intelligence by the first intention of the mind, without reflection,— and knowing no more of what was going on in our minds than a healthy man does of what is going on in his stomach. I have several times shown to my classes how some of the main laws of cerebration and particularly the formation of habits could be ac counted for by the principles of probability, and I have shown by experiment how a certain regularity of arrangement can be impressed upon a pack of cards by imitating the action of habit. The main element of habit is the tendency to repeat any action which has been performed before. It is a phenomenon at least coexten sive with life, and it may cover a still wider real realm. Imagine a large number of systems in some of which there is a decided tendency toward doing again what has once been done, in others a tendency against doing what has once been done, in others elements having one tendency and elements having the other. Let us consider the effects of chance upon these different systems. Tofix our ideas suppose players playing with dice, some of their dice are worn down in such a way that the act of losing tends to make them lose again, others in such a way that the act of losing tends to make them win. The latter will win or lose much more slowly, yet after a sufficient length of time they will be in danger of being ruined and if the game is quite even, they will eventually be ruined and destroyed. Those whose dice are so worn as to reproduce the same effects, will be divided into two parts, one of which will quickly be destroyed, the other made stronger and stronger. For every kind of an organism, system, form, or compound, there is an absolute limit to a weakening process. It ends in destruc tion; there is no limit to strength. The result is that chance in its action tends to destroy the weak & increase the average strength of the objects remaining. Systems or compounds which have bad habits are quickly destroyed, those which have no habits follow the same course; only those which have good habits tend to survive. May not the laws of physics be habits gradually acquired by sys tems. Why, for instance, do the heavenly bodies tend to attract one another? Because in the long run bodies that repel or do not attract will get thrown out of the region of space leaving only the mutually
