[pdf page 274]
[page 230]

has possessed. It contains many distinct elements; and the study of logic has not yet been carried far enough to estimate precisely the value of all of them. Dr. Royce has produced a work which will form a good introduc tion to Hegel. His language and his thought are equally lucid and within the capacity of ordinary minds; his style is animated and readable, and in passages rises without eifort to true philosophical eloquence. His method is a dialectic one; that is to say, it proceeds by the criticism of opinions, first, destructively to absolute scepticism, and then finds hidden in that scepticism itself the highest truth. It differs, however, very decidedly from the dialectic of Hegel; and in its simplicity and general tone reminds us rather of the reasoning of Plato. But before we examine the method, let us glance at the philosoph ical upshot of the book. This is, that the reality of whatever really exists consists in the real thing being thought by God.1 Ordinary people think that things exist by the will of God; and if thought be taken in so wide a sense as to include volition, they have no difficulty in admitting the proposition which Dr. Royce has borrowed from Hegel and Schelling.2 But ordinary people say that not merely the real but all that can possibly enter into the mind of man must be within the thought of God in some sense; so that it must be some particular kind of divine thought which constitutes reality; and that particular kind of thought must be distinguished by a volitional ele ment. In short, ordinary people make, at once, the very same criti cism that the profoundest students of philosophy have made, namely, that the Hegelian school overlooks the importance of the will as an element of thought. A certain writer has suggested that reality, the fact that there is such a thing as a true answer to a question, consists in this: that human inquiries,— human reasoning and observation,—tend toward the set tlement of disputes and ultimate agreement in definite conclusions which are independent of the particular stand-points from which the different inquirers may have set out; so that the real is that which any man would believe in, and be ready to act upon, if his investigations were to be pushed sufficiently far.3 Upon the luckless putter-forth of this opinion Dr. Royce is extremely severe. He will not even name him (perhaps to spare the family), but refers to him by various satirical nick-names, especially as “Thrasymachus,”— a foolish character intro duced into the Republic and another dialogue of Platofor the purpose of showing how vastly such an ignorant pretender to philosophy is inferior to Socrates (that is, to Plato himself) in every quality of mind and heart, and especially in good manners.4 But I must with shame confess that if I understand what the opinion of this poor, Royce-
