[pdf page 275]
[page 231]

forsaken Thrasymachus is, I coincide with it exactly. I ask any man, Suppose you could be miraculously assured that a certain answer to any question that interests you would be the one in which, were your life and mental vigor to be indefinitely prolonged, you must eventually rest, would you not cease all inquiries at once, and be content with that answer now, as being the very thing you had been striving after? This question Dr. Royce answers explicitly in the negative. “No barely possible judge,” he says, “who would see the error, i f he were there, will dofor us.” 5 Yet if I were to represent Dr. Royce as preferring to believe for a little while that which a certain Being— no matter who— imagines, rather than to come at once to the belief to which investiga tion is destined at last to carry him, I should probably be doing him injustice; because I suppose he would say that the thing which God imagines, and the opinion to which investigation would ultimately lead him, in point of fact coincide. If, however, these two things coincide, I fail to understand why he should be so cruel to the childish Thrasymachus; since after all there is no real difference between them, but only a formal one,—each maintaining as a theorem that which the other adopts as a definition. As was just remarked, the Hegelian school do not sufficiently take into account the volitional element of cogni tion. Dr. Royce admits in words that belief is what a man will act from;6but he does not seem to have taken the truth of this proposition home to him, or else he would see that the whole end of inquiry is the settlement of belief;7 so that a man shall not war against himself, nor undo tomorrow that which he begins to do today. Dr. Royce’s main argument in support of his own opinion, to the confusion of Thrasymachus, is drawn from the existence of error. Namely, the subject of an erroneous proposition could not be identified with the subject of the corresponding true proposition, except by being com pletely known, and in that knowledge no error would be possible. The truth must, therefore, be present to the actual consciousness of a living being. This is an argument drawn from Formal Logic, for formal logic it is which inquires how different propositions are made to refer to the same subject, and the like. German metaphysics has, since Kant, drawn its best arguments from formal logic; and it is quite right in doing so, for the conceptions which are proved to be indispensable in formal logic, must have been already rooted in the nature of the mind when reasoning first began, and are, so far, a priori. But one would surely have supposed that when the German philosophers8 were thus drawing their arguments from formal logic, they would have post poned their venturesome flights into the thin air of theology and the vacuum of pure reason, until they had carefully tried the strength of every part of that logical machine on which they were to depend. Instead of that, they have left the great work of creating a true system
