[pdf page 277]
[page 233]

not in so many words; but it is because of this property that he distin guishes Space and Tim e from the general conceptions of the under standing and sets them off by themselves under the head of intuition. But I should prefer to say that it is by volitional acts that dates and positions are distinguished. The element of feeling is so prominent in sensations, that we do not observe that something like Will enters into them, too. You may quarrel with the word volition if you like; I wish I had a more general one at my hand.14 But what I mean is that that strong, clear, and voluntary consciousness in which we act upon our muscles is nothing more than the most marked variety of a kind of consciousness which enters into many other phenomena of our life, a consciousness of duality or dual consciousness. Feeling is simple consciousness, the consciousness that can be contained within an instant of time, the consciousness of the excitation of nerve-cells; it has no parts and no unity. What I call volition is the consciousness of the discharge of nerve-cells, either into the muscles, etc., or into other nerve-cells; it does not involve the sense of time (i.e. not of a con tinuum) but it does involve the sense of action and reaction, resistance, externality, otherness, pair-edness. It is the sense that something has hit me or that I am hitting something; it might be called the sense of collision or clash. It has an outward and an inward variety, corre sponding to Kant’s outer and inner sense,15 to will and self-control, to nerve-action and inhibition, to the two logical types A:B and A: A. The capital error of Hegel which permeates his whole system in every part of it is that he almost altogether ignores the Outward Clash.* Besides the lower consciousness of feeling and the higher consciousness of nutrition, this direct consciousness of hitting and of getting hit enters into all cognition and serves to make it mean something real. It is formal logic which teaches us this; not that of a Whately or a Jevons, but formal logic in its new development, drawing nutriment from physiology and from history without leaving the solid ground of logi cal forms. An objection different from that of Dr. Royce might be raised. Nam ely it might be asked how two different men can know they are speaking of the same thing. Suppose, for instance, one man should say a flash of lightning was followed by thunder and another should deny it. How would they know they meant the same flash? The answer is that they would compare notes somewhat as follows. One would say, “I mean that very brilliant flash which was preceded by three slighter flashes, you know.” The second man would recognize the mark, and *“We must be in contact with our subject-matter,” says he in one place, “whether it be by means of our external senses, or; what is better; by our profounder mind and our innermost self-consciousness.” 16
