[pdf page 278]
[page 234]

thus by a probable and approximate inference they would conclude they meant the same flash. Dr. Royce in describing the opinion of Thrasymachus has selected the expression “a barely possible judge.” 17 Is there not an ambiguity in this mode of speech which is unfair to Thrasymachus? The final opin ion which would be sure to result from sufficient investigation may possibly, in reference to a given question, never be actually attained, owing to a final extinction of intellectual life or for some other rea son.18 In that sense, this final judgment is not certain but only possible. But when Dr. Royce says “bare possibility is blank nothingness,” 19 he would seem to be speaking of mere logical possibility, and not a possi bility which differs but by a hair’s-breadth from entire certainty. Let us consider what probability there is that a given question, say one capable of being answered by yes or no, will never get answered. Let us reason upon this matter by inductive logic. Dr. Royce and his school, I am well aware, consider inductive reasoning to be radically vicious; so that we unhappily cannot carry them along with us. [They often deny this, by the way, and say they rest entirely on experience. This is because they so overlook the Outward Clash, that they do not know what experience is. They are like Roger Bacon, who after stating in eloquent terms that all knowledge comes from experience, goes on to mention spiritual illumination from on high as one of the most valuable kinds of experiences.]20 But they will not succeed in explod ing the method of modern science; and there is no reason why those who believe in induction at all, should not be willing to apply it to the subject now in hand. In the first place, then, upon innumerable ques tions, we have already reached the final opinion. How do we know that? Do we fancy ourselves infallible? Not at all; but throwing off as probably erroneous a thousandth or even a hundredth of all the beliefs established beyond present doubt, there must remain a vast multitude in which the final opinion has been reached. Every directory, guide book, dictionary, history, and work of science is crammed with such facts. In the history of science, it has sometimes occurred that a really wise man has said concerning one question or another that there was reason to believe it never would be answered. The proportion of these which have in point of fact been conclusively settled very soon after the prediction has been surprizingly large. Our experience in this direction warrants us in saying with the highest degree of empirical confidence that questions that are either practical or could conceivably become so are susceptible of receiving final solutions provided the existence of the human race be indefinitely prolonged and the particular question excite sufficient interest. As for questions which have no conceivable practical bearings, as the question whether force is an entity, they mean nothing, and may be answered as we like, without
