[pdf page 280]
[page 236]

reality, and makes it differ from a dream.23 In that way, if we think that some questions are never going to get settled, we ought to admit that our conception of nature as absolutely real is only partially correct. Still, we shall have to be governed by it practically; because there is nothing to distinguish the unanswerable questions from the answera ble ones, so that investigation will have to proceed as if all were answerable. In ordinary life, no matter how much we believe in ques tions ultimately getting answered, we shall always put aside an innu merable throng of them as beyond our powers. We shall not in our day seek to know whether the centre of the sun is distant from that of the earth by an odd or an even number of miles on the average; we shall act as if neither man nor God could ever ascertain it. There is, how ever, an economy of thought, in assuming that it is an answerable question. From this practical and economical point of view, it really makes no difference whether or not all questions are actually an swered, by man or by God, so long as we are satisfied that investigation has a universal tendency toward the settlement of opinion; and this I conceive to be the position of Thrasymachus. If there be any advantage to religion in supposing God to be omni scient, this sort of scepticism about reality can do no practical harm. We can still suppose that He knows all that there is of reality to be known. On the theory of Dr. Royce, the real existence of God would consist in his imagining or positing Himself; it would thus be, accord ing to him, of the same nature as the reality of anything else. For my part, I hold another theory, which I intend to take an early opportu nity of putting into print. I think that the existence of God, as well as we can conceive of it, consists in this, that a tendency toward ends is so necessary a constituent of the universe that the mere action of chance upon innumerable atoms has an inevitable teleological result. One of the ends so brought about is the development of intelligence and of knowledge; and therefore I should say that God’s omniscience, humanly conceived, consists in the fact that knowledge in its develop ment leaves no question unanswered. The scepticism just spoken of would admit this omniscience as a regulative but not a speculative conception. I believe that even that view is more religiously fruitful than the opinion of Dr. Royce. Let us now turn to the examination of Dr. Royce’s peculiar method of reasoning; for that is always the most important element in every system of philosophy. His work is divided into a brief intro duction and two books, the first entitled “The search for a moral ideal”; the second “The search for a religious truth.” These titles seem to me to point, at the outset, to a fault of method. The pursuit of a conscience, if one hasn’t one already, or of a religion, which is the subjective basis of conscience, seems to me an aimless and hypo chondriac pursuit. If a man finds himself under no sense of obliga
