[pdf page 282]
[page 238]

ther I nor the readers of the Popular Science Monthly can possibly believe that, in advance. But let us see how the method will work when applied to the discussion of ethics. The moral stand-point from which every man with a Christian training sets out, even if he be a dogmatic atheist, is pretty nearly the same. He has a horror of certain crimes and a disapproval of certain lesser sins. He is also more or less touched with the spirit of Christian love, which he believes should be his beacon, and which in point of fact, by its power in his heart, shall and will govern him in all ques tions of disputed morals. More or less, in all of us, this sentiment replaces and abolishes conscience; like Huckleberry Finn, we act from Christian charity without caring very much whether conscience ap proves of the act or not. This is the state of mind of the ordinary man or woman who will open Dr. Royce’s book. And now Dr. Royce proposes that this person shall ask himself the question what validity or truth is there in the distinction of right and wrong. To me, it plainly appears that such a person, if he have a clear head, will at once reply, right and wrong are nothing to me except so far as they are connected with certain rules of living by which I am enabled to satisfy a real impulse which works in my heart; and this impulse is the love of my neighbor elevated into a love of an ideal and divine humanity which I identify with the providence that governs the world. But Dr. Royce says that different people will answer the question in different ways; some will take the position of the “moral realist” and say that moral distinctions are founded on some matter of fact (say a decree from Sinai), while others will take the position of the “moral idealist” and say that these distinc tions are founded on an inward sentiment,—an ideal.25 Tw o such persons come into collision; they find by mutual criticism that both positions are unsatisfactory; external fact can only determine what is, not what ought to be; while inward sentiment cannot be a restingplace, because it is only individual caprice and has no authority for another man. From this criticism the only outcome is ethical scepti cism. This is a fair specimen of Dr. Royce’s logical method, which is a mere apotheosis of the dilemma, as the great instrument of thought. As compared with syllogistic method of the middle ages (which sur vives in certain quarters, yet) it is certainly wonderfully superior; but as compared with the mathematical reasoning upon which modern science is built, it is inefficacious and restricted. In the particular case in hand, it appears to me that the ordinary Christian does not find himself caught in Dr. Royce’s dilemma at all. He is a moral idealist; yet far from being shaken by the spectacle of different men having different passions, he feels that every man may
