[pdf page 283]
[page 239]

come to the same passion which animates him by a mere enlargement of his horizon, and that his is the only sentiment in which all others may be reconciled. For altruism is but a developed egoism; that same sensitiveness which in its lowest state is selfishness, first transforms itself into esprit de corps or collective selfishness; then, passing from feeling for others collectively tofeeling for themindividually, it be comes philanthropy, pity, sympathy tossed hither and thither rudder less on the ocean of human misery; finally, steadying itself by the conception of an ideal humanity and a divine providence, it passes into Christian charity, which gathers up all selfishnesses and all pities and is ready to give each its due measure. The author having stated the above argument with admirable clear ness, fills a hundred pages with a perhaps not altogether necessary, though a charmingly written and highly interesting elaboration and illustration of it. He here passes in review a goodly number of the ethical theories which have been proposed at different times. After the Sophists, Plato, Aristotle, and the Stoics, he criticizes what he con ceives to be the ethics of Jesus.26 Every Christian will tell him that he makes the mistake of viewing that as a theory or speculation which is really a spiritual experience;— another example of his neglect of the volitional element. For instance, he asks, “If I feel not the love of God, how prove to me that I ought tofeel it?” 27 The answer to that need not be pointed out. In what he says about Herbert Spencer, he seems toforget that Mr. Spencer is not addressing a body of moral sceptics but readers ani mated by the sentiments which, in our day, animate every man who reads at all.28 At last he takes up the thread of his argument as follows. The conflict between moral realism and idealism can only lead to moral scepticism. Now what is this scepticism? It is the contemplation of two opposing aims. Here he adduces the testimony of modern psy chologists to show that we cannot think of willing without actually willing.29 (But for all that, I fancy I notice a difference sometimes in cold weather between thinking of willing to take my morning dash of cold water and actually willing to take it.) Scepticism, then, shares at once these opposing aims, or strives to share them. It has thus itself an aim, namely, to reconcile opposing aims. So absolute moral scepticism is self-destructive. “Possibly this result may be somewhat unexpected,” says our author.30 Not at all unexpected to one who does not believe in the dialectical method. You started with a hypo chondriac hankering after an aim; and now you have acquired it. Eurekas! Well, what is it, this aim which you have at last got? Why, to have an aim! But that is nothing but the old nonsensical longing with which you set out. Like Kant’s dove,31 you have been winging a vac
