[pdf page 284]
[page 240]

uum, without remarking that you never advanced an inch. I do not misrepresent the author. “For behold,” he says, “made practical, brought down from its lonesome height, my Ideal very simply means the Will to direct my acts towards the attainment of universal Harmony.” 32 But this, I must insist, was obviously implied in the origi nal fantastic desire to have an aim. When I say that this is a fantastic desire, I do not of course mean to deny that there may be such an operation as the choice of an aim, if by that aim be meant a secondary or derived one; but I do say that it is absurd to speak of choosing an original and ultimate aim. That is something which if you haven’t it, you have nothing to do but wait till the grace of God confers it on you. I should think, however, that were it once admitted to be a rational performance to go a-hunting for an ultimate aim or end, the first preliminary would be to recognize the axiom that such an end must have unity, after which the hunt might begin. But Royce, call ing this axiom the “ideal of ideals,” as it certainly is, in a sense, ex claims “Here I have the aim I wanted, and the hunt is over.” 33 If one might be permitted to enliven a dry subject with a little folly, I should say that it reminded me of the surveyor Phoenix, who after purchasing 365 solar compasses and a vast amount of other parapher nalia, in order to ascertain the distance between San Francisco and the Mission of Dolores, stepped into a grocery and inquired how far it was, and returned “much pleased at so easily acquiring so much valuable information.” 34 If Dr. Royce merely means that it can be shown that a man whof ancies he has no moral ideal really has one, I heartily grant it; and I will further admit that dialectic is the proper instrument to show this. But then a very lowly kind of dialec tic will do; and a rather more definite ideal may be pointed out. The rest of Book I is occupied, as it seems to me, with illicitly slipping some content into an empty formula. Much of this part of the book is splendidly said. But other passages seem to me to preach, in a way quite uncalled for by the premises, an ethics of the evil eye. “It is well that we should feel... joy whenever pride has a fall.... In all such ways... we must show no mercy.” “When the hedonist gives us his picture of a peaceful society, where, in the midst of good humor, his ideal, the happiness of everybody concerned, is steadfastly pursued, we find ourselves disappointed and contemptuous.... Who cares whether that wretched set... think themselves happy or not?” “The appearance of anybody who pretends to be content with himself must be the signal not for admiration at the sight of his success, but for a good deal of contempt.” etc.35 Some of the students to whom this ethics is taught at Harvard may upon reflection think that Christian charity is not so much lower a frame of mind after all. In Book II Dr. Royce undertakes by the same dialectic procedure to establish the existence of a God. /S7pace does not permit me to enter
