[pdf page 287]
[page 243]

its being exactly 180 degrees, so that that hypothesis ought to be en tirely dismissed from our minds. It is difficult for us to believe that any physical constant, any finite quantity in nature, is primordial. It may be so, but we cannot help at least asking how it came to have the precise value that it has. Especially do we feel the need of an explanation when the quantity in question comes very near to unity, zero, or any other remarkable number. For then it is suggested that there must have been some cause tending to change the value of the constant and to bring it nearer and nearer to the number that it nearly equals. In such a case, therefore, we have a positive reason for thinking that the quantity is not primordial. Thus the principles of logic require us to think that space did not always have its present simple construction, but that this has been brought about by some gradual process. This is not quite a correct statement, however, because space, as an individual receptacle of things, is a fiction. Were it otherwise, absolute position and absolute velocity in space would mean something, which we have no reason to think that they do. What is true is that there are certain general laws of position, but not that there is a receptacle which accounts for those laws. This is a fiction of geometry. The same reasoning applies to the axiom that everything that happens is completely determined by exact laws. We have no reason to think that the accordance of phenomena with formulae is absolutely exact. Whenever we attempt to verify the accordance of fact with law, we find discrepancies which we rightly enough attribute to errors of observation. But we cannot be sure that there are not similar, though much smaller, aberrations in the events themselves. Since we have no reason to think that the mean aberration of phenomena from law is equal to zero, it is infinitely more probable that it is not. We must therefore suppose an element of absolute chance, sporting, spon taneity, originality, freedom, in nature.1 We must further suppose that this element in the ages of the past was indefinitely more prominent than now, and that the present almost exact conformity of nature to law is something that has been gradually brought about. We have to suppose that in looking back into the indefinite past we are looking back towards times when the element of law played an indefinitely small part in the universe. If the universe is thus progressing from a state of all but pure chance to a state of all but complete determination by law, we must suppose that there is an original, elemental, tendency of things to acquire determinate properties, to take habits. This is the Third or mediating element between chance, which brings forth First and origi nal events, and law which produces sequences or Seconds. Now the tendency to take habits is something essentially finite in amount, an
