[pdf page 289]
[page 245]

A Guess at the Riddle MS pop. [First published in CP 1.354 (the opening outline), 1.1-2 (the next two paragraphs), 1*355-68 (chapter 1), 1.3/3 (chapter 3), 1.374-75 and 37P-83 (chapter 4; missing are the final sentence of the second paragraph, the third paragraph, and the first half of the fourth paragraph), and 1.385-416 (chapters 5, 6, and 7). An earlier opening page has the title “Notesfor a Book, to be entitled ‘A Guess at the Riddle,’ with a Vignette of the Sphynx below the Title.”] Although chapters 2, 8, andp are missing (andprobably were never written) and chapter3 is a mere outline, “A Guess at the Riddle” isperhaps Peirce!rgreatest and most original contribution to speculative philosophy, and it marks his deliberate turn to architectonic thought. His three categories, which he speculates are iso morphic with the three elements that are active in the universe (chance, law, and habit-taking), serve as the structure for organizing the branches ofphilosophy and science, and it is clear that he anticipated a complete reorganization ofhuman knowledge around his triad of universal conceptions; for as he wrote, on a variant opening page, “this book, i f ever written, as it soon will be i f I am in a situation to do it, will be one of the births of time.” Although, unfortunately, Peirce never was in such a situation, it isfortunate that many of his major ideas in the “Guess” would soon appear in the papers of the Monist Metaphysical Series (items 21-25). Chapter 1. One, Tw o, Three. Already written.1 Chapter 2. The triad in reasoning. Not touched.2 It is to be made as follows. 1. Three kinds of signs; as best shown in my last paper in the Am. Jour. Math.32. Term, proposition, and argument, mentioned in my paper on a new list of categories.4 3. Three kinds of argument, deduc tion, induction, hypothesis, as shown in my paper in Studies in Logic. 5 Also three figures of syllogism, as shown there and in my paper on the classification of arguments.64. Three kinds of terms, absolute, relative, and conjugative, as shown in my first paper on Logic of Relatives.7 There are various other triads which may be alluded to. The dual
