[pdf page 290]
[page 246]

divisions of logic result from a false way of looking at things abso lutely. Thus, besides affirmative and negative, there are really probable enunciations, which are intermediate. So besides universal and partic ular there are all sorts of propositions of numerical quantity. For example, the particular proposition Some A is B, means At least one A is B. But we can also say At least 2 A’s are B’s. Also, All the A’s but one are B’s, etc. etc. ad infinitum. We pass from dual quantity, or a system of quantity such as that of Boolian algebra, where there are only two values, to plural quantity. Chapter 3. The triad in metaphysics. This chapter one of the best, is to treat of the theory of cognition. Chapter 4. The triad in psychology. The greater part is written. Chapter 5. The triad in physiology. The greater part is written. Chapter 6. The triad in biology. This is to show the true nature of the Darwinian hypothesis. Chapter 7. The triad in physics. The germinal chapter. 1. The necessity of a natural history of the laws of nature, so that we may get some notion of what to expect. 2. The logical postulate for explanation forbids the assumption of any absolute. That is, it calls for the intro duction of thirdness. 3. Metaphysics is an imitation of geometry; and mathematicians having declared against axioms, the metaphysical axi oms are destined tof all too. 4. Absolute chance. 5. The universality of the principle of habit. 6. The whole theory stated. 7. Consequences. Chapter 8. The triad in sociology or shall I say pneumatology. That the consciousness is a sort of public spirit among the nerve-cells. Man as a community of cells; compound animals and composite plants; society; nature. Feeling implied in firstness. Chapter 9. The triad in theology. Faith requires to be materialists without flinching.8 To erect a philosophical edifice that shall outlast the vicissitudes of time, my care must be, not so much to set each brick with nicest accuracy, as to lay the foundations deep and massive. Aristotle builded upon a few deliberately chosen concepts— such as matter and form, act and power—very broad, and in their outlines vague and rough, but solid, unshakable, and not easily undermined; and thence it has come to pass that Aristotelianism is babbled in every nursery, that “English Common Sense,” for example, is thoroughly peripatetic, and that ordi nary men live so completely within the house of the Stagyrite that whatever they see out of the windows appears to them incomprehensi ble and metaphysical. Long it has been only too manifest that, fondly habituated though we be to it, the old structure will not dofor modern needs; and accordingly, under Descartes, Hobbes, Kant, and others, repairs, alterations, and partial demolitions have been carried on for
