[pdf page 297]
[page 253]

I could not help asking myself whether they did not enter into the physiology of the nervous system. By drawing a little on hypothesis, I succeeded in detecting them there; and then the question naturally came how they would appear in the theory of protoplasm in general. Here I seemed to break into an interesting avenue of reflections giving instructive aperçus both into the nature of protoplasm and into the conceptions themselves; though it was not till later that I mapped out my thoughts on the subject as they are presented in Chapter V.111had no difficulty in following the lead into the domain of natural selection; and once arrived at that point, I was irresistibly carried on to specula tions concerning physics. One bold saltus landed me in a garden of fruitful and beautiful suggestions, the exploration of which long pre vented my looking further.12 As soon, however, as I was induced to look further, and to examine the application of the three ideas to the deepest problems of the soul, nature, and God, I saw at once that they must carry me far into the heart of those primeval mysteries. That is the way the book has grown in my mind: it is also the order in which I have written it; and only this first chapter is more or less an after thought, since at an earlier stage of my studies I should have looked upon the matter here set down as too vague to have any value. I should have discerned in it too strong a resemblance to many a crack-brained book that I had laughed over. A deeper study has taught me that even out of the mouths of babes and sucklings strength may be brought forth, and that weak metaphysical trash has sometimes contained the germs of conceptions capable of growing up into important and posi tive doctrines. Thus, the whole book being nothing but a continual exemplifica tion of the triad of ideas, we need linger no longer upon this prelimi nary exposition of them. There is, however, one feature of them upon which it is quite indispensable to dwell. It is that there are two distinct grades of secondness and three grades of thirdness. There is a close analogy to this in geometry. Conic sections are either the curves usu ally so called, or they are pairs of straight lines. A pair of straight lines is called a degenerate conic. So plane cubic curves are either the genu ine curves of the third order, or they are conics paired with straight lines, or they consist of three straight lines; so that there are two orders of degenerate cubics. N early in this same way, besides genuine second ness, there is a degenerate sort which does not exist as such, but is only so conceived. The medieval logicians (following a hint of Aristotle) distinguished between real relations and relations of reason. A real relation subsists in virtue of a fact which would be totally impossible were either of the related objects destroyed; while a relation of reason subsists in virtue of twof acts, one only of which would disappear on the annihilation of either of the relates. Such are all resemblances: for any two obiects in nature resemble each other, and indeed in them
