[pdf page 300]
[page 256]

to be in profound contrast with that of Hegel; I reject his philosophy in toto.14 Nevertheless, I have a certain sympathy with it, and fancy that if its author had only noticed a very few circumstances he would himself have been led to revolutionize his system. One of these is the double division or dichotomy of the second idea of the triad. He has usually overlooked external secondness, altogether. In other words, he has committed the trifling oversight of forgetting that there is a real world with real actions and reactions. Rather a serious oversight that. Then Hegel had the misfortune to be unusually deficient in mathemat ics. He shows this in the very elementary character of his reasoning. Worse still, while the whole burden of his song is that philosophers have neglected to take thirdness into account, which is true enough of the theological kind, with whom alone he was acquainted (for I do not call it acquaintance to look into a book without comprehending it), he unfortunately did not know, what it would have been of the utmost consequence for him to know, that the mathematical analysts had in great measure escaped this great fault, and that the thorough-going pursuit of the ideas and methods of the differential calculus would be sure to cure it altogether. Hegel’s dialectical method is only a feeble and rudimentary application of the principles of the calculus to meta physics. Finally Hegel’s plan of evolving everything out of the abstractest conception by a dialectical procedure, though far from being so absurd as the experientialists think, but on the contrary represent ing one of the indispensable parts of the course of science, overlooks the weakness of individual man, who wants the strength to wield such a weapon as that. C h a p t e r III. The T r ia d i n M e t a p h y s i c s I will run over all the conceptions that played an important [ro\e] in the pre-Socratic philosophy and see how far they can be expressed in terms of one, two, three. i. The first of all the conceptions of philosophy is that of a primal matter out of which the world is made.15 Thales and the early Ionian philosophers busied themselves mainly with this. They called it the arche, the beginning; so that the conception of First was the quintes sence of it. Nature was a wonder to them, and they asked its explana tion; from what did it come? That was a good question, but it was rather stupid to suppose that they were going to learn much even if they could find out from what sort of matter it was made. But to ask how it had been formed, as they doubtless did, was not an exhaustive question, it would only carry them back a little way; they wished to go to the very beginning at once, and in the beginning there must have been a homogeneous something, for where there was variety they
