[pdf page 308]
[page 264]

is blue; or that any two qualities are immediately contiguous in space or time. If the contiguity is in time, it is by the polar sense directly that we are conscious of a dividing instant with its difference on the two sides. If the contiguity is in space, I think we have at first a completely confused feeling of the whole, as yet unanalysed and unsynthetised, but afterward, when the analysis has been made, we find ourselves compelled, in recomposing the elements, to pass directly from what is on one side of the boundary to what is on the other. I suppose then that we are compelled to think the twofeelings as contiguous because the nerve-cell whose excitation produces the feeling of one recalled sensation discharges itself into the nerve-cell whose excitation makes the feeling of the other recalled sensation. The genuine synthetic consciousness, or the sense of the process of learning, which is the preeminent ingredient and quintessence of rea son, has its physiological basis quite evidently in the most characteris tic property of the nervous system, the power of taking habits. This depends on five principles, as follows, ist, when a stimulus or irritation is continued for some time, the excitation spreads from the cells di rectly affected to those that are associated with it, and from those to others, and so on, and at the same time increases in intensity. 2nd, after a time, fatigue begins to set in. Now beside the utter fatigue which consists in the cell’s losing all excitability, and the nervous system refusing to react to the stimulus at all, there is a gentler fatigue, which plays a very important part in adapting the brain to serving as an organ of reason, this form of fatigue consisting in the reflex action or dis charge of the nerve-cell ceasing to go on one path and either beginning on a path where there had been no discharge, or increasing the inten sity of the discharge along a path on which there had been previously only a slight discharge. For example, a frog whose cerebrum or brain has been removed, and whose hind leg has been irritated by putting a drop of acid upon it, after repeatedly rubbing the place with the other foot, as if to wipe off the acid, may at length be observed to give several hops, the first avenue of nervous discharge having become fatigued. 3rd, when from any cause the stimulus to a nerve-cell is removed, the excitation quickly subsides. That it does not do so in stantly is well-known, and the phenomenon goes among physicists by the name of persistence of sensation. All noticeable feeling subsides in a fraction of a second, but a very small remnant continues for a much longer time. 4th, if the same cell which was once excited, and which by some chance had happened to discharge itself along a certain path or paths, comes to get excited a second time, it is more likely to discharge itself the second time along some or all of those paths along which it had previously discharged itself than it would have been had it not so discharged itself before. This is the central principle of habit; and the striking contrast of its modality to that of any mechanical law
