[pdf page 310]
[page 266]

original disposition of the nerve-cell, which is supposed to be equally likely to react in any of the four ways. You turn these 8 cards face down and shuffle them with extreme thoroughness.* Then turn up cards from the top of this pack, one by one until a spade is reached. This process represents the reaction of the cell. Take up the cards just dealt off, and add to the pack held in the hand one card of each of those suits that have just been turned up (for habit) and remove from the pack one card of each suit not turned up (for forgetfulness). Shuffle, and go through with this operation 13 times or until the spades are exhausted. It will then generally be found that you hold nothing but spades in your hand. Thus we see how these principles not only lead to the establish ment of habits, but to habits directed to definite ends, namely the removal of sources of irritation. Now it is precisely action according tofinal causes which distinguishes mental from mechanical action; and the general formula of all our desires may be taken as this: to remove a stimulus. Every man is busily working to bring to an end that state of things which now excites him to work. But we are led yet deeper into physiology. The three fundamental functions of the nervous system, namely, 1st, the excitation of cells, 2nd, the transfer of excitation over fibres, 3rd, the fixing of definite tendencies under the influence of habit, are plainly due to three prop erties of the protoplasm or life-slime itself. Protoplasm has its active and its passive condition, its active state is transferred from one part of it to another, and it also exhibits the phenomena of habit. But these three facts do not seem to sum up the main properties of protoplasm, as our theory would lead us to expect them to do. Still, this may be because the nature of this strange substance is so little understood; and if we had the true secret of its constitution we might see that qualities that now appear unrelated really group themselves into one, so that it may be after all that it accords with our theory better than it seems to do. There have been at least two attempts to explain the properties of protoplasm by means of chemical suppositions; but inasmuch as chemical forces are as far as possible themselves from being under stood, such hypotheses, even if they were known to be correct, would be of little avail. As for what a physicist would understand by a molec ular explanation of protoplasm, such a thing seems hardly to have been thought of; yet I cannot see that it is any more difficult than the *Cards are almost never shuffled enough to illustrate fairly the principles of proba bilities; but if after being shuffled in any of the usual ways, they are dealt into three packs and taken up again, and then passed from one hand into the other one by one, every other one going to the top and every other to the bottom of the pack that thus accumu lates in the second hand, and finally cut, the shuffling may be considered as sufficient for the purpose of this game. Whenever the direction is to shuffle, shuffling as thorough as this is meant.
