[pdf page 317]
[page 273]

principle of heredity is the principle of the determination of something by what went before, the principle of compulsion, correspond ing to will and sense. The principle of the elimination of unfavorable characters is the principle of generalization by a casting out of sporadic cases, corresponding particularly to the principle of forgetfulness in the action of the nervous system. We have, then, here, a somewhat imperfect reproduction of the same triad as before. Its imperfection may be the imperfection of the theory of development. C h a p t e r V II. The T r ia d i n P h y s i c s Metaphysical philosophy may almost be called the child of geome try. Of the three schools of early Greek philosophers, two, the Ionic and the Pythagorean, were all geometers, and the interest of the Eleatics in geometry is often mentioned. Plato was a great figure in the history of both subjects; and Aristotle derived from the study of space some of his most potent conceptions. Metaphysics depends in great measure on the idea of rigid demonstration from first principles; and this idea, as well in regard to the process as the axioms from which it sets out, bears its paternity on its face. Moreover, the conviction that any metaphysical philosophy is possible has been upheld at all times, as Kant well says, by the example in geometry of a similar science. The unconditional surrender, then, by the mathematicians of our time of the absolute exactitude of the axioms of geometry cannot prove an insignificant event for the history of philosophy.21 Gauss, the great est of geometers, declares that “there is no reason to think that the sum of the three angles of a triangle is exactly equal to two right angles.” 22 It is true, experience shows that the deviation of that sum from that amount is so excessively small that language must be ingeniously used to express the degree of approximation: but experience never can show any truth to be exact, nor so much as give the least reason to think it to be so, unless it be supported by some other considerations. We can only say that the sum of the three angles of any given triangle cannot be much greater or less than two right angles; but that exact value is only one among an infinite number of others each of which is as possible as that. So say the mathematicians with unanimity. The absolute exactitude of the geometrical axioms is exploded; and the corresponding belief in the metaphysical axioms, considering the dependence of metaphysics on geometry, must surely follow it to the tomb of extinct creeds. The first to go must be the proposition that every event in the universe is precisely determined by causes accord ing to inviolable law. We have no reason to think that this is absolutely exact. Experience shows that it is so to a wonderful degree of approxi mation, and that is all. This degree of approximation will be a value for future scientific investigation to determine; but we have no more
