[pdf page 318]
[page 274]

reason to think that the error of the ordinary statement is precisely zero, than any one of an infinity of values in that neighborhood. The odds are infinity to one that it is not zero; and we are bound to think of it as a quantity of which zero is only one possible value. Phoenix, in his Lectures on Astronom y,23 referring to Joshua’s commanding the sun to stand still, said that he could not help suspecting that it might have wiggled a very little when Joshua was not looking directly at it. We know that when we try to verify any law of nature by experiment, we always find discrepancies between the observations and the theory. These we rightly refer to errors of observation; but why may there not be similar aberrations due to the imperfect obedience of the facts to law? Grant that this is conceivable and there can be nothing in experi ence to negative it. Strange to say, there are many people who will have a difficulty in conceiving of an element of lawlessness in the universe, and who may perhaps be tempted to reckon the doctrine of the perfect rule of causality as one of the original instinctive beliefs, like that of space having three dimensions. Far from that, it is histori cally altogether a modern notion, a loose inference from the discover ies of science. Aristotle often lays it down that somethings are determined by causes while others happen by chance.24 Lucretius, following Democritus, supposes his primordial atoms to deviate from their rectilinear trajectories just fortuitously, and without any reason at all. To the ancients, there was nothing strange in such notions; they were matters of course; the strange thing would have been to have said that there was no chance. So we are under no inward necessity of believing/m7 perfect causality if we do not find any facts to bear it out. I am very far from holding that experience is our only light; Whew ell’s views of scientific method seem to me truer than M ill’s; so much so that I should pronounce the known principles of physics to be but a development of original instinctive beliefs. Yet I cannot help ac knowledging that the whole history of thought shows that our instinc tive beliefs, in their original condition are so mixed up with error, that they can never be trusted till they have been corrected by experiment. Now the only thing that the inference from experience can ever teach us is the approximate value of a ratio. It all rests on the principle of sampling; we take a handful of coffee from a bag, and we judge that there is about the same proportion of sound beans in the whole bag that there is in that sample. At this rate, every proposition which we can be entitled to make about the real world must be an approximate one; we never can have the right to hold any truth to be exact. Approx imation must be the fabric out of which our philosophy has to be built. I come now to another point. Most systems of philosophy maintain certain facts or principles as ultimate. In truth, any fact is in one sense ultimate,— that is to say, in its isolated aggressive stubbornness and
