[pdf page 324]
[page 280]

Trichotomic MS 1600. [Previously unpublished.] Written (probably for oral presentation) in early i888yshortly after the completion of item 19, this three-page typescript (found in one of the thirteen boxes of MS 1600) is a sort of summary of some of the main points of “A Guess at the Riddle.” In addition, it includes a discussion of Peirce's categories applied to signs (a topic that had beenprojectedfor the unwritten second chapter of the “Guess”) and a comparison of his views, on the subject of dramatic expression and theprinciples of being, with those of the New York playwright and theater manager Steele MacKaye. The title of the paper is one of the alternatives Peirce had considered for his projected “One, Two, Three,” which then became “A Guess at the Riddle.” T R IC H O T O M IC is the art of making three-fold divisions. Such division depends on the conceptions of 1st, 2nd, 3rd. First is the begin ning, that which is fresh, original, spontaneous, free. Second is that which is determined, terminated, ended, correlative, object, neces sitated, reacting. Third is the medium, becoming, developing, bring ing about. A thing considered in itself is a unit. A thing considered as a correlate or dependent, or as an effect, is second to something else. A thing which in any way brings one thing into relation with another is a third or medium between the two. Firstness or freshness may have manifold varieties, or rather arbi trariness and variety is its essence, but it is absolute and unsusceptible of differences of degree. It may be present more or less, but it has no different orders of complication in itself. Secondness, on the other hand, may be genuine or degenerate. Degenerate secondness has two varieties, for a single object considered as second to itself is a degener ate second, and an object considered as second to another with which it has no real connection, so that were that other taken away it would still have those same characters which are implied in the relation, is also a degenerate second. Genuine secondness is dynamical connec tion; degenerate secondness is a relation of reason, as a mere resem
