[pdf page 325]
[page 281]

blance. Thirdness has two different orders of degeneracy. Genuine thirdness is where of the three terms A, B, C, each is related to each of the others, but by a relation which only subsists by virtue of the third term, and each has a character which belongs to it only so long as the others really influence it. It would not be enough to say that the connection between the terms is dynamical, for forces only subsist between pairs of objects; we had better use the word “vital” to express the mode of connection, for wherever there is life, generation, growth, development, there and there alone is such genuine thirdness. Third ness of the first order of degeneracy is where two of the three terms are identical, so that the other only mediates between two aspects of the same object or where in some other way there is no vital connec tion between A, B, and C, but only a dynamical connection between A and B, and another between B and C, thus bringing about a dynami cal connection between A and C. The second order of degeneracy is where there is not even any dynamical connection between the terms, or at least where the thirdness does not consist in that [although it may be necessary for the establishment of the thirdness] but where all three terms are virtually identical or are connected by mere relations of reason. Expression is a kind of representation or signification. Asign is a third mediating between the mind addressed and the object repre sented. If the thirdness is undegenerate, the relation of the sign to the thing signified is one which only subsists by virtue of the relation of the sign to the mind addressed; that is to say, the sign is related to its object by virtue of a mental association. Conventional modes of expres sion, and other modes dependent on the force of association, enter largely into every art. They make up the bulk of language. If the thirdness is degenerate in the first degree, the sign mediates between the object and the mind by virtue of dynamical connections with the object on the one hand and with the mind on the other. This is the only kind of sign which can demonstrate the reality of things, or distinguish between things exactly alike. As I am walking alone on a dark night, a man suddenly jumps out of a corner with a “Boh!” and thus brings his presence home to me in a particularly forcible manner. It would be impossible tofollow a geometrical proof without the letters which are attached to the different parts of the figure and thus forcibly direct the attention to the right object. So a desired frame of mind on the part of the audience is often brought about by the dramatist in a forcible way by directly affecting the nervous system, without appealing to association; or the attention of the audience may be awakened, as a clergyman shouts out the commencement of a new head to his sermon, or may be directed to a particular part of the stage, as the jugglers do. If the thirdness is degenerate in the second1 degree, the idea in the mind addressed, the object represented, and the representation of it,
