[pdf page 326]
[page 282]

are only connected by a mutual resemblance. The sign is a likeness; and this is the main mode of representation in all art. Here there is no sharp discrimination between the sign and the thing signified, the mind floats in an ideal world and does not ask or care whether it be real or not. This character makes a striking point of difference between this kind of representation and the second; and that is why the use of the second mode of representation is so unartistic. Again, the third mode of representation is unanalytic, it presents the total object as it exists in the concrete, and not merely abstract relations and points in that object; and this constitutes a marked contrast from the first mode of representation; and this is what makes the first mode of representa tion unartistic. Mr. Mackaye divides dramatic expression into panto mime, voice, and language.2 A person would at first glance make the division into speech and gesture, and this would doubtless answer some purposes better. But with reference to the value of the different instruments at our command it is important to make a division which shall correspond as nearly as may be with the different kinds of repre sentation. Now language is in the main representation by the force of association; it involves the analysis of whatever is to be conveyed [on the part of the hearer as well as on the part of the author] and the separate expression of abstract points. Voice, on the other hand, awakes attention, directs it to particular channels, calls up feelings, and modifies consciousness generally, in a physiological way in the main; and is therefore a mode of expression of the second kind. Panto mime alone is mainly representation of the purely artistic kind, to be contemplated without analysis and without discrimination of the sign from the thing signified. Pantomime may itself be divided, on the same principle, into three varieties; artistic pantomime which merely exhib its the man, his general disposition and what there is uppermost in him at the moment, and is to be contemplated without analysis; dynamical pantomime, as where one points with finger or shakes or holds up the finger to impress what one is saying, or when one shakes the fist, or knocks the interlocutor down; and sign-language, mostly (owing to the peculiar nature of pantomime) of an imitative kind but yet involving analysis and being really rather language than pantomime proper. C O N SC IO U SN E SS has three elements, Single, Dual, and Plural consciousness. Single or simple consciousness is consciousness as it can exist in a single instant, the consciousness of all that is immediately present, for which all that is not immediately present is an absolute blank. This is the pure Feeling which forms the warp and woof of consciousness, or in Kant’s phrase its matter.3 In this kind of consciousness subject and object are nowise discriminated, in fact there is no discrimination, no parts, no analysis, there is no considering a thing for anything else, no relation, no representation, but just a pure inde scribable quale which is gone in the twinkling of an eye and which
