[pdf page 327]
[page 283]

bears no resemblance to any memory of it. It is just the quality of the immediately present, which is continually pouring through us, always here but never stopping to be examined. It is always fresh, always new, sporting in unbounded manifoldness. Dual consciousness is a sense of another, not present, a sense of hitting and of getting hit, of action and reciprocal reaction, of energy. This is the most wide-awake kind of consciousness; it strenuously sets object over against subject, in place of the dreamy failure to recognize the situation which belongs to Feeling. Dual consciousness includes Will, but the consciousness of hitting and /that/ of being hit have been shown by conclusive experi ments not to differ, and Sense in its direct reference to an object is likewise consciousness of action and reaction. It is the energetic and real character of the dual consciousness that principally distinguishes it. It consists of a sense of “can” which is at the same time a sense of “cannot.” Force implies resistance, and power limitation. There is always an opposite, always a but, always a second, in the dual consciousness. It has nothing to do with may-be’s; it is always right there. Plural or synthetic consciousness, is not the mere feeling of what is immediately present, nor yet the mere sense of something without, but is the being aware of the bridge which unites the present and the absent, of a Process as such. Zeno showed how motion is impossible if you refuse to open the eyes of the synthetic consciousness. It is the perception of motion and change. I am soundly asleep and my bed clothes take fire. At first, the warmth merely tinges my consciousness, so to speak; that is pure Feeling; then I become energetically conscious of something and start up without knowing what it is; that is Dual consciousness, Sense with Will; last I begin to collect myself, I am aware of a process of learning, I put things together; that is Perception and Synthetic consciousness, which collects present and absent into a whole. Dual consciousness, because it is consciousness of a second, has two degrees, the dynamical and the statical or degenerate form. Dynamical dual consciousness consists of outward action and reaction, External Sense and Volition; statical dual consciousness consists of inward ac tion and reaction, Self-consciousness and Self-control. Plural consciousness because it is consciousness of a third, has two degrees of degeneracy. The genuine synthetic consciousness, the consciousness of that which has its being in its thirdness, is Reason. The dynamical variety is a consciousness of a coordination between acts of sense and will, it is the looking upon the phenomena of sense and will as rational, which we may call Desire, though that does not precisely define it. The statical variety is the comparison of feelings, and may be called esthetic understanding. Mr. Mackaye’s division of the principles of being has considerable resemblance with this. What he calls the vital or passional principle,
