[pdf page 329]
[page 285]

The Architecture of Theories P 439: The Monist 1 (January 1891)1161-/6. [Also published in CP 6.7-34.] This is theJirst ofJive papers (although at least one more had been projected, and “The Reply to the Neces sitarians'” mentioned in the headnote to item 22 should be considered a companion piece to that item) in the Monist Metaphysical Series, in which Peirce fully applied to meta physical questions the evolutionary philosophy developed in “A Guess at the Riddle.” (The chapter on metaphysics in item 19 is a mere outline.) The architectonic approach of the “Guess” is here explained and defended, and Peirce examines a number of conceptions to determine which ones “ought to form the brick and mortar of aphilosophical system.” He then reviews many of the essential ideas of the “Guess,” again using his categories to organize his examination of different sciences, and demonstrates that philosophy requires thorough going evolutionism, that mental phenomena fa ll into three classes (feelings, sensations of reaction, and general concep tions), that the fundamental law of mental action is that feelings and ideas tend to spread, and that “the one intelligi ble theory of the universe is that of objective idealism, that matter is effete mind.” Peirce concludes that chance and conti nuity are two of the most fundamental ideas on which to build a philosophical theory that is compatible with modern science. Of the fifty or hundred systems of philosophy that have been ad vanced at different times of the world’s history, perhaps the larger number have been, not so much results of historical evolution, as happy thoughts which have accidentally1 occurred to their authors. An idea which has been found interesting and fruitful has been adopted, developed, and forced to yield explanations of all sorts of phenomena. The English have been particularly given to this way of philosophising; witness, Hobbes, Hartley, Berkeley, James Mill. Nor has it been by any means useless labor; it shows us what the true nature and value of the ideas developed are, and in that way affords service
