[pdf page 331]
[page 287]

The adequate treatment of this single point would fill a volume, but I shall endeavor to illustrate my meaning by glancing at several sciences and indicating conceptions in them serviceable for philoso phy. As to the results to which long studies thus commenced have led me, I shall just give a hint at their nature. We may begin with dynamics,—field in our day of perhaps the grandest conquest human science has ever made,— I mean the law of the conservation of energy. But let us revert to the first step taken by modern scientific thought,— and a great stride it was,— the inaugura tion of dynamics by Galileo. A modern physicist on examining Galileo’s works is surprised to find how little experiment had to do with the establishment of the foundations of mechanics. His principal appeal is to common sense and il lume naturale.2 He always assumes that the true theory will be found to be a simple and natural one. And we can see why it should indeed be so in dynamics. For instance, a body left to its own inertia, moves in a straight line, and a straight line appears to us the simplest of curves. In itself no curve is simpler than another. Asystem of straight lines has intersections precisely corre sponding to those of a system of like parabolas similarly placed, or to those of any one of an infinity of systems of curves. But the straight line appears to us simply, because, as Euclid says, it lies evenly be tween its extremities; that is, because viewed endwise it appears as a point. That is, again, because light moves in straight lines. Now, light moves in straight lines because of the part which the straight line plays in the laws of dynamics. Thus it is that our minds having been formed under the influence of phenomena governed by the laws of mechanics, certain conceptions entering into those laws become implanted in our minds, so that we readily guess at what the laws are. Without such a natural prompting, having to search blindfold for a law which would suit the phenomena, our chance of finding it would be as one to infinity. The further physical studies depart from phenomena which have directly influenced the growth of the mind, the less we can expect to find the laws which govern them “simple,” that is, composed of a few conceptions natural to our minds. The researches of Galileo, followed up by Huygens and others, led to those modern conceptions of Force and Law, which have revolutio nised the intellectual world. The great attention given to mechanics in the seventeenth century soon so emphasised these conceptions as to give rise to the Mechanical Philosophy, or doctrine that all the phe nomena of the physical universe are to be explained upon mechanical principles. New ton’s great discovery imparted a new impetus to this tendency. The old notion that heat consists in an agitation of corpus cles was now applied to the explanation of the chief properties of gases. The first suggestion in this direction was that the pressure of gases is explained by the battering of the particles against the walls of the
