[pdf page 339]
[page 295]

toward something different in the infinitely distant future, or whether the universe sprang from nothing in the past to go on indefinitely toward a point in the infinitely distant future, which, were it attained, would be the mere nothing from which it set out. The doctrine of the absolute applied to space comes to this, that either— First, space is, as Euclid teaches, both unlimited and immeasurable, so that the infinitely distant parts of any plane seen in perspective appear as a straight line, in which case the sum of the three angles of a triangle amounts to i8o°; or, Second, space is immeasurable but limited, so that the infinitely dis tant parts of any plane seen in perspective appear as a circle, beyond which all is blackness, and in this case the sum of the three angles of a triangle is less than i8o° by an amount proportional to the area of the triangle; or, Third, space is unlimited but finite (like the surface of a sphere), so that it has no infinitely distant parts; but a finite journey along any straight line would bring one back to his original position, and looking off with an unobstructed view one would see the back of his own head enormously magnified, in which case the sum of the three angles of a triangle exceeds i8o° by an amount proportional to the area. Which of these three hypotheses is true we knownot. The largest triangles we can measure are such as have the earth’s orbit for base, and the distance of a fixed star for altitude. The angular magnitude resulting from subtracting the sum of the two angles at the base of such a triangle from i8o° is called the star’s parallax. The parallaxes of only about forty stars have been measured as yet. Tw o of them come out negative, that of Arided (a Cycni), a star of magnitude i\, which is —o."o82, according to C. A. F. Peters, and that of a star of magnitude 7!, known as Piazzi III 422, which is —o."o45 according to R. S. Ball.13 But these negative parallaxes are undoubtedly to be attributed to er rors of observation; for the probable error of such a determination is about ±o."o75, and it would be strange indeed if we were to be able to see, as it were, more than half way round space, without being able to see stars with larger negative parallaxes. Indeed, the very fact that of all the parallaxes measured only two come out negative would be a strong argument that the smallest parallaxes really amount to +o."i, were it not for the reflexion that the publication of other negative parallaxes may have been suppressed. I think we may feel confident that the parallax of the furthest star lies somewhere between —o."o5 and -f o."i5, and within another century our grandchildren will surely know whether the three angles of a triangle are greater or less than 180°,— that they are exactly that amount is what nobody ever can be justified in concluding. It is true that according to the axioms of geom etry the sum of the three angles of a triangle is14 precisely 180°; but
