[pdf page 349]
[page 305]

departures from the law. We are accustomed to ascribe these, and I do not say wrongly, to errors of observation; yet we cannot usually ac count for such errors in any antecedently probable way. Trace their causes back far enough, and you will be forced to admit they are always due to arbitrary determination, or chance. But it may be asked whether if there were an element of real chance in the universe it must not occasionally be productive of signal effects such as could not pass unobserved. In answer to this question, without stopping to point out that there is an abundance of great events which one might be tempted to suppose were of that nature, it will be sim plest to remark that physicists hold that the particles of gases are moving about irregularly, substantially as if by real chance, and that by the principles of probabilities there must occasionally happen to be concentrations of heat in the gases contrary to the second law of thermodynamics, and these concentrations, occurring in explosive mixtures, must sometimes have tremendous effects. Here, then, is in substance the very situation supposed; yet no phenomena ever have resulted which we are forced to attribute to such chance concentration of heat, or which anybody, wise or foolish, has ever dreamed of ac counting for in that manner. In view of all these considerations, I do not believe that anybody, not in a state of case-hardened ignorance respecting the logic of sci ence, can maintain that the precise and universal conformity of facts to law is clearly proved, or even rendered particularly probable, by any observations hitherto made. In this way, the determined advocate of exact regularity will soon find himself driven to a priori reasons to support his thesis. These received such a socdolager from Stuart M ill in his Examination ofHamilton, 7 that holding to them now seems to me to denote a high degree of imperviousness to reason; so that I shall pass them by with little notice. To say that we cannot help believing a given proposition is no argument, but it is a conclusive fact if it be true; and with the substitu tion of “I” for “we,” it is true in the mouths of several classes of minds, the blindly passionate, the unreflecting and ignorant, and the person who has overwhelming evidence before his eyes. But that which has been inconceivable to-day has often turned out indisputable on the morrow. Inability to conceive is only a stage through which every man must pass in regard to a number of beliefs,—unless endowed with extraordinary obstinacy and obtuseness. His understanding is en slaved to some blind compulsion which a vigorous mind is pretty sure soon to cast off. Some seek to back up the a priori position with empirical argu ments. They say that the exact regularity of the world is a natural belief, and that natural beliefs have generally been confirmed by expe rience. There is some reason in this. Natural beliefs, however, if they
