[pdf page 350]
[page 306]

generally have a foundation of truth, also require correction and purification from natural illusions. The principles of mechanics are undoubtedly natural beliefs; but, for all that, the early formulations of them were exceedingly erroneous. The general approximation to truth in natural beliefs is, in fact, a case of the general adaptation of genetic products to recognisable utilities or ends. Now, the adaptations of nature, beautiful and often marvellous as they verily are, are never found to be quite perfect; so that the argument is quite against the absolute exactitude of any natural belief, including that of the princi ple of causation. Another argument, or convenient commonplace, is that absolute chance is inconceivable. This word has eight current significations. The Century Dictionary enumerates six.8 Those who talk like this will hardly be persuaded to say in what sense they mean that chance is inconceivable. Should they do so, it would easily be shown either that they have no sufficient reason for the statement or that the inconceiva bility is of a kind which does not prove that chance is non-existent. Another a priori argument is that chance is unintelligible; that is to say, while it may perhaps be conceivable, it does not disclose to the eye of reason the how or why of things; and since a hypothesis can only be justified so far as it renders some phenomenon intelligible, we never can have any right to suppose absolute chance to enter into the produc tion of anything in nature. This argument may be considered in con nection with two others. Namely, instead of going so far as to say that the supposition of chance can never properly be used to explain any observed fact, it may be alleged merely that no facts are known which such a supposition could in any way help in explaining. Or again, the allegation being still further weakened, it may be said that since depar tures from law are not unmistakably observed, chance is not a vera causa, and ought not unnecessarily to be introduced into a hypothesis. These are no mean arguments, and require us to examine the mat ter a little more closely. Come, my superior opponent, let me learn from your wisdom. It seems to me that every throw of sixes with a pair of dice is a manifest instance of chance. “While you would hold a throw of deuce-ace to be brought about by necessity?” [The opponent’s supposed remarks are placed in quota tion marks.] Clearly one throw is as much chance as another. “Do you think throws of dice are of a different nature from other events?” I see that I must say that all the diversity and specificalness of events is attributable to chance. “Would you, then, deny that there is any regularity in the world?” That is clearly undeniable. I must acknowledge there is an approxi mate regularity, and that every event is influenced by it. But the
