[pdf page 356]
[page 312]

The Law of Mind P 477: The Monist 2 (July 1892)1533-39. [Also published in CP 6.102-63.] In this paper, Peirce develops his synechism, the doctrine that continuity is “of prime importance in philosophy” and, according to which, the one law of mind is that ideas tend to spread and to affect other ideas but that, in spreading, they lose intensity as they gain generality. From synechism, doctrines of logical realism, objective idealism, tychismfollow. Peirce also considers continuityfrom the standpoint of mathematics (with reference to Cantor), and he isolates two fundamental properties of a continuous series: Aristotelicity (every continuum contains its limits) and Kanticity (every continuum is infinitely divisible); applying the former to philosophy, he finds that consciousness essentially occupies time. He also claims that the three principal types of mental action correspond to the three main classes of logical inference. In an article published in The Monist for January 1891, I endeav ored to show what ideas ought to form the warp of a system of phi losophy, and particularly emphasised that of absolute chance. In the number of April 1892, I argued further in favor of that way of think ing, which it will be convenient to christen tychism (from rvx?), chance).1 Aserious student of philosophy will be in no haste to ac cept or reject this doctrine; but he will see in it one of the chief attitudes which speculative thought may take, feeling that it is not for an individual, nor for an age, to pronounce upon a fundamental question of philosophy. That is a task for a whole era to work out. I have begun by showing that tychism must give birth to an evolution ary cosmology, in which all the regularities of nature and of mind are regarded as products of growth, and to a Schelling-fashioned ide alism which holds matter to be mere specialised and partially dead ened mind. I may mention, for the benefit of those who are curious in studying mental biographies, that I was born and reared in the neighborhood of Concord,— I mean in Cambridge,— at the time when Emerson, Hedge, and their friends were disseminating the
