[pdf page 361]
[page 317]

above two reasonings are examples of the syllogism of transposed quantity.5 The proposition that finite and infinite collections are distin guished by the applicability to the former of the syllogism of trans posed quantity ought to be regarded as the basal one of scientific arithmetic. If a person does not know how to reason logically, and I must say that a great many fairly good mathematicians,—yea distinguished ones,— fall under this category, but simply uses a rule of thumb in blindly drawing inferences like other inferences that have turned out well, he will, of course, be continually falling into error about infinite numbers. The truth is such people do not reason, at all. But for the few who do reason, reasoning about infinite numbers is easier than about finite numbers, because the complicated syllogism of transposed quan tity is not called for. For example, that the whole is greater than its part is not an axiom, as that eminently bad reasoner, Euclid, made it to be. It is a theorem readily proved by means of a syllogism of trans posed quantity, but not otherwise. Of finite collections it is true, of infinite collections false. Thus, a part of the whole numbers are even numbers. Yet the even numbers are nofewer than all the numbers; an evident proposition since if every number in the whole series of whole numbers be doubled, the result will be the series of even numbers. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, etc. Sofor every number there is a distinct even number. In fact, there are as many distinct doubles of numbers as there are of distinct numbers. But the doubles of numbers are all even numbers. In truth, of infinite collections there are but two grades of magni tude, the endless and the innumerable. Just as a finite collection is distin guished from an infinite one by the applicability to it of a special mode of reasoning, the syllogism of transposed quantity, so, as I showed in the paper last referred to, a numerable collection is distinguished from an innumerable one by the applicability to it of a certain mode of reasoning, the Fermatian inference, or, as it is sometimes improperly termed, “mathematical induction.” 6 As an example of this reasoning, Euler’s demonstration of the binomial theorem for integral powers may be given. The theorem is that (x 4- y ) n, where n is a whole number, may be expanded into the sum of a series of terms of which the first is x ny ° and each of the others is derived from the next preceding by diminishing the exponent of x by i and multiplying by that exponent and at the same time increasing the exponent of y by i and dividing by that increased exponent. Now, suppose this proposition to be true for a certain exponent, n = M, then
