[pdf page 363]
[page 319]

The class of endless but numerable collections (so called because they can be so ranged that to each one corresponds a distinct whole number) is very large. But there are collections which are certainly innumerable. Such is the collection of all numbers to which endless series of decimals are capable of approximating. It has been recognised since the time of Euclid that certain numbers are surd or incommen surable, and are not exactly expressible by any finite series of decimals, nor by a circulating decimal. Such is the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter, which we know is nearly 3.1415926. The calcula tion of this number has been carried to over 700 figures without the slightest appearance of regularity in their sequence. The demonstra tions that this and many other numbers are incommensurable are perfect. That the entire collection of incommensurable numbers is innumerable has been clearly proved by Cantor.8 I omit the demon stration; but it is easy to see that to discriminate one from some other would, in general, require the use of an endless series of numbers. Now if they cannot be exactly expressed and discriminated, clearly they cannot be ranged in a linear series. It is evident that there are as many points on a line or in an interval of time as there are of real numbers in all. These are, there fore, innumerable collections. Many mathematicians have incau tiously assumed that the points on a surface or in a solid are more than those on a line. But this has been refuted by Cantor.9 Indeed, it is obvious that for every set of values of coordinates there is a single distinct number. Suppose, for instance, the values of the coordinates all lie between o and +1. Then if we compose a number by putting in the first decimal place the first figure of the first coordinate, in the second the first figure of the second coordinate, and so on, and when the first figures are all dealt out go on to the second figures in like manner, it is plain that the values of the coordinates can be read off from the single resulting number, so that a triad or tetrad of num bers, each having innumerable values, has no more values than a sin gle incommensurable number. Were the number of dimensions infinite, this would fail; and the collection of infinite sets of numbers having each innumerable varia tions, might, therefore, be greater than the simple innumerable collec tion, and might be called endlessly infinite. The single individuals of such a collection could not, however, be designated, even approxi mately, so that this is indeed a magnitude concerning which it would be possible to reason only in the most general way, if at all. Although there are but two grades of magnitudes of infinite collec tions, yet when certain conditions are imposed upon the order in which individuals are taken, distinctions of magnitude arise from that cause. Thus, if a simply endless series be doubled by separating each unit into two parts, the successive first parts and also the second parts
