[pdf page 365]
[page 321]

ingeniously wraps up its properties in two separate parcels, but does not display them to our intelligence. Kant’s definition expresses one simple property of a continuum;12 but it allows of gaps in the series. To mend the definition, it is only necessary to notice how these gaps can occur. Let us suppose, then, a linear series of points extending from a point, A, to a point, B, having a gap from B to a third point, C, and thence extending to a final limit, D; and let us suppose this series conforms to Kant’s definition. Then, of the two points, B and C, one or both must be excluded from the series; for otherwise, by the definition, there would be points between them. That is, if the series contains C, though it contains all the points up to B, it cannot contain B. What is required, therefore, is to state in non-metrical terms that if a series of points up to a limit is included in a continuum the limit is included. It may be remarked that this is the property of a continuum to which Aristotle’s attention seems to have been directed when he defines a continuum as something whose parts have a common lim it.13 The property may be exactly stated as follows: If a linear series of points is continuous between two points, A and Z), and if an endless series of points be taken, the first of them between A and D and each of the others between the last preceding one and Z), then there is a point of the continuous series between all that endless series of points and Z), and such that every other point of which this is true lies between this point and D. For example, take any number between o and i, as o.i; then, any number between o.i and i, as o.n; then any number between o.n and i, as o.iii; and so on, without end. Then, because the series of real numbers between o and i is continuous, there must be a least real number, greater than every number of that endless series. This property, which may be called the Aristotelicity of the series, together with Kant’s property, or its Kanticity, completes the definition of a continuous series. The property of Aristotelicity may be roughly stated thus: a con tinuum contains the end point belonging to every endless series of points which it contains. An obvious corollary is that every continuum contains its limits. But in using this principle it is necessary to observe that a series may be continuous except in this, that it omits one or both of the limits. Our ideas will find expression more conveniently if, instead of points upon a line, we speak of real numbers. Every real number is, in one sense, the limit of a series, for it can be indefinitely approx imated to. Whether every real number is a limit of a regular series may perhaps be open to doubt. But the series referred to in the definition of Aristotelicity must be understood as including all series whether regular or not. Consequently, it is implied that between any two points an innumerable series of points can be taken.
