[pdf page 374]
[page 330]

determinism does not seem to me to recommend itself to a sober and sound judgment, which seeks the guidance of observed facts and not that of prepossessions. R e s t a t e m e n t of the L a w Let me now try to gather up all these odds and ends of commentary and restate the law of mind, in a unitary way. First, then, we find that when we regard ideas from a nominalistic, individualistic, sensualistic way, the simplest facts of mind become utterly meaningless. That one idea should resemble another or influ ence another, or that one state of mind should so much as be thought of in another is, from that standpoint, sheer nonsense. Second, by this and other means we are driven to perceive, what is quite evident of itself, that instantaneous feelings flow together into a continuum of feeling, which has in a modified degree the peculiar vivacity of feeling and has gained generality. And in reference to such general ideas, or continua of feeling, the difficulties about resemblance and suggestion and reference to the external, cease to have any force. Third, these general ideas are not mere words, nor do they consist in this, that certain concrete facts will every time happen under cer tain descriptions of conditions; but they are just as much, or rather far more, living realities than the feelings themselves out of which they are concreted. And to say that mental phenomena are governed by law does not mean merely that they are describable by a general formula; but that there is a living idea, a conscious continuum of feeling, which pervades them, and to which they are docile. Fourth, this supreme law, which is the celestial and living har mony, does not so much as demand that the special ideas shall surren der their peculiar arbitrariness and caprice entirely; for that would be self-destructive. It only requires that they shall influence and be in fluenced by one another. Fifth, in what measure this unification acts, seems to be regulated only by special rules; or, at least, we cannot in our present knowledge say how far it goes. But it may be said that, judging by appearances, the amount of arbitrariness in the phenomena of human minds is neither altogether trifling nor very prominent. P e r s o n a l i t y Having thus endeavored to state the law of mind, in general, I descend to the consideration of a particular phenomenon which is remarkably prominent in our own consciousnesses, that of personal ity. Astrong light is thrown upon this subject by recent observations of double and multiple personality. The theory which at one time
