[pdf page 376]
[page 332]

elements of nature, say by some curious symmetry, or by some union of a tender color with a refined odor. To such forms the law of mechan ical energy has no application. If they are eternal, it is in the spirit they embody; and their origin cannot be accounted for by any mechanical necessity. They are embodied ideas; and so only can they convey ideas. Precisely how primary sensations, as colors and tones, are excited, we cannot tell, in the present state of psychology. But in our ignorance, I think that we are at liberty to suppose that they arise in essentially the same manner as the other feelings, called secondary. As far as sight and hearing are in question, we know that they are only excited by vibrations of inconceivable complexity; and the chemical senses are probably not more simple. Even the least psychical of peripheral sen sations, that of pressure, has in its excitation conditions which, though apparently simple, are seen to be complicated enough when we con sider the molecules and their attractions. The principle with which I set out requires me to maintain that these feelings are communicated to the nerves by continuity, so that there must be something like them in the excitants themselves. If this seems extravagant, it is to be remembered that it is the sole possible way of reaching any explanation of sensation, which otherwise must be pronounced a general fact abso lutely inexplicable and ultimate. Now absolute inexplicability is a hypothesis which sound logic refuses under any circumstances to jus tify. I may be asked whether my theory would be favorable or otherwise to telepathy. I have no decided answer to give to this. At first sight, it seems unfavorable. Yet there may be other modes of continuous connection between minds other than those of time and space. The recognition by one person of another’s personality takes place by means to some extent identical with the means by which he is conscious of his own personality. The idea of the second personality, which is as much as to say that second personality itself, enters within the field of direct consciousness of the first person, and is as immedi ately perceived as his ego, though less strongly. At the same time, the opposition between the two persons is perceived, so that the external ity of the second is recognised. The psychological phenomena of intercommunication between two minds have been unfortunately little studied. So that it is impossi ble to say, for certain, whether they are favorable to this theory or not. But the very extraordinary insight which some persons are able to gain of others from indications so slight that it is difficult to ascertain what they are, is certainly rendered more comprehensible by the viewhere taken. A difficulty which confronts the synechistic philosophy is this. In considering personality, that philosophy is forced to accept the doc trine of a personal God; but in considering communication, it cannot
