[pdf page 378]
[page 334]

Mans Glassy Essence P 480: The Monist j (October 1892)11-22. [Also published in CP 6.238-yi.] In this paper, Peirce applies his synechistic phi losophy to the mind-bodyproblem or “the relation between the psychical and physical aspects of a substance.” In order to carry out his purpose of developing a philosophy that ade quately represents the state of knowledge in the nineteenth century, he discusses at length, and in elaborate technical detail, the constitution of matter and the molecular theory of protoplasm. He associates the main physical properties of protoplasm with the three main types of mental action, and he suggests that—as “matter is effete mind,” as “physical events are but degraded or undeveloped forms of psychical events,” and as “mechanical laws are nothing but acquired habits, like all the regularities of mind”— uthe idealist has no need to dread a mechanical theory of life.” Peirce ends his paper with a discussion of the life of ideas and the self-consciousness of groups of individuals. In The Monist for January 1891, I tried to show what conceptions ought to form the brick and mortar of a philosophical system. Chief among these was that of absolute chance for which I argued again in last A pril’s number.* In July, I applied another fundamental idea, that of continuity, to the law of mind.2 N ext in order, I have to elucidate, from the point of view chosen, the relation between the psychical and physical aspects of a substance. The first step towards this ought, I think, to be the framing of a molecular theory of protoplasm. But before doing that, it seems indispensable to glance at the constitution of matter, in general. We shall, thus, unavoidably make a long detour; but, after all, our pains will not *1 am rejoiced to find, since my last paper was printed, that a philosopher as subtle and profound as Dr. Edmund Montgomery has long been arguing for the same element in the universe. Other world-renowned thinkers, as M. Renouvier and M. Delboeuf, appear to share this opinion.1
