[pdf page 379]
[page 335]

be wasted, for the problems of the papers that are tofollow in the series will call for the consideration of the same question. All physicists are rightly agreed the evidence is overwhelming which shows all sensible matter is composed of molecules in swift motion and exerting enormous mutual attractions, and perhaps repul sions, too. Even Sir William Thomson, Lord Kelvin, who wishes to explode action at a distance and return to the doctrine of a plenum, not only speaks of molecules, but undertakes to assign definite magni tudes to them.3 The brilliant Judge Stallo, a man who did not always rightly estimate his own qualities in accepting talks for himself, de clared war upon the atomic theory in a book well worth careful perusal.4 To the old arguments in favor of atoms which he found in Fechner’s monograph,5 he was able to make replies of considerable force, though they were not sufficient to destroy those arguments. But against modern proofs he made no headway at all. These set out from the mechanical theory of heat. Rum ford’s experiments showed that heat is not a substance.6 Joule demonstrated that it was a form of energy.7 The heating of gases under constant volume, and other facts instanced by Rankine, proved that it could not be an energy of strain.8 This drove physicists to the conclusion that it was a mode of motion. Then it was remembered that John Bernoulli had shown that the pressure of gases could be accounted for by assuming their molecules to be moving uniformly in rectilinear paths.9The same hypothesis was now seen to account for Avogadro’s law, that in equal volumes of different kinds of gases exposed to the same pressure and temperature are contained equal numbers of molecules.10 Shortly after, it was found to account for the laws of diffusion and viscosity of gases, and for the numerical relation between these properties. Finally, Crookes’s radiometer furnished the last link in the strongest chain of evidence which supports any physical hypothesis.11 Such being the constitution of gases, liquids must clearly be bodies in which the molecules wander in curvilinear paths, while in solids they move in orbits or quasi-orbits. (See my definition solid II, i, in the Century Dictionary.)12 We see that the resistance to compression and to interpenetration between sensible bodies is, by one of the prime propositions of the molecular theory, due in large measure to the kinetical energy of the particles, which must be supposed to be quite remote from one an other, on the average, even in solids. This resistance is no doubt in fluenced by finite attractions and repulsions between the molecules. All the impenetrability of bodies which we can observe is, therefore, a limited impenetrability due to kinetic and positional energy. This being the case, we have no logical right to suppose that absolute im penetrability, or the exclusive occupancy of space, belongs to mole
