[pdf page 380]
[page 336]

cules or iitnms. Tt is an unwarranted hvoothesis. not a vera causa. * Unless ® ne’ *s generally a dualistic philosophy in which the conception of tions aSecond receives exaggerated attention; for this One (though of course impen *nvo^ ving r^e ic*ea °** F irst) is always the other of a manifold which is distantnot one* t*ie Many, because variety is arbitrariness and wanto arbitrariness is repudiation of any Secondness, has for its principal In shocomPonent in cep tio n of First. In psychology Feeling is First, an atc^ense react^ on Second, General conception Third, or mediation. In througbiol° ^’ the idea arbitrary sporting is First, heredity is Second, the with inertia.13 The potential energy belongs to two molecules, and is to be conceived as different between molecules A and B from what it is between molecules A and C. The distribution of energy is not necessarily spherical. Nay, a molecule may conceivably have more than one centre; it may even have a central curve, returning into itself. But I do not think there are any observed facts pointing to such multiple or linear centres. On the other hand, many facts relating to crystals, especially those observed by Voigt,t go to show that the distribution of energy is harmonical but not concentric. We can easily calculate the forces which such atoms must exert upon one another by considering! that they are equivalent to aggregations of pairs of elec trically positive and negative points infinitely near to one another. About such an atom there would be regions of positive and of negative potential, and the number and distribution of such regions would determine the valency of the atom, a number which it is easy to see would in many cases be somewhat indeterminate. I must not dwell further upon this hypothesis, at present. In another paper, its conse quences will be further considered.14 I cannot assume that the students of philosophy who read this magazine are thoroughly versed in modern molecular physics, and therefore it is proper to mention that the governing principle in this branch of science is Clausius’s law of the virial. I will first state the law, and then explain the peculiar terms of the statement. This statement is that the total kinetic energy of the particles of a system in stationary motion is equal to the total virial. By a system is here meant a number of particles acting upon one another.** Stationary motion is a quasi- *By a vera causa, in the logic of science, is meant a state of things known to exist in some cases and supposed to exist in other cases, because it would account for observed phenomena. tWiedemann, Annalen, 1887-1889 [30:190; 31:141, 544; 32:526; 34:981; 35:76, 370; 36:743; 38:573]- +See Maxwell on Spherical Harmonics, in his Electricity and Magnetism [2:179]. **The word system has three peculiar meanings in mathematics. (A.) It means an orderly exposition of the truths of astronomy, and hence a theory of the motions of the stars; as the Ptolemaic system; the Copernican system. This is much like the sense in which we speak of the Calvinistic system of theology, the Kantian system of philosophy, etc. (B.) It means the aggregate of the planets considered as all moving in somewhat the
