[pdf page 382]
[page 338]

account for the shape of certain isothermal curves.* But if the idea of an impenetrable atom is illogical, that of an impenetrable molecule is almost absurd. For the kinetical theory of matter teaches us that a molecule is like a solar system or star-cluster in miniature. Unless we suppose that in all heating of gases and vapors internal work is per formed upon the molecules, im plying that their atoms are at considera ble distances, the whole kinetical theory of gases falls to the ground. As for the term added to P, there is no more than a partial and roughly approximative justification for it. Nam ely, let us imagine two spheres described round a particle as their centre, the radius of the larger being so great as to include all the particles whose action upon the centre is sensible, while the radius of the smaller is so large that a good many molecules are included within it. The possibility of describing such a sphere as the outer one implies that the attraction of the particles varies at some distances inversely as some higher power of the distance than the cube, or, to speak more clearly, that the attraction multiplied by the cube of the distance diminishes as the distance increases; for the number of particles at a given distance from any one particle is propor tionate to the square of that distance and each of these gives a term of the virial which is the product of the attraction into the distance. Consequently unless the attraction multiplied by the cube of the dis tance diminished so rapidly with the distance as soon to become insen sible, no such outer sphere as is supposed could be described. H ow ever, ordinary experience shows that such a sphere is possible; and consequently there must be distances at which the attraction does thus rapidly diminish as the distance increases. The two spheres, then, being so drawn, consider the virial of the central particle due to the particles between them. Let the density of the substance be increased, say, N times. Then, for every term, i?r, of the virial before the conden sation, there will be N terms of the same magnitude after the condensa tion. Hence, the virial of each particle will be proportional to the density, and the equation of the virial becomes ad = P V + V This omits the virial within the inner sphere, the radius of which is so taken that within that distance the number of particles is not pro portional to the number in a large sphere. For Van der Waals this radius is the diameter of his hard molecules, which assumption gives his equation. But it is plain that the attraction between the molecules must to a certain extent modify their distribution, unless some pecu *But, in fact, an inspection of these curves is sufficient to show that they are of a higher degree than the third. For they have the line V — o, or some line V a constant for an asymptote, while for small values of P, the values of d 2P/(dV)2 are positive.
