[pdf page 386]
[page 342]

anticipation of the chemist would decidedly be that enough different chemical substances having protoplasmic characters might be formed to account, not only for the differences between nerve-slime and muscle-slime, between whale-slime and lion-slime, but alsofor those minuter pervasive variations which characterise different breeds and single individuals. Protoplasm, when quiescent, is, broadly speaking, solid; but when it is disturbed in an appropriate way, or sometimes even spontane ously without external disturbance, it becomes, broadly speaking, liq uid. A moner in this state is seen under the microscope to have streams within its matter; a slime-mold slowly flows by force of gravity. The liquefaction starts from the point of disturbance and spreads through the mass. This spreading, however, is not uniform in all directions; on the contrary it takes at one time one course, at another another, through the homogeneous mass, in a manner that seems a little myste rious. The cause of disturbance being removed, these motions gradu ally (with higher kinds of protoplasm, quickly) cease, and the slime returns to its solid condition. The liquefaction of protoplasm is accompanied by a mechanical phenomenon. Namely, some kinds exhibit a tendency to draw them selves up into a globular form. This happens particularly with the contents of muscle-cells. The prevalent opinion, founded on some of the most exquisite experimental investigations that the history of sci ence can show, is undoubtedly that the contraction of muscle-cells is due to osmotic pressure; and it must be allowed that that is a factor in producing the effect. But it does not seem to me that it satisfactorily accounts even for the phenomena of muscular contraction; and be sides, even naked slimes often draw up in the same way. In this case, we seem to recognise an increase of the surface-tension. In some cases, too, the reverse action takes place, extraordinary pseudopodia being put forth, as if the surface-tension were diminished in spots. Indeed, such a slime always has a sort of skin, due no doubt to surface-tension, and this seems to give way at the point where a pseudopodium is put forth. Long-continued or frequently repeated liquefaction of the proto plasm results in an obstinate retention of the solid state, which we call fatigue. On the other hand repose in this state, if not too much pro longed, restores the liquefiability. These are both important functions. The life-slimes have, further, the peculiar property of growing. Crystals also grow; their growth, however, consists merely in attract ing matter like their own from the circumambient fluid. To suppose the growth of protoplasm of the same nature, would be to suppose this substance to be spontaneously generated in copious supplies wherever food is in solution. Certainly, it must be granted that protoplasm is but a chemical substance, and that there is no reason why it should not be
