[pdf page 392]
[page 348]

unless we admit that physical events are but degraded or undeveloped forms of psychical events. But once grant that the phenomena of matter are but the result of the sensibly complete sway of habits upon mind, and it only remains to explain why in the protoplasm these habits are to some slight extent broken up, so that according to the law of mind, in that special clause of it sometimes called the principle of accommodation,* feeling becomes intensified. Now the manner in which habits generally get broken up is this. Reactions usually termi nate in the removal of a stimulus; for the excitation continues as long as the stimulus is present. Accordingly, habits are general ways of behavior which are associated with the removal of stimuli. But when the expected removal of the stimulus fails to occur, the excitation continues and increases, and non-habitual reactions take place; and these tend to weaken the habit. If, then, we suppose that matter never does obey its ideal laws with absolute precision, but that there are almost insensible fortuitous departures from regularity, these will pro duce, in general, equally minute effects. But protoplasm is in an exces sively unstable condition; and it is the characteristic of unstable equi librium, that near that point excessively minute causes may produce startlingly large effects. Here then, the usual departures from regular ity will be followed by others that are very great; and the large fortui tous departures from law so produced, will tend still further to break up the laws, supposing that these are of the nature of habits. Now, this breaking up of habit and renewed fortuitous spontaneity will, accord ing to the law of mind, be accompanied by an intensification of feeling. The nerve-protoplasm is, without doubt, in the most unstable condi tion of any kind of matter; and consequently, there the resulting feel ing is the most manifest. Thus we see that the idealist has no need to dread a mechanical theory of life. On the contrary, such a theory, fully developed, is bound to call in a tychistic idealism as its indispensable adjunct. Wherever chance-spontaneity is found, there, in the same proportion, feeling exists. In fact, chance is but the outward aspect of that which within itself is feeling. I long ago showed that real existence, or thing-ness, consists in regularities.22 So, that primeval chaos in which there was no regularity was mere nothing, from a physical aspect. Yet it was not a blank zero; for there was an intensity of consciousness there in comparison with which all that we ever feel is but as the struggling of a molecule or two to throw off a little of the force of law to an endless and innumerable diversity of chance utterly unlimited. But after some atoms of the protoplasm have thus become partially emancipated from law, what happens next to them? To understand *“Physiologically,... accommodation means the breaking up of a habit.... Psycho logically, it means reviving consciousness.” Baldwin, Psychology, Part III, ch. i., §5.
