[pdf page 396]
[page 352]

Evolutionary Love P 521: The Monist 3 (January 1893):176-200. [Also published in CP 6.287-317.] In this fifth (and last) Monist paper, Peirce develops his agapism, the doctrine that the law of love is operative in the world. He argues that of the three kinds of evolution (by fortuitous variation, by mechanical neces sity, and by creative love) the third is the mostfundamental: “Love, recognizing germs of loveliness in the hateful, gradu ally warms it into life, and makes it lovely. That is the sort of evolution which every careful student of my essay ‘The Law of Mind’ must see that synechism calls for.” Peirce delivers a polemic against the “gospel ofgreed” and laments thefact that sentiment seems to have lostfavor; sentimen talism, he says, is “the doctrine that great respect should be paid to the natural judgments of the sensible heart,” and he entreats his readers “to consider whether to contemn it is not of all blasphemies the most degrading.” He compares some of the views expressed here with those of Christianity, and ends with a discussion of the continuity of mind and the caution that we should not overestimate the importance of the indi vidual. A t F i r s t B l u s h. C o u n t e r - G o s p e l s Philosophy, when just escaping from its golden pupa-skin, mythology, proclaimed the great evolutionary agency of the universe to be Love. Or, since this pirate-lingo, English, is poor in such-like words, let us say Eros, the exuberance-love. Afterwards, Empedocles set up passionate-love and hate as the two coordinate powers of the universe.1 In some passages, kindness is the word. But certainly, in any sense in which it has an opposite, to be senior partner of that opposite, is the highest position that love can attain. Nevertheless, the ontological gospeller, in whose days those views were familiar topics, made the One Supreme Being, by whom all things have been made out of noth ing, to be cherishing-love. What, then, can he say to hate? Never mind, at this time, what the scribe of the apocalypse, if he were John, stung
