[pdf page 402]
[page 358]

against the truth of the doctrine. At any rate, since the warmth of feeling exists, it should on every account be candidly confessed; espe cially since it creates a liability to one-sidedness on my part against which it behooves my readers and me to be severally on our guard. S e c o n d T h o u g h t s. I r e n i c a Let us try to define the logical affinities of the different theories of evolution. Natural selection, as conceived by Darwin, is a mode of evolution in which the only positive agent of change in the whole passage from moner to man is fortuitous variation. To secure advance in a definite direction chance has to be seconded by some action that shall hinder the propagation of some varieties or stimulate that of others. In natural selection, strictly so called, it is the crowding out of the weak. In sexual selection, it is the attraction of beauty, mainly. The Origin of Species was published toward the end of the year 1859. The preceding years since 1846 had been one of the most productive seasons,— or if extended so as to cover the great book we are consider ing, the most productive period of equal length in the entire history of science from its beginnings until now. The idea that chance begets order, which is one of the corner-stones of modern physics (although Dr. Carus considers it “the weakest point in Mr. Peirce’s system,” )9 was at that time put into its clearest light. Quetelet had opened the discussion by his Letters on the Application ofProbabilities to the Moral and Political Sciences, a work which deeply impressed the best minds of that day, and to which Sir John Herschel had drawn general attention in Great Britain.10 In 1857, the first volume of Buckle’s History of Civilisa tion had created a tremendous sensation, owing to the use he made of this same idea. Meantime, the “statistical method” had, under that very name, been applied with brilliant success to molecular physics. Dr. John Herapath, an English chemist, had in 1847 outlined the kineti cal theory of gases in his Mathematical Physics; and the interest the theory excited had been refreshed in 1856 by notable memoirs by Clausius and Kronig.11 In the very summer preceding Darwin’s publi cation, Maxwell had read before the British Association the first and most important of his researches on this subject.12 The consequence was that the idea that fortuitous events may result in a physical law, and further that this is the way in which those laws which appear to conflict with the principle of the conservation of energy are to be explained, had taken a strong hold upon the minds of all who were abreast of the leaders of thought. By such minds, it was inevitable that the Origin of Species, whose teaching was simply the application of the same principle to the explanation of another “non-conservative” ac tion, that of organic development, should be hailed and welcomed. The sublime discovery of the conservation of energy by Helmholtz in 1847,
