[pdf page 403]
[page 359]

and that of the mechanical theory of heat by Clausius and by Rankine, independently, in 1850, had decidedly overawed all those who might have been inclined to sneer at physical science.13 Thereafter a belated poet still harping upon “science peddling with the names of things” would fail of his effect. Mechanism was now known to be all, or very nearly so. All this time, utilitarianism,—that improved substitute for the Gospel,— was in its fullest feather; and was a natural ally of an individualistic theory. Dean Mansel’s injudicious advocacy had led to mutiny among the bondsmen of Sir William Hamilton, and the nomi nalism of Mill had profited accordingly;14 and although the real science that Darwin was leading men to was sure some day to give a death blow to the sham-science of Mill, yet there were several elements of the Darwinian theory which were sure to charm the followers of Mill. Another thing: an aesthetics had been in use for thirteen years. A l ready, people’s acquaintance with suffering had dropped off very much; and as a consequence, that unlovely hardness by which our times are so contrasted with those that immediately preceded them, had already set in, and inclined people to relish a ruthless theory. The reader would quite mistake the drift of what I am saying if he were to understand me as wishing to suggest that any of those things (except perhaps Malthus) influenced Darwin himself. What I mean is that his hypothesis, while without dispute one of the most ingenious and pretty ever devised, and while argued with a wealth of knowl edge, a strength of logic, a charm of rhetoric, and above all with a certain magnetic genuineness that was almost irresistible, did not ap pear, at first, at all near to being proved; and to a sober mind its case looks less hopeful now than it did twenty years ago; but the extraor dinarily favorable reception it met with was plainly owing, in large measure, to its ideas being those toward which the age was favorably disposed, especially, because of the encouragement it gave to the greed-philosophy. Diametrically opposed to evolution by chance, are those theories which attribute all progress to an inward necessary principle, or other form of necessity. Many naturalists have thought that if an egg is destined to go through a certain series of embryological transforma tions, from which it is perfectly certain not to deviate, and if in geolog ical time almost exactly the same forms appear successively, one re placing another in the same order, the strong presumption is that this latter succession was as predeterminate and certain to take place as the former. So, Nageli, for instance, conceives that it somehow follows from the first law of motion and the peculiar, but unknown, molecular constitution of protoplasm, that forms must complicate themselves more and more. Kolliker makes one form generate another after a certain maturation has been accomplished. Weismann, too, though he calls himself a Darwinian, holds that nothing is due to chance, but that
