[pdf page 408]
[page 364]

of new ideas adopted without foreseeing whither they tend, but having a character determined by causes either external to the mind, such as changed circumstances of life, or internal to the mind as logical devel opments of ideas already accepted, such as generalisations. The agapastic development of thought is the adoption of certain mental tenden cies, not altogether heedlessly, as in tychasm, nor quite blindly by the mere force of circumstances or of logic, as in anancasm, but by an immediate attraction for the idea itself, whose nature is divined before the mind possesses it, by the power of sympathy, that is, by virtue of the continuity of mind; and this mental tendency may be of three varieties, as follows. First, it may affect a whole people or community in its collective personality, and be thence communicated to such individuals as are in powerfully sympathetic connection with the col lective people, although they may be intellectually incapable of attain ing the idea by their private understandings or even perhaps of con sciously apprehending it. Second, it may affect a private person directly, yet so that he is only enabled to apprehend the idea, or to appreciate its attractiveness, by virtue of his sympathy with his neigh bors, under the influence of a striking experience or development of thought. The conversion of St. Paul may be taken as an example of what is meant. Third, it may affect an individual, independently of his human affections, by virtue of an attraction it exercises upon his mind, even before he has comprehended it. This is the phenomenon which has been well called the divination of genius; for it is due to the continu ity between the man’s mind and the Most High. Let us next consider by means of what tests we can discriminate between these different categories of evolution. No absolute criterion is possible in the nature of things, since in the nature of things there is no sharp line of demarcation between the different classes. Never theless, quantitative symptoms may be found by which a sagacious and sympathetic judge of human nature may be able to estimate the ap proximate proportions in which the different kinds of influence are commingled. Sof ar as the historical evolution of human thought has been tychastic, it should have proceeded by insensible or minute steps; for such is the nature of chances when so multiplied as to show phenomena of regularity. For example, assume that of the native-born white adult males of the United States in 1880, one-fourth part were below 5 feet 4 inches in stature and one-fourth part above 5 feet 8 inches. Then by the principles of probability, among the whole population, we should expect 216 under 4 feet 6 inches, 216 above 6 feet 6 inches. 48 " 4 « 5 9 " 4 " 4 less than 2 " 4 » 3 " 48 " 6 " 7 9 « 6 « 8 less than 2 " 6 " 9 "
