[pdf page 412]
[page 368]

properly to appreciate, clearly shows that it is far from being the overwhelmingly preponderant influence, even there.27 Internal anancasm, or logical groping, which advances upon a predestined line without being able toforesee whither it is to be carried nor to steer its course, this is the rule of development of philos ophy. Hegel first made the world understand this; and he seeks to make logic not merely the subjective guide and monitor of thought, which was all it had been ambitioning before, but to be the very mainspring of thinking, and not merely of individual thinking but of discussion, of the history of the development of thought, of all history, of all development. This involves a positive, clearly demonstrable error. Let the logic in question be of whatever kind it may, a logic of necessary inference or a logic of probable inference (the theory might perhaps be shaped tofit either), in any case it supposes that logic is sufficient of itself to determine what conclusion follows from given premises; for unless it will do so much, it will not suffice to explain why an individ ual train of reasoning should take just the course it does take, to say nothing of other kinds of development. It thus supposes that from given premises, only one conclusion can logically be drawn, and that there is no scope at all for free choice. That from given premises only one conclusion can logically be drawn, is one of the false notions which have come from logicians’ confining their attention to that Nantucket of thought, the logic of non-relative terms. In the logic of relatives, it does not hold good. One remark occurs to me. If the evolution of history is in considera ble part of the nature of internal anancasm, it resembles the develop ment of individual men; and just as 33 years is a rough but natural unit of time for individuals, being the average age at which man has issue, so there should be an approximate period at the end of which one great historical movement ought to be likely to be supplanted by another. Let us see if we can make out anything of the kind. Take the govern mental development of Rome as being sufficiently long and set down the principal dates. B.C. 753, Foundation of Rome. B.C. 510, Expulsion of the Tarquins. B.C. 27, Octavius assumes title Augustus. A.D. 476, End of Western Empire. A.D. 962, Holy Roman Empire. A.D. 1453, Fall of Constantinople. The last event was one of the most significant in history, especially for Italy. The intervals are 243, 483, 502, 486, 491 years. All are rather curiously near equal, except the first which is half the others. Succes sive reigns of kings would not commonly be so near equal. Let us set down a few dates in the history of thought.
