[pdf page 413]
[page 369]

B.C. 585, Eclipse of Thales. Beginning of Greek philosophy. A.D. 30, The crucifixion. A.D. 529, Closing of Athenian schools. End of Greek philosophy. A.D. 1125, (Approximate) Rise of the Universities of Bologna and Paris. A.D. 1543, Publication of the De Revolutionibus of Copernicus. Be ginning of Modern Science. The intervals are 615, 499, 596, 418 years. In the history of metaphysics, we may take the following: B.C. 322, Death of Aristotle. A.D. 1274, Death of Aquinas. A.D. 1804, Death of Kant. The intervals are 1595 and 530 years. The former is about thrice the latter. From these figures, no conclusion can fairly be drawn. At the same time, they suggest that perhaps there may be a rough natural era of about 500 years. Should there be any independent evidence of this, the intervals noticed may gain some significance. The agapastic development of thought should, if it exists, be distin guished by its purposive character, this purpose being the develop ment of an idea. We should have a direct agapic or sympathetic com prehension and recognition of it, by virtue of the continuity of thought. I here take it for granted that such continuity of thought has been sufficiently proved by the arguments used in my paper on the “Law of Mind” in The Monist of last July. Even if those arguments are not quite convincing in themselves, yet if they are reenforced by an apparent agapasm in the history of thought, the two propositions will lend one another mutual aid. The reader will, I trust, be too well grounded in logic to mistake such mutual support for a vicious circle in reasoning. If it could be shown directly that there is such an entity as the “spirit of an age” or of a people, and that mere individual intelligence will not account for all the phenomena, this would be proof enough at once of agapasticism and of synechism. I must ac knowledge that I am unable to produce a cogent demonstration of this; but I am, I believe, able to adduce such arguments as will serve to confirm those which have been drawn from other facts. I believe that all the greatest achievements of mind have been beyond the powers of unaided individuals; and I find, apart from the support this opinion receives from synechistic considerations, and from the purposive char acter of many great movements, direct reason for so thinking in the sublimity of the ideas and in their occurring simultaneously and inde pendently to a number of individuals of no extraordinary general powers. The pointed Gothic architecture in several of its develop
