FOREWORD




What Is G i ven i n Experience?

      Bruno Latour

Every synthesis begins "anew" and has to be taken up from the
start as if for the first time.
      -Isabelle Stengers




       T
      I
           COULD BE ONE of those little games j ournalists play on televi
         sion talk shows about books: " Who was the greatest philosopher
         of the twentieth century whose name begins with W?" Most
learned people in America would answer " Wittgenstein." Sorry. The right
answer is " Whitehead "-another philosopher whose name begins with
 W, to be sure, but one who is vastly more daring, and also, unfortunately,
much less studied . Among his many m isfortunes, Al fred North White
head had the very bad one of provoking too much i nterest among theo
logians and too little among epi stemologists. His reputation in America
is thus skewed toward his theological innovations to the detriment of his
epistemological theories . He also suffers from the terri ble stigma of hav
ing i nd ulged in metaphysics, something one is no longer supposed to do
after the ed icts of the first " W," even though those who think that meta
physics is passe know usual ly much less science than Whitehead and
swal low-without an ounce of criticism-hook, l ine, and sinker the en
ti rety of metaphysical beliefs about nature that one can easily derive by
l umping together the least-common-denominator views of geneticists
and so-cal led cognitive scientists. As Isa belle Stengers says in her recently

The Foreword is excerpted from my review of the French edition of this book,
Isabelle Stengers, Penser avec Whitehead: Une fihre et sauvage creation de concepts.
The review was published as Bruno Latour, "What Is Given in Experience?," in
houndary 2, Volume 32, no. 1, pp. 223-237. Copyright © 2005 by Duke Univer
sity Press. All rights reserved. Reprinted by permission of the publisher. I thank
Lindsay Waters for his valuable comments on earlier drafts of this essay. Cita
tions to Penser avec Whitehead appear in parentheses, and, unless otherwise
noted, a l l translations are my own.-B.L.
X   F O R E W O R D




published ma sterpiece a bout Whitehead, " critica l consciousness admits
so many th ings without criticizing them " ( 74 ) .
   What makes Stengers's book Penser a vee Whitehead-in English, " to
th ink with Whitehead "-such an importa nt work for Anglo-American
philosophy is that in it the greatest phi losopher of the twentieth century is
fina lly studied in great deta il by someone who is one of the most innova
tive philosophers of science of the present time. Now we finally have, in
other words, after yea rs of emba rrassed commentaries in which people
had eulogized Whitehead 's God and d isparaged Whitehead's science, a
book in which Whitehead 's science and Whitehead 's God are each given
their rightful place. This development is not going to put process theol
ogy on a new footing. After having worked for years on the physics of
time with lIya Prigogine,l and then a fter having written her seven-volume
treatise laying out her own version of Cosmopolites,2 Stengers has dedi
cated 572 pages to her favorite philosopher, retranslating herself many
pages of this most difficult of authors for the sake of her ana lysis in French.1
   For people who have read both Stengers and Whitehea d for yea rs,
the prospect of rea d i ng the prose of the first commenting on the prose
of the second might be somewhat da unting. And yet, one gets exactly


 I Because of this long and friendly collaboration, Stengers has been associated with

the physics of complexity pioneered by lIya Prigogine. In her own work since,
Prigogine's influence is important not because she tried to prolong some more
elaborated naturalism but because she learned from Prigogine's experience to
which extent scientists would go to ignore something as crucial as time. Hence her
admiration for science and her deep-seated suspicion for some of its sleight of hand.
2 From Cosmopolitiques-Tome 1: La guerre des sciences (Paris: La Decouverte

Les Empecheurs de penser en rond, 1996), to Cosmopolitiques-Tome 7: Pour en
finir avec la tolerance (Paris: La Decouverte-Les Empecheurs de penser en rond,
1997).
 1 Isabelle Stengers teaches philosophy in Brussels. Only a small part of her works

is available in English: Power and Invention, with a foreword by Bruno Latour
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1997); The Invention of Modem
Science, trans. Daniel W. Smith (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
2000); Bernadette Bensaude-Vincent and Isabelle Stengers, A History ofChemis
try, trans. Deborah Van Dam (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1996); and Leon Chertock and Isabelle Stengers, A Critique of Psychoanalytic
Reason: HY11110sis as a Scientific Prohlem from Lavoisier to Lacan, trans. Martha
Noel Evans (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1992). I have attempted
to present Stengers's epistemological principle in "How to Talk about the Body?
The Normative Dimension of Science Studies," in Part 3: Body Collective of
"Bodies on Trial," ed. Marc Berg and Madeleine Akrich, special issue, Body and
Society 10, no. 2-3 (June-September 2004): 205-229.
                                                               F O R E W O R D   X I




the opposite result: Stengers ill uminates the most obscure passages of
Whitehead in a style that is supple, often witty, always generous. So read
ers should not be put off by the surprising subtitle, which Stengers actu
ally borrowed f rom Deleuze: there is nothing "wild " in this book, except
as that word might be used to characterize the freedom and i nvention of
the author. Of those virtues the book is stuffed f ul1 .4
   Following Whitehead, Stengers has been able to turn around many of
the metaphors usually borrowed from critica l thinking: "To think with
Whitehead today means to sign on i n advance to an adventure that wil l
leave none of the terms we normally use a s they were, even though none
will be undermined or summarily denounced as a carrier of i l l usion " (24 ) .
   Whitehead i s thoroughly p u t to the test here, a n d yet I have n o doubt
that, had he lived, Deleuze would have celebrated this book as a major
event in the geopolitics of philosop hy: a great but neglected Anglo
American is reimported into France through Belgium, and the event is
taken as the occasion to reinterpret pragmatism, Bergsonism, and empiri
cism. What a wonder! What an interesting ecologica l " inter-capture " !
   Although the book i s a close reading, i n chronological order, of the
major books of Whitehead, and although it makes good use of the body
of existing scholarship, it does not simply try to explain or popularize the
history of Whitehead 's thought. As the title i ndicates so wel l, the aim is to
think with Whitehead. Because she is hersel f a philosopher of science who
has explored minutely many of the same fields as Whitehead-chemistry,
physics, Darwinism, ethology, and psychology ( but not mathematics nor
logic, although she ta kes very seriously the fact that Whitehead thinks as
a mathematician )-Stengers's book can be seen as an effort to test out
Whitehead 's most da ring concepts on new materials and in new exam
ples. But contrary to the rather cava lier way in which Whitehead treats
his own predecessors, Stengers is very precise and fol lows with great at
tention Whitehead 's own hunches. Have no doubt: when we read this
book, we are thinking with Stengers and with Whitehead all along; we
are not thi nking with Whitehead about what is on Stengers's mind .

The whole book turns around the most arduous question of Whitehead,
wi thout making any attempt either to avoid the dif ficulties or to obfus
cate his philosophy by bringing i n new i rrelevant conundrums. The basic
question is to decide whether or not empiricism can be renewed so that


4 The choice of the subtitle is even more bizarre, since on page 307 Stengers re

veals a clear contrast between the positivity of Whitehead and the exaggerated
tropism of Deleuze for chaos and organicism.
X I I   FOREWO R D




" what is given in experience " is not simplified too much. Agai nst the
tradition ina ugurated by Locke and Desca rtes, then pushed to the limits
by Kant until it was terminated by Wi ll iam James, Whitehead offers an
other role for the object of study to play: "The object [for him] is neither
the j udge of our production nor the product of our judgments " ( 93 ) .'
   What has been least critica lly considered by the philosophical tradi
tion, and especially by the anti-meta physical one, is the feature of West
ern thought that occupied Whitehead for most of his career, what he ca lls
" the bifurcation of nature," that is to say, the stra nge and ful ly modernist
d ivide between primary and secondary qualities.1> Bifurcate is a strange
and awkwa rd word, strange to the tongue and ear, but what it betokens
is somethi ng even worse for our thinking. Bi furcation is what happens
whenever we think the world is divided i nto two sets of things: one which
is composed of the funda mental constituents of the universe-invisible to
the eyes, known to science, rea l and yet valueless-and the other which is
constituted of what the mind has to add to the basic build ing blocks of
the world in order to make sense of them. Those " psychic additions," as
Whitehead calls them, are parts of common sense, to be sure, but they are
unfortunately of no use to science, since they ha ve no rea lity, even though
they a re the stuff out of which dreams and va lues are made.?



, "It is because William James has refused to give to reflexive consciousness and to
its pretensions to invariance, the privilege to occupy the center of the scene, that
James has explicated so well [for Whitehead] what human experience requests from
metaphysics and, more precisely, to what it requests metaphysics to resist" (2 30).
Far from psychologizing everything, Whitehead sees in James-and especially in his
celebrated essay on consciousness-the thinker who has ended all the pretensions of
the mind. If the "actual occasion" is depsychologized, it is thanks to James.
I> Here is a standard definition of the problem: "However, we must admit that the

causality theory of nature has its strong suit. The reason why the bifurcation of
nature is always creeping back into scientific philosophy is the extreme difficulty
of exhibiting the perceived redness and warmth of the fire in one system of rela
tions with the agitated molecules of carbon and oxygen with the radiant energy
from them, and with the various functioning of the material body. Unless we
produce the all-embracing relations, we are faced with a bifurcated nature; namely,
warmth and redness on one side, and molecules, electrons and ether on the other
side. Then the two factors are explained as being respectively the cause and the
mind's reaction to the cause" (Alfred North Whitehead, The Concept of Nature
[Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1920J, 32).
7 On the political dimension of this divide, see my own footnote on Whitehead's

argument in Politics of Nature: How to Bring the Sciences into Democracy. trans.
Catherine Porter (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2004).
                                                          F O R E W O R D   X I I I




   If I could summarize Stengers's version of Whitehead by a sort of syl
logism, i t could be the fol lowing one: modernist philosophy of science
implies a bifurcation of nature i nto objects having primary and second
ary qualities. However, i f nature really is bifurcated , no living organism
would be possible, since being an organism means being the sort of thing
whose primary and secondary qual ities-i f they did exi st-are endlessly
blurred. Since we are organisms surrounded by many other organisms,
nature has not bifurcated . Corollary: if nature has never bi furcated in the
way phi losophy has implied since the time of Locke, what sort of meta
physics should be devised that would pay ful l j ustice to the concrete and
obstinate existence of organisms? The consequence of considering this
question is radical indeed : " The question of what is an object and thus
what is an abstraction must belong, if nature is not allowed to bi furcate,
to nature and not to knowledge on ly" ( 95; my emphasis ) .
   Hence the roughly three equal parts o f the book (although Stengers
divides her book in two ) : How to overcome the bifurcation of nature ?
What is an organism of a creati ve sort? What sort of strange God is im
plied for this new philosophical business ?
   r...J
   I think it is with Whitehead 's God that Stengers's book reveals its u lti
mate power. Commentators have often tried either to drag Whitehead
in theology seminars-forgetting that his God is there to solve very pre
cisely a technical problem of philosophy, not of belief--{)r to get rid of
this embarrassing appendix altogether. Stengers does not hesitate to go
all the way in the d irection of Whitehead 's argument: if nature can't be
seen as bifurcated, if actual occasions are the stuff out of which the
world is made, if " negative prehensions" are the only way actual occa
sions have to envisage the world, to apprehend it, i f eternal objects are
there as guardians aga inst the shift back to substance and foundations,
then a God-function is implied in this philosophy.
   But, of course, everything now turns around the word implied, or im
plicated. Ta ken superficially, it shifts the concept of God into one of a
king who sits on a throne or some great plant ensconced in a sort of
flowerpot, holding this position in order to close a book of metaphysics
the equivalent in philosophy of the Q ueen of England in pol itics. Or else,
taken as a belief, God gives some philosoph ical luster to parts of the
creed of some church, becoming what you confide in when you have lost
confidence in the world and especially in science. Without disregarding
those possibil ities, Whitehead means something else altogether. Implied
is not only a logical function-who is less a logician than the Whitehead
of the famous team " Russell and Whitehead " ?-but a thoroughly onto-
X I V   F O R E W O R D




logica l involvement into the world. God is the feeling for positive, i nstead
of negative, prehensions. After years (or shou ld I say centuries ? ) of asso
ciating God with negativity-think, for instance, of Hegel-it will take
some time to see his role as consisting of a positivity, but that would be a
welcome cha nge ! " Divine experience is, in that sense, conscious but also
incomplete. God does not envisage what could be. His existence does not
precede nor predict future actua lizations. His envisagement comes from
the thirst for some novelty that this thirst is going to induce but which,
by definition, will go beyond it" ( 525 ) .
   I n a way, it i s not surprising that theology has found Whitehead so
congenial, si nce i nnovations in theology are few and far between. But
Stengers red resses the usua l i mbalance and places Whitehead's i nvention
of a God impl icated squarely inside the world-and unable to " expli
cate " it, nor to " extricate " himself out of it-as the most daring but a lso
the most indispensa ble consequence of his early refusa l to let nature bi
furcate. No more than you can choose i n nature to eli mi nate either pri
mary or secondary qualities can you choose, i n Whitehead, between his
epistemology and his theology. And, of course, it would be impossible to
say that the modernist philosophy has " no need for God ," as philosophers
are so proud of saying and say frequently. Their crossed-out God-to use
my term-is always there but only to fill gaps in their reasoni ng. By tak
ing Whitehead 's God as seriously as Whitehead 's epistemology, Stengers
is leading us in the first systematic attempt at finding a metaphysical al
ternati ve to modernism. The reason why her attempts are so beautifully
moving is that Whitehead has a gift of the most extraordinary rarity: he
is not a creature of the culture of critique. " He knows no critique," as one
could say of a saint " she k nows no sin."

What does it mean to " spea k Whiteheadian " ? Amusi ngly, Stengers's book
begins with some of those long Whiteheadian sentences that Grendel, the
dragon hero of John Gardner's remake of Beowulf, thunders when he
wishes to frighten his human victi ms out of their wits. Stengers's book is
a frightening one, no question about that: five hundred pages of purely
speculative metaphysics . But Grendel, as we learn when we read the
story, is not there to eat all of us up. On the contrary, he is there to re
mind us of our lost wisdom. How can it be that America, nay, the Har
vard Phi losophy Depa rtment, provided a shelter to the most i mportant
philosopher of the twentieth century and then has utterly forgotten him ?
Why has it ta ken us so long to understa nd Grendel's moaning? Probably
beca use it does not offer the easy grasp of the usual domesticated philo
sophica l animals presented in zoos beh ind bars, always there to be in-
                                                            F O R E W O R D   X V




spected and endlessly monitored. Maybe this is what Deleuze mea nt by
" a f ree and wild i nvention of concepts." " Wi l d " does not mean " savage,"
but out in the open, as when we go searching for some elusive wildlife.
   I have a lways felt that Wh itehead-watching had a lot to do with
whale-watching as it is practiced, for i nstance, on the coast of San Diego
i n the winter. You stay on a boa t for hours, see nothi ng, a nd suddenly,
" There she blows, she blows ! " a nd swiftly the whale disappears again.
But with Stengers at the helm, the little ship is able to predict with great
accuracy where the whale wi l l emerge aga i n, i n a few hours. Come on
board, prepa re your bi noculars, and be confident i n the capta i n 's watch.
