There are concepts wherever there are habits, and habits are
made and unmade on the plane of immanence and radical
experience: they are "conventions." This is why English philosophy
is a free and wild creation of concepts. Once a proposition is
given, to what convention does it refer, what is the habit that
constitutes its concept? This is the question of pragmatism.
      -Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, Qu'est-ce que /a Phi/osophie?
                                                                   INTRODUCTION




Whitehead Today?




A Discreet Philosopher

He glanced at me, suspicious. " You're not paying attention."
    " I am ! " 1 said, joining my hands to show my seriousness.
    But he shook his head slowly. " Nothing interests you but excitement,
violence."
    "That's not true ! " 1 sai d .
    His eye opened wider, h i s body brightened from end t o e n d . " You tell
me what's true ? " he sa i d .
    " I'm trying t o fol low y o u . 1 do m y best," I said . " You should b e reason
able. What do you expect ? "
    The dragon thought about it, breathi ng slowly, full o f wrath. A t last he
closed his eyes: " Let us try starting somewhere else," he said . " It's damned
hard, you understand, confining myself to concepts familiar to a creature
of the Dark Ages. Not that one age is darker than another. Technical jar
gon from another dark age." He scowled as if hardly capable of forci ng
himself on. Then, a fter a long moment: " The essence of l i fe is to be found
i n the frustrations of established order. The universe refuses the deaden
ing influence of complete conformity. And yet in its refusal, it passes to
ward novel order as a primary requisite for important experience . We
have to explain the aim at forms of order, and the aim at novelty of order,
and the measure of success, and the measure of fa il ure. Apart from some
understa ndi ng, however dim-witted, of these cha racteristics of historic
process . . ." His voice trai led off (Gr, 5 7-5 8 ) .
    How does a dragon ta l k ? Such is the problem John Gardner had to
solve when he undertook to reinvent the epic poem Beowulf, a poem
2   I NTRODUCTI O N




that, as eve ry Englis h-speaking student has learned, is the oldest E uro
pea n lite ra ry work written in a ve rnacular tongue to have come down to
us. In the orig inal work, slow and sombe r, Beowulf is the hero who fights
against the forces of evi l : the monste r Grendel, whom he kills in the first
part of the poem, and the d ragon whom he will likewise kill in the sec
ond pa rt, but who will morta lly wound him. In Gardner's fiction, how
eve r, it is Grende l who tells his story, for the question of knowi ng how
one gets to be a monste r produces a more inte resting viewpoint than the
one defined by the good. One thus discovers that if Grendel kills me n, it
is because he is simultaneous ly the witness, j udge, a nd i mpotent voyeur
of the strange powe r fiction has ove r the m, and confe rs upon them. He
has seen them build themselves a destiny, a hero ic past, a glorious future,
with the words invented for them by the Shaper, or the Poet i n the strong
sense of giver of form. Grendel is aware of the lies in these words, but
this knowledge excl udes him from what is taking shape before his eyes:
his lucidity brings him noth ing but ha tred and despa i r. Thus, he chooses,
foreve r solita ry, to be the Great De stroye r for human beings, or more
precisely the Great Deconstructor. He will derive a bitter, monotonous
pleasure from the p roof he neve r cea ses infl icting on humans of the im
potence of their Gods, the senseless characte r of their lives, and the van
ity of their heroes.
   Ha tred is a choice, not a consequence . Before becoming the scou rge
of humankind, Grende l met a being much older than hi mse l f, the dragon
that Beowulf was to fight one day. This dragon is " beyond good and evi l,"
beyond both the passion for constructing and for destroying illusory con
structions. For him, nihil istic rage is just as absurd as bel ief, for eve rything
is tied together, eve rything goes hand in hand, creation and destruction,
lies and authenticity. And he knows that Grendel will choose excitement
and violence , despite his advice, the only one he can give: seek out gold and
sit on it . . .
   The homage of fiction to philosophy. It is fairly easy to give voice to a
denouncer, an idol-sma she r, a denie r of all be lief. Yet it is much ha rde r to
give voice to a nonhuman knowledge, more a ncient than humankind,
able to see fa rthe r than the i nsignificant ripple they create in the rive r of
time . To escape the human point of view, and to do so with the calm self
evidence that is appropriate, as i f the workings of the unive rse belonged to
what is given, beyond a l l conquest and hypothesis, Gardne r turned to the
philosopher Alfred North White head, copying out entire passages from
Whitehead's last book, Modes of Thought.
   In what fol lows, Grende l was to encounte r Whitehead a second time .
It happened i n the course o f an incursion that took h i m toward the ci rcle
                                                           I N T R O D U C T I O N




of the Gods, those statues that terrorized men ask i n vain for p rotecti on
aga i nst him. Grendel meets the blind Ork, the el dest and wisest of the
priests. He decides to have some fun and, before killing Ork, he asks him
to confess his fa ith, and say who is the King of the Gods. This time, in
breathless succession, it is the God of Science and the Modern World, the
principle of limitation, ulti mate i rrationality, then that of Process of R eal
ity, with his infinite patience, his tender concern that nothing may be
lost, that come from the blind man's lips. Grendel , bewi ldered, lets his
prey get away.
   The words of a dragon, surging forth from the depths of the ages, as
sociated with the neutrality of one for whom epochs, importances, and
arrogances succeed one another, but a lso words of trance, come from
nowhere, a ble to rout Grendel, who has declared wa r on the poet's ta le
spinning: the reader has now been wa rned . It is a strange tongue that will
gradually be elaborated here, a language that cha llenges a l l clea r distinc
tions between description a nd tale-spinning, and ind uces a singular expe
rience of disorientation in the hea rt of the most familiar experiences. It is
a language that can scandalize, or else madden, a l l those who think they
know what they know, but also a l l those for whom to approach the non
knowi ng at the heart of a l l k nowledge is an underta king that is meticu
lous, grave, and a lways to be ta ken up again.

And yet, of the philosophers of the century that has just ended, the one
who proposes this strange test was the quietest, the most gentle, and the
least anxious to shock. For most of those who know it, the name of White
head has, until very recently, merely called up an image of the couple " Rus
sel l and Whitehead," authors of the Principia Mathematica, a monumen
tal attempt at the axiomatization of mathematics. Nor is anyone supposed
to be unawa re that Godel's fa mous theorem sounded the death-knoll for
this undertaking. The na me of Bertrand Russell, initially Whitehead's
student at Trinity College, Cambridge, and then, between 190 1 and 19 10,
his colla borator, is associated with many of the century's adventures.
Whitehead's name, in contrast, has escaped the " Russell-and-Whitehea d "
association only gradually, a n d i n the a fterma th, to vibra te with i t s own
resonance: first in the United States, and then, gradua l ly, in other regions
of the world, as translations of his grea t work Process and Reality were
published .
   Whitehead's personal l i fe was not only without stories, but it has left
very few traces behind. He answered the letters written to h i m only
ra rely, and at his death his personal papers were destroyed, a s he had
req uested. This i s why his biogra phy, by Vi ctor Lowe, is extremely
4   I N TR O D U CTI O N




sober, especia lly with regard to the second pa rt of his life (volume 2,
1 9 1 0- 1 94 7 ) : there is nothing here to arouse the appetite of the fans of
biograph ica l-i ntellectua l speculation, in sea rch of the " man" beh i nd the
work. To my knowledge, only Bertra nd Russell, who a lways found ways
to denigrate what he did not understa nd, ventured such an i nterpretation
of the phi losophica l turn taken by his friend : it was, he suggested, the
death of his son Eric, a fighter pilot, i n 1 9 1 8 , that led Whitehead to reject
a purely mecha ni stic universe and turn toward phi losophy. No comment.
For the rest, what can we say, except that Whitehead's life was that of a
gi fted student, a respected university professor, a happy husband , and a n
attentive, affectionate father . . .
    Whitehead was born in Kent i n 1 86 1 , the son of a schoolmaster, later
an Anglican pastor, who took persona l charge of his education until the
age of fourteen. His youth, which was happy, was that of a student as
gifted for studies as he was for sports. Upon his ad mission to Cambridge
in 1 8 80, he was offered the rare choice of a scholarship either for classica l
or for mathematica l studies. He chose mathematics, which he then taught
at Trinity College from 1 8 85 to 1 9 1 0. Yet he did not devote himself to
mathematics a lone. Whitehead often sa id that his philosophica l ideas orig
inated from questions he had pursued throughout his life. This pursuit was
reflected, in particular, in a rather astonishing historica l, phi losophica l,
theologica l, and litera ry culture, of which he was to make free use through
out his works. Yet Whitehead was no scholar. According to Victor Lowe,
when he received his students on Sunday evenings near the end of his life,
"what he ta lked about rea lly concerned him" ( ANW, 302 ) . Whether in
phi losophy, theology, science, or literature, his goa l was neither to inform
nor to cultivate himself, but always and above all to understand .
    In 1 9 1 1 , at the age of fifty, Whitehead went i nto action. Fa r from the
protected rhythms of Cambridge, he taught at Uni versity College Lon
don, then at Imperial Col lege, and occupied a series of administrative
positions . The mathematician was henceforth associated not only with
an educationa l thinker-which, for him, is the same thing as a thinker of
human nature-but a lso with a phi losopher of nature, thinking the space
ti me of relativity with a nd against Einstein.
   This life " within the world," divided between public responsi bil ities,
reformist activities, and persona l research, should have yielded to peace
at the age of retirement, but two years before the fateful date, Whitehead
was to receive the invitation that would change the course of his l i fe: to
cross the ocean and go teach at Ha rva rd. To teach his own ideas there,
which he cou ld finally develop in the living, risky way that, for him, every
educationa l process impl ies.
                                                           I N TRO D U CT I O N




    Whitehead set sa i l at Liverpool on August 1 6, 1 924, and arrived at
Boston ten days later. As early as September 23, he gave his fi rst philoso
phy class, which, as he was to observe, was also the first one he ever
attended. For thi rteen years, Whitehead was to "think" in front of sur
prised, fascinated, and disconcerted students. For them, with them, and
i n front of them, he was to discover and explore the unexpected impl ica
tions of the q uestions on which he had meditated all his life. Perhaps,
moreover, it was the commitment that all teaching constituted for him
that inspired what my book will try to fol low, a m utation without equiv
alent in the history of philosophy. In a few years, the logician and philos
opher of nature was to transform himsel f into a metaphysician, the cre
ator of a strangely a udacious speculative philosophy.
    A homage of philosophy to fiction, John Gardner grasped the strange
character of this audacity quite precisely: it is bereft of all excitement, of all
appetite for destruction and scandal, simultaneously the word of a Shaper,
or a creator of forms who might perhaps be able to disarm Grendel 's
hatred, and of the dragon who, with his immemorial knowledge, knows
the vanity of arguments that try to fixate time, found the order of things,
refute or j ustify.
    Whitehead died in 1 947. At the time, his influence in the United States
was swept away by the rising tide of analytical thought. As far as England
was concerned, Process and R eality had gone out of print. For years, in
fact, it was through the teaching and the books of the philosopher and
theologian Charles Hartshorne that a thread of transmission was main
tained . The God conceived by Whitehead, and affi rmed by the blind man
Ork, thus earned him an improbable survival through the intermediary of
American theology. And the consequence of this intermediary was an initial
mode of reading that was rather peculiar: that of a theism that sought to
elaborate, by rational arguments a lone, the definition of a God conceived
as " perfection," but which often looked favorably upon convergence with
Christian doctrine ( there are even Whiteheadian theological constructions
that confer a philosophical foundation upon the Trinity ) .
    For a European l i k e me, a stranger t o the theistic tradition, the true
interlocutors make their appearance with Ivor Leclerc and William A.
Christian. It is not that these philosophers rejected proximity with theistic
concerns, but that their interest focused on the conceptual coherence
proper to the work, not its contri bution to theology. Thus, the question
for them was not to renew the ideal of perfection associated with God,
but to grasp the reasons and the extent of the conceptual creation White
head names God . One of these phi losophers' ambitions was to restore
Whitehead to philosophy, and more particularly to European philosophy,
6   I N TRODU CTI O N




which constitutes the nourishing soil of his concepts (al though today it
is in Korea and Japan tha t Whitehead's thought meets with its greatest
success ) .
   Henceforth, American " Whiteheadians" are recruited a mong both phi
losophers and theologians, a nd the palette has been enriched by practi
tioners from the most diverse horizons, from ecology to femi nism, prac
tices that unite poli tica l struggle and spiritual ity with the sciences of
educa tion. This forms a world that is astonishingly disparate from a Eu
ropean viewpoint, in which a New-Age type of thought can rub el bows
with metaphysicians discussi ng Plato, Lei bniz, and Kant: a strange drop
of water in the a mazing American multiplicity, but which affirms itsel f in
a singularly lively and tenacious way.
   This is a "slightly secret school " as Deleuze wrote in Le P I; ( LP, 1 03 ) ,
a n d here the secret is not associated with a desire for mystery, quite the
contra ry: Whiteheadian philosophers are passionately attached to tech
nical controversy, to expla ining conceptual difficulties, and to evaluating
possible or necessary modifications. The secrecy derives from the legacy
of a philosopher who, discretely and without polemics, without ever ask
ing his readers to thri l l to the audacity and radicalism of the risk or to the
threat of isolation, but with an obstinate tenderness, undertook to forge a
conceptual language that forces those who acquire a taste for it to think.
   Whitehead was a ma thematician, and it is no doubt because he was a
mathematician, because he knew and loved the way mathematics forces
mathematicians to thi nk, but also knew the rigorous constra ints to which
every mathematica l defi nition must respond , that he never thought that
mathematics could consti tute a model that was generalizable. The kind
of necessity proper to mathematical demonstrations cannot be transferred
to philosophy. Phi losophical reasoning that tries to be demonstrative in
this sense could only produce an imitation unworthy of the adventure that,
for mathematicians, is constituted by the production of a demonstration.
What is more, in order to conform to the logical-mathema tical model,
such reasoning would require the goodwill of the readers, their submis
sion to definitions that are simplistic compa red with the extraordinary
subtlety both of the situations and of the usages of natura l la nguage as
it confronts these situations. Such simpl istic defi nitions, which mutilate
questions, would be the price to pay for an approach that would finally
be rationa l . As a mathematician-cum-phi losopher, Whitehead trans
ferred from mathematics to phi losophy not the a uthority produced by
demonstration, but the adventure and commitment to and for a ques
tion, the " bad faith " with regard to every " as is well known," all consen
sual plausi bilities.
                                                          I N TRO D U C T I O N   7




    If Whitehead's work is hard to approach, it is because it de mands, with
utter di scretion, that its readers accept the adventure of the questions
that will separate them from every consensus. Of course, one could say that
th is is the case for all " great" philosophers, those who do not limit them
se lves to ask ing a " classic" question: that of human freedom, or that of
the va lidity of our k nowledge, or of the re lation between facts and val
ues, for instance . When phi losophers transform the landscape of ques
tions, their readers cannot limit themselves to " taking cognizance " of what
is proposed, or to evaluating, as " connoisseurs," the way certa i n we ll
known arguments are formu lated and used, and whose authors situate
the mselves, construct alliances, i ntroduce new distinctions that others
wi l l then have to discuss, conserve, or reject. Even when an a rgument is
taken up again, its meaning changes, and the readers must accept the
experience of this change . Yet even when philosophers innovate in this
way, the nove l ty is usually introduced i n a way that offers readers an
other kind of stability, the one that can be associated with progress. If
they dare, they will be the ones to topple the present into an obsolete
past, a past in which " people sti ll be l ieved that . . . " They will be united
by the audacity of what they deny, and what they no longer need. And
even a philosopher like Nietzsche, who thought he was writing for no
one, because no readers could bear to si tuate themselves " beyond good
and evil," supplied, no doubt involuntarily, the formula for a new con
sensus: not, of course , to live what is unlivable, or to think what is un
thinkable, but to refer to the unlivable and the unthinkable , to criticize or
deconstruct that in which others sti ll " believe ."
    If Gardner's monster Grendel flees, he lpless, instead of kill ing the blind
priest, it is because his hatred is fed by the way human be ings a re situated
in a history that he cannot share, a history that is the work of the Shaper,
who transforms their l i ves i nto epics. And to disarm Grende l 's hatred,
i t is not enough to deny progress, to reject human greatness. Time and
again, the monster will perceive that negation and re futation are equally
the a ffirmation of the superiority of those who have become capable of
de nying and refuting that in which others believed. Time and again, he
will discern the work of the Shaper, and he wi ll k i l l . Gardner needed
Whitehead to give voice both to the priest and to the dragon because he
needed sta tements that, in two different modes, separate Grendel from
what makes him a monster. The dragon is extra-epic, but the priest, for
his part, makes Grendel 's powers of discernment redundant. How could
one discern a mendacious construction where nothing claims to be au
thorized by the facts, where no argument ever claims the power to bring
into agreement those who wil l prove, by this agreement, that they are
8   I NTRO D U C T I O N




worthy of what is demanded of them? The priest's speech is " la ughable,"
as Whitehead's ambition may seem laughable in the eyes of contempo
rary phi losophers: to construct a philosophy that is openly and system
atically speculative.
   One of the tests Whitehead reserves for his readers thus concerns the
question of what is philosophically " serious," or what every serious phi
losopher k nows today: it is ill usory to deal in a positive way with the
truth of God, or of the universe. This seriousness is marked at the division
between the questions that belong to the history of philosophy, and those
that designate its contemporary territories. Historians of philosophy can
devote hundreds of pages to Plato's Ideas, the Hegelian Spirit, the Leibniz
ian monads, the Cartesian God, or the vision in God of Malebranche, and
they can experience the efficacy proper to these concepts, and even suc
ceed in transmitting them. They will not be asked how they situate them
selves with regard to these philosophical propositions, because they are
doing the job of a historian. They are protected by their distance. Yet White
head is a quasi-contemporary philosopher. He wrote at the same time as
Heidegger, Husserl, and Wittgenstein, who are stil l cited today as refer
ences for thinking about our epoch. It is thus impossible to keep him "at a
distance." And yet he seems to be unaware that there is a " before Kant,"
when philosophers considered themselves free to speculate about God,
the world, and the human soul, and an " a fter Kant," in which, except for
a few old-fashioned naifs, they have learned the lesson of human finitude,
have accepted the consequences of the fact tha t they do not have the ben
efit of a direct intuition of these ultimate realities, and have admitted that
" thoughts without intuitive content are empty."


Taking a Speculative Philosophy Seriously?
How can we take seriously a book l ike Process and R eality, which opens
with a chapter devoted to that speculative phi losophy that we are sup
posed to have relegated to history ? All the more so i n that Whitehead
does not undertake to defend the conditions of possibil ity of such a phi
losophy, or to answer the condemnation that has been decreed aga inst it.
He l imits himsel f to l i ni ng up, in a way that is perfectly serene, as if they
were so many self-evidences, statements l iable to pl unge serious philoso
phers into abysses of indignant perplexi ty, if they do not close the book
after two pages, not even seei ng how one could attack a thought that is
disarming in its na ivety and its dogmatism. And how could one take
seriously, a s a quasi-contempora ry, a book that ends with the grandiose
vision of a perpetual cosmic process such tha t " the love in the world
                                                          I NTRO D U C T I O N   9




passes i nto the love i n heaven, and floods back again i nto the worl d "
( PR, 3S1 ) ?
   The difficulty is all the greater because i t is impossible to maintain that
Whitehead, as a mathematician, was naive and ignorant in philosophy,
or to classify him among those who attempt a " return" to a philosophy
of the " pre-Kantian" type. Does he not himself explicitly deny the possi
bil ity of such a return when he writes that " philosophy never reverts to
its old position after the shock of a great phi losopher" ( PR, II) ? Of course,
Whitehead reads Descartes, Spi noza , Leibniz, and even Kant as if they
were his contemporaries, but he knows that he asks them q uestions that
are not theirs, he knows that he does not respect what matters for them,
or what made them think.
   Perhaps one had to be a mathematician to realize that it is not appro
priate to take seriously, for one instant, the unavoi dable di lemmas and
the insurmountable alternatives that phi losophers produce i n order to
give their demonstrations a necessity that also enables them to criticize
and denounce. Yet a humor of thought was also necessary in order not to
overestimate this knowledge, so as not to transform it into an i nstrument
of j udgment, to know that, unlike mathematical defi nitions, defi nitions in
philosophy a re j ust as interesting by what they deny, j udge, or refuse to
think, as by what they affirm. Philosophical statements must generally be
heard twice: in the mode of creation, they find their necessity in the prob
lem that set the philosopher to work; in the mode of j udgment, they desig
nate what the philosopher has undertaken to silence and disqua l i fy, that
is, also the transformation of what gave rise to the problem in polemics
against rivals and imposters .
   Whitehead 's speculati ve phi losophy is i ndeed si tuated " a fter K ant,"
a fter the shock consti tuted for philosophy by the Kantian prohibi
tions, beca use this phi losophy does not communicate with a " right to
think ." Thus, Whitehead does not infri nge upon any prohi b ition, for
prohibitions presuppose such a com munication. The q uestion for him
is not what we can k now, but what we k now. I f he became a phi loso
pher, i t is because q uestions to which, as a n empirica l fact, he felt that
his epoch demanded a n answer situated him i n that tra dition known
as philosophy.
   Reading Whitehea d is a test, for he demands of his readers not only
that they accept these questions, but a lso, and above all, that they accept
the possibi lity that such questions are not destined to remain without an
answer, the object of a meditation on the human condition, its paradoxes,
and even its tragedy. More than any other phi losopher, Whitehead was
permeated by the vertiginous distance between the possi bilities of the
10   I N TRO D U C T I O N




universe and our human abil ities to apprehend them. Yet he never bowed
down before a question, for every question is a human formul ation, and
none, as such, transcends the human adventure. The way we formulate
questions always comes from somewhere, and can always lead some
where: not, certa inly, to an answer that would be definitive at last, but
rather to new ways of formulating them, in a way that no longer com
municates with an insurmountable enigma, but with a problem. If there
is one position that denies the finitude of the human cond ition, it is the
one that claims to put a stop to the a dventure of thought, and supposes
that we know what is imposed by that cond ition.
   If reading Whitehead means accepting to commit oneself to an adven
ture whose starting point is always the formul ation of a problem, with
out the legiti macy of the problem being well-founded, without the pos
sibil ity of answering it being j ustified in terms of the right to think, one
may rightly wonder if the formulations he attempted a re sti ll able to en
gage us today. Such a question coul d, of course, be raised with regard to
every philosopher, and it is the greatness of the history of philosophy that
it succeeds, sometimes, in giving what one could cal l , with Gilles Deleuze,
a " portra it of the philosopher with his problem." Even when the problem
is no longer ours, the way it forced the phi losopher to think, create, and
reject can then become ours, in the sense that it creates the experience of
the movement of thought proper to philosophical creation. Deleuze was
wel l aware of this, he who discovered that philosophy would be his life,
would be what woul d make his life worth living, a fter a first class on
Plato's Ideas-even i f many consider him as the anti-Platonic philosopher
par excellence. The surest way to " k ill " philosophy is to transmit it in the
manner of a science : one does not need to enter i nto contact with New
ton's problem to learn rational dynamics-the equations of Lagrange and
Hamilton define what must be reta ined of it-but to deal with Plato
without first sharing his problem is somewhat analogous to studying but
terflies on the basis of a collection of pinned butterfl ies, without ever hav
ing seen one fly.
   Yet Thinking with Whitehead does not belong, properly speaking, to
the history of philosophy. In it, to be sure, Whitehead will never be sepa
rated from his problem, and more precisely from the way in which he
never ceased formulating and reformul ating his problem. Yet this is no
" portrait," for what is at stake in this book is a lso, and inseparably, to
present Whitehead as a phi losopher who belongs to our epoch. Unl i ke
the portraitist, whose task is to make the viewers feel, to transfer what
was lived and created, but without personally taking over from it, my
a pproach to Whitehea d cannot be dissociated from the importance of
                                                         I N TR O D U C T I O N   11




his work in my life. In this sense, I am pa rt of the motley crew of "White
head ians," of those ecologists, femin ists, educators, theologians, and so
on, who have discovered that Whitehead helped them to imagine and to
fight against " ready-made " models, a nd above all not to despa ir.
   The discovery that Whitehead hel ped me in this way is inseparable
from my practical situation more than thirty years ago: that of a young
philosopher who had come from the experi mental sciences to philosophy
because she did not accept the way researchers in science are trained, and
who was trying to figure out how to situate herself with regard to these
sciences. The goal, for her, was to be able to think about the creative power
of these sciences-the path of critical ep istemology was henceforth
closed-but also about their catastrophic indifference to what they judge
" non-scientific ." The path that ratifies this j udgment by making the sci
ences, in one way or another, an " access to reality " beyond our ill usions
was therefore closed as wel l .
   It could, however, be maintained that Whitehea d fai led, if not i n his
diagnosis, then at least i n his prognosis with regard to science. For an
important aspect of what engaged his philosophical adventure was his
conviction that what is cal led modern science had reached a turning
point, which demanded a new philosophical thought. The period when
modern science had developed by repudiating philosophy had been fruit
fu l, but as he wrote in 1 925, the threat was henceforth that science might
degenerate into a " medley of ad hoc hypotheses " ( SMW, 1 7) . It will be said
that this threat has not material ized, and that physicists have, without the
hel p of the philosophers, transformed the foundations of their science, and
have accompl ished what seemed impossible to Kant: to interrogate the ori
gin of the Universe, of matter, and even to place in debate the question
" why is there something rather than nothing ? " It will also be said that
biology has accompl ished its revolution, and that we have learned more
about l iving beings in a few decades than throughout the preceding centu
ries. Others could also say that if science is threatened today, it is rather by
the way in which its traditional all ies, the State and industry, have under
taken to enslave it directly through what is called the economy of knowl
edge, and that Whitehead's propositions ignore what should be thought
about today: not a science that is still a cousin of philosophy, trying to
confer an intelligible order on what confronts us, but a technoscience for
which to understand is to be able to transform, and which blindly serves
those who actualize that power to transform the world .
   Of course, Whitehead was only laterally interested in this last question,
although one could say that the way he designated the " method of training
professionals" ( SMW, 1 96 ) , as one of the great and most redou btable
12   I NTRODUCTI O N




discoveries of the nineteenth century, has lost none of its power. Yet his
goal was not to denounce professionals or to bring them culture, the
 " supplement of soul " they lack. Whitehead belongs to our epoch because
he asks a question that is ours, that of our lack of resistance to the way in
which, since the begi nning of the ni neteenth century, what has been
called progress has redefined the worl d. From this viewpoint, one could
say that today, a t a time when it has become impossi ble to ignore the
consequences of this progress, worrisome to say the least, Whitehead's
thought finds a n actua lity it lacked in its own day. To be sure, there has
been innovation, but also rarefaction of those who, still i n Whitehead's
time, took the time to think. Instead, we have to do with a veritable "cult
of the scienti fic revolution "-a new revolution will come a long to solve
the questions rai sed by the preceding one. One must " wa i t for genius,"
and meanwhi le nothing must slow down the race, the process of accu
mulating results by researchers who a re defined, in the fi rst instance, by
competition.
    Yet what, one wi l l ask, does Wh itehead suggest? Are we to believe
that his concepts, formulated so long ago, m i raculously conserve thei r
relevance in a world he cou ld not i magine ? Is he the genius we were
wa iting for ? By no means, and I must confess that the way some physi
cists who have withdrawn from the race to speculate have become i n
terested in Whitehead, and have found a mong the " p rocess philoso
phers " the sympathetic and a ttentive ear their col leagues refused them,
does not convi nce me. For this interest a ffirms what Whitehead refused :
that the questions that issue from the specia l ized adventure known as
physics a re the " big questions " that deal with rea l i ty as such. Much
more positive i n this regard is the interest of certa in chem ists or biolo
gists, who do not aim a t a summit meaning between their science and
metaphysics, but discover that the Whitehea d i a n concepts make aspects
of the situations they study i nteresting and signi ficant; they do not il
l ustrate the power of theoretical a pproaches that are habitua l, but i m
posed by experi mentation.
    However, for a philosopher l i ke me, i nterested in science, what is no
doubt most important is the way Whitehead suggests putting things in
perspective. It a llows us to resi st the identification of the question of sci
ence with that of knowledge. Confronted by science, philosophy does not
have to think of human knowledge, either to make thi s science the accom
plishment of human rationality, and extract from it epistemological or
normative norms i n order to diagnose, in the manner of Bergson, the
limits of rational knowledge, or, like Heidegger, to denounce science as
" that which does not think." Beyond their contrad ictions, all these philo-
                                                          I N TRODU CTI O N     13




sophical problematizations turn science into a n accomplishment o r a des
tiny that, beyond itself, speaks of something human, and of the knowledge
to which this something human may lay claim. For Whitehead, in contrast,
science must be understood as an adventure, and an a dventure never en
ables us to draw a general lesson. When the adventurer is perplexed, when
the adventure turns out badly, the question to ask is rather " what has hap
pened to us ? "
   The Chinese, i t i s sa id, smiled a t the na ivete o f the Jesuit missionaries
who reported to them the triumphs of seventeenth-century science, but
all the words we have available today are laden with this " fact " : " we,"
for our part, did not laugh. The community picked out by this " we " is the
one Whitehead is addressing in the fi rst instance. We are those who, for
instance, have accepted and continue to accept the separation, proposed
since the Galilea n origins of modern science, between the " why " and the
" how." Such a separation is always what prevails when a public question
highlights what scientists propose ( we know " how" to go about this . . . ) ,
a n d what is to b e decided according t o val ues defined as " purely human,"
alien to a nature supposed to be defined by the scientific " how." Such a
separa tion gives rise to, and presupposes, an inabil ity to resist, for as soon
as it is staged and accepted, it is too late. The roles have been distributed,
with the scientists on the side of innovation, and those who dispute their
proposition on the side of inertia, habits, and what will eventually give in,
for " you can't stop progress." And yet, we have not learned to laugh at this
scenario. We are the ones who ask the question of our lack of resistance to
what, in the name of progress, dismembers thought.
   One does not need, however, to benefit from Chinese wisdom to ques
tion the separation between the why and the how, in particular to show
that it has in fact no stable identi ty, and tha t the " how" never stops mu
ta ting. Yet this criticism will not go far, for scientists will be happy to
admit it: for them, the " how" follows the advance of scientific territories
and designates the " why " as what is left over, what is not scienti fically
demonstra ble but is relative to the tastes and passions of a n epoch; and
it will pass, l ike the epoch. This was the sense in which Galileo proposed
to distinguish between what he had succeeded in demonstrating, " how"
bodies fall, and the question of " why " they fall in tha t way, a question
which, as he remarked, there was " no great use" in asking: this is the
domain of the imagination and of undecidable fiction. The dice a re thus
loaded from the outset, and the distribution unequal , implying as a previ
ous proposition the relegation of what does not perta in to the terri tories
conq uered by scientific objectivity to the rea lm of fiction, human, a l l too
human as it is.
14   I N TRO D U C T I O N




    In other words, for one who learned to think with Whitehead, the con
frontation, which a few years ago inspired so many passions under the
name of the " science wars," was not at all surprising. If the "objective "
sciences can relegate to undecidable fiction what has not undergone a
redefinition that would finally be scientific, why would representatives
of the humanities depri ve themselves of transforming this fiction into a
counteroffensive category to show that the so-called " hows," finally ob
jective, conceal the " whys " of human undertakings ? As Whitehead wrote
with regard to the dual ity between free, entrepreneurial individual spirit
and regular, submissive matter bequeathed to us by the seventeenth cen
tury, " There is Aaron's rod, and the magicians' serpents; and the on ly
question for philosophy is, which swa llows which; or whether, as Des
cartes thought, they all live happy together" (SMW, 1 42-1 43 ) .
    History has proved Descartes wrong. Each " advance " of an objectivity
reputed to be scientific has been acclaimed by some as a gain in rationa l
ity, and condemned by others as a n a ttack on the subject. In fact, one
could almost say that provoking denunciation has become a favorite rhe
torica l trick in certa in scientific fields. The scandal stirred up bears wit
ness to the conquest. The barking dogs constitute in themselves the proof
that the caravan is passing, transporting the first fruits of the irresistible
conquest. And the dogs are all the more useful i n that the caravan in
question is transporting only goods that a re not very interesting at all:
that is, the pretensions of "evolutionary psychology."
   What has happened to us? One of the unique aspects of Whitehead's
suggestion is tha t is does not contain any " bad guys," nor an explanatory
construction of continuity that refers to something we "couldn't help."
That "adventure " is the first and the last word impl ies that all continuity
is questiona ble, and that no principle of economy should preva il that al
lows us to forget that the resumption of a seemi ngly similar theme takes
place in circumstances that a re di fferent every time, and with stakes that
a re always different. The question " what has happened to us ? " is there
fore not the search for an ultimate explanation, but a resource for tel ling
our stories in another way, in a way that si tuates us otherwise-not as
defined by the past, but as a ble, perhaps, to inherit from it in another way.
   Whitehead 's contemporaries could, with amusement, perplexity, or
scanda l, wonder whether one shou ld really incur the risks of a specula
tive operation, moving Heaven and Earth, God and matter, to remedy
difficulties that a re ulti mately secondary : does not modern " progress "
bear witness to the fact that, despite everythi ng, " we " have succeeded in
d istinguishing oursel ves from those peoples who, i n fact, profited at the
time from the benefits of civil izing coloni alism ? Ti mes have changed , and
                                                         I N TR O D U C T I O N   15




what may have seemed to be "excess" may be worthy of playing a role in
the apprenticeship that today imposes itself with regard to ourselves. For
good intentions and a conciliatory spirit are not enough. Visions of the
world that pacify contradictions by weakening them will always be at the
mercy of one of the terms that will transform the fragile bridge of resem
blances that has united it with the other as a means of passage and con
quest. And they allow us, in all good conscience, to propose to the rest of
the world a thought that is finally consensual . The speculative operation
attempted by Whitehead could well be more relevant today than it was in
his day, because it breaks with the claim to anonymity that inhabits us
and constitutes us, stil l and again, as " the thinking head of humanity." To
learn to resist, with regard to the " us " that made the Chinese smile, is also
to learn that our adventure can indeed make people smile.


T hinking with Whitehead
Thinking with Whitehead today therefore means accepting an adventure
from which none of the words that serve as our reference points should
emerge unscathed , but from which none will be disqual ified or denounced
as a vector of i l l usion. All a re a part of the problem, whether they refer to
the whys of human experience or to the hows of "objective rea lity." If
compromise solutions do not suffice, it is because they try to circumvent
the problem instead of raising it; that is, they try to mitigate the contra
dictions and to make compatible that which defines itself as conflictual.
Whitehead was a mathematician, and mathematicians a re they who do
not bow down before contrad ictions but transform them into an ingredi
ent of the problem . They are the ones who dare to " trust" in the possibil
ity of a solution that remai ns to be created . Without this " trust " in a pos
sible solution, mathematics would not exist.
   This truth is the one William James cal led faith or bel ief, his only an
swer when confronted by those who have declared that l i fe is not worth
living, " the whole army of suicides ( . . . ) an army whose roll-ca ll, like
the famous evening gun of the British a rmy, follows the sun round the
world and never terminates " ( LWL, 3 7 ) . It has nothing in common with
what I would ca ll, to underline the d i fference, " to be confident," that is,
to continue, to carry on in the mode of "everything will work out fine."
The mathematician's trust is insepa ra ble from a commitment not to mu
tilate the problem in order to solve it and to take its demands fully into
account. Yet it implies a certain deli berate amnesia with regard to the ob
viousness of obstacles, an active i ndetermination of what the terms of the
problem " mean." Tra nsferred to phi losophy, this indetermination means
16   I N TRO D U C T I O N




that what announced i tsel f a s a foundation, authorizing a position and
providing its banner to a ca use, will be transformed into a constra i nt,
which the solution will have to respect but upon which it may, if neces
sary, confer a somewhat unexpected signification .
   To ill ustrate this indeterminization, I will refer to a well-known fable.
There once was an old Bedouin, who, sensing that his death was immi
nent, gathered together his three sons and signified his last wishes to
them. To the eldest, he beq ueathed half his inheritance, to the second one
qua rter, and to the third one sixth. As he said this, he d ied, leaving his sons
in perplexity, for the inheritance in question consisted of eleven camels.
   How were they to respect the old man's will ? Should they kill those of
the camels whose division seemed prescribed, and share the meat among
them ? Was this the required filial piety ? Did their father really want them to
prove thei r love by accepting this loss ? Or had he made a mistake, dis
tracted or weakened by his imminent death ? In fact, at least one error was
obvious, because one-half pl us a quarter plus a sixth do not make one. Yet
to inherit on the basis of an interpretation that disquali fies a last wish, is
this not to insult to the dea d ? And i n this case, moreover, how could one
divide ? Who would take away the remainder of the divi sion ? All the in
gredients were there for a fratricidal war. The three brothers nevertheless
decided to try to avoid the war, that is, to wager that a solution could
exist. This means that they went to see the old sage who so often plays a
role in such stories. This old sage, on this occasion, told them that he
could not do anything for them except to offer them what might perhaps
help them : his old camel, skinny and half-blind. The inheritance now
counted twelve camels: the eldest took six of them, the second three, the
youngest two, and the old camel was returned to the old sage.
   What did the twelfth camel accompl ish ? By its presence, it made possi
ble what seemed contradictory, simultaneously obeying the father's wishes,
discovering the possi bility of respecting thei r terms, and not destroying
the va l ue of the i nheritance. All this because it made it possible to bring
to existence that which remained discretely undetermined in the paternal
statement, the q uestion of what it means to " share an inheri tance." It is
usually divided into parts, and this is what the statement seems to com
mand . Yet this norm is only one way of answering the problem. What is
requi red is that once the allocation has been made, the contents of the
inheri tance are distributed, but nothing determines what the allocation
must deal with. The content of the inheritance is a given that acts as a
constraint, but the role of this constraint belongs to the solution, and the
question of the allocation ca n thus be plunged within a wider field of
possi bilities. Thus, the sol ution does not enta il submission to the prob-
                                                         I N T R O D U CT I O N   17




lema tic statement, but the invention of the field i n which the problem finds
its solution.
    The fa ble of the twelfth camel illumi nates the meaning of what White
head was to cal l " speculative philosophy." First, it ill ustrates the d iffer
ence between " trusting" and " being confident in." If the brothers had gone
no farther than to wonder whether they could be confident in their father's
intentions, their situation wou ld remain without issue. It is only beca use
they accepted the paternal will as an unknown, because none of them
clai med to know what their father " meant," that they went to consult the
old sage. And the " trust " presupposed by their procedure is not d i rected
to the old sage hi mself, for the goal is not to yield to his authority rather
than to the paternal authority. It is d i rected to the possible as such, to the
possibil ity of a solution on the basis of which the unknown of the pater
na l will might find its meaning. As far as the twel fth camel added to the
inheritance is concerned, it ill ustrates the efficacy proper to the specula
tive proposition. This camel will not benefit any of the brothers. It makes
the division possible, in conformity with the father's will, but it is not dis
tri buted itself and is not added to any share.
    The specificity of the concepts proposed by Whitehead is that, like the
twelfth camel, once they have done their j ob, once they have transformed
the way in which a situation raises a problem, they d isappear without leav
ing a trace other than this transformation itself. This is why Whitehead
can write that the interest of the speculative scheme he has constructed
resides in its a pplications, in the transformations it carries out in our
ways of explaining or characterizing our experiences. It is these transfor
mations that are to give ri se to the experience Whitehead associates with
the goal of philosophy, an experience of " sheer disclosure " (MT, 49) rather
than the concepts themselves. The concepts are required by the transfor
mation of experience, but it is this disclosure that has, and always will
have, the last word . For i nstance, the question raised by the speculative
construction of God, required by Whitehead, does not imply the existence
of this God . The only question is that of knowing which experiences
would have been relegated to illusion-how the problem would have been
muti lated-i f what Whitehead names God had not been included in the
conceptual arrangement constructed by Whitehead.
    Yet the fact that Whitehead was a ble to discover that his conceptual
arrangement needed God implies an aspect of his speculative philosophy
that the fa ble of the camels does not a l low us to describe, beca use this
fa ble has the form of a riddle that allows one path to a solution, and only
one. In the case of speculative phil osophy, the role of the dying father,
whose last wishes define wha t the sol ution to the problem of definition
18   I N T R O D U C T I O N




must achieve, is not played by a nyone. Thi s is why one cannot say that
the Whiteheadian proposition constitutes " the answer," finally discov
ered . Quite the contrary, this proposition is i nseparable from the con
stra ints that Whitehead had to impose upon himsel f in order to formu
late the problem to be solved, for it is these constra ints that make him a
creator: in other words, they confer upon the solution being sought the
power to obl ige him to create. This is why the speculative a nswer formu
lated in Process and Reality is itsel f coherent with what it tries to bring
about: " sheer d isclosure." It is i nseparable from a n adventure i n which
the problem of philosophers, that is, the constrai nts that must be satisfied
hy the solution they construct, have not ceased to he reformulated .
     If Whitehead is the one who brings adventures into existence, where
what we seek a re reasons and j ustifications, or what is supposed to tran
scend a nd a uthorize our choices, it is crucial not to conceive of this ad
venture as reduci ble to what is arbitrary or contingent. What is at stake
here enables me both to cha racterize Whitehead 's approach as "construc
tivist" and to defend the constructivist position agai nst the curse that
weighs it down today, a weight it tra nsfers to the situations in which it
intervenes. There are social, cultural, linguistic, neurophysiological, his
torical, and pol itica l constructivisms, but their common feature is demys
tification. In a way that bears witness in itself to the polemical power of
our categories, to affirm " it's a construction" is to affirm "it is a mere con
struction," and it will then most often be a matter of affirming the a rbi
trary nature of what others believe they can j ustify. In particular, the rea lity
to which the sciences claim to have access must fall si lent, unable to make
a significant di fference between the interpretative constructions that con
cern it. Such claims are themselves " mere" constructions, or " narratives."
    Where polemics unmasks, Whitehead addresses adventures. In Process
and Reality, he speaks of rationalism as an " experimental adventure " ( PR,
9) and of metaphysics as an "adventure of hope " ( PR, 42 ), but he a lso
defines, in a speculative mode, a l l continuity as an " adventure in change "
( PR, 3 5 ) . For him, then, the term "adventure " is valid simultaneously, both
on an empirical level-to characterize what we are dealing with, but
which also situates us-and on a speculative level . And the choice of this
term accentuates a question that polemica l constructivisms render sec
ondary. There is no adventure without a risky relation to an environment
that has the power to compl icate this adventure, or even to doom it to
fa i l ure. Likewise, there is no construction that does not ra ise the question
of " how it holds together," or how it is a ffected by its environment and
how it a ffects it.
   That a bridge may hold throughout its "adventure of change," through
the multiple trials that its envi ronment imposes upon i t, is the achieve-
                                                        I N TRO D U C T I O N   19




ment that ma tters i n its case. And no one will say, with regard to a
century-old bridge, " it's only a construction ." However, it will be objected,
if no one says this, it is because no one claims the contrary: no one claims
that the bridge is " objective," or independent of human knowledge. Yet
this a nswer, a l beit legitimate, provides a good translation of the curse that
weighs upon constructivism, that is, on its capture by a polemical net
work. If the notion of construction is used in a pejorative way, it is be
cause it was initially mobilized by scientists to characterize what is not
scientific, then catastrophically preserving its same connotation of a rbi
trariness, by the " deconstructivists," to show that scientific knowledge can
not escape the same j udgment.
   The fact that all continuity must be described as an "adventure " creates
the possibility of esca ping polemics. Instead, a set of notions organizes it
sel f around the notion of adventure, and particularly that of a construc
tion that " is able to hold," which, following Whitehead , and in the math
ematical sense, we will cal l " generic." When Whitehead uses the word
" generic," and also when he spea ks of "general i ty," he is not thinking like
a logician and is not giving the term the power to define a class of partic
ular cases (all men are mortal; Socrates . . . ). The generic notion does not
authorize any definition. It suggests a way of addressing a situation whose
eventual success will be the relevance of the questions to which it gives rise.
Generalities in the logical sense authorize classifications, with each partic
ular case exemplifying the general characteristic that defines a set of
notions. Whiteheadian philosophical general ities, and the notions he calls
"generic," make the wager that the questions to which they will give rise
will shed light on features that are important for each situation.
   Importance is a Whitehead ian generic notion. It enables no classifica
tion, yet nevertheless does not condemn it: to classify may be what mat
ters, for instance, for a botanist. This is not a matter of psychology, for if
one questions botanists, they will spea k of vegetal proliferation, of the
thorny questions raised by each type of classification, in short, of an ad
venture that confronts one with plants. Every adventure thus calls forth
the generic question " what does it make matter ? " which can also mean
" how is the contrast between success and defeat defined for it ? " and this
question will cal l forth others in turn, which will imply the trials, risks,
and type of environment required for success, and so on .
   As an example, but also in order to introduce myself, I will a llow myself
to sketch here the way I have tried to characterize modern experimental
science. I have practiced an a pproach that could be ca lled constructivist,
but not in the sense of a theory of knowledge or an epi stemol ogy that
affirms that not real ity, but human acti vities a lone are responsible for our
knowledge. The constructivist question I have asked is " what makes these
2 0   I NTRODUCTI O N




human beings, these prod ucers of the knowledge we call 'experimental:
become active ? " In other words, " what is the uniq ueness of the adven
ture in which they have become engaged ? " " what matters to them ? "
" what does success mean to them ? "
   O f course, many things are important for individuals, but here the
question bears not upon them but on the way they define an achieve
ment, and the way this definition engages them. In The Invention of Mod
ern Sciences, I suggested that what unites experimenters, what forces them
to become active and to think together, is a question that can only be
asked in the la boratory : did this experimenta l arrangement provide the
phenomenon being questioned with the abil ity to bear witness in a reli
able way, concerning the way wha t is made observa ble a bout this phe
nomenon must be interpreted ? Has it succeeded in conferring upon the
phenomenon being q uestioned the role of " respondent" for the interpre
tation that is given to it?
   The ability to resist the accusation of " being a mere construction," in
the sense of a merely human ( social, linguistic, techn ica l , subjective) fab
rication, is thus no longer the privi lege of the experi mental proced ure,
but its key element. It is what defines the demands of the environment on
which the success of an experi menta l suggestion depends, and this ability
does not exclude the human beings who become active, discuss, and hesi
tate, but sol icits them and mobil izes them a round the eventual i ty of this
achievement. And this is an achievement that no theory of knowledge, no
epistemology could j ustify, for it belongs to the order of the event, of what
can happen but is not deserved, and does not correspond to any right. It
is an achievement that is rare, extremely selective, and radically situated .
Wha t situates it is not the world, objectively deciphered at last, but the
experimental a pparatus, for the questions that matter are established
around the experimental apparatus. It is here that human beings become
active, and that an art of testing and of consequences is practiced, whose
correlation is the signature of the event. The tests of an experi mental
proposition's reliabil ity are not a goa l in themselves; the true verification
of a proposition concerns its consequences or the new possi bili ties that it
makes conceivable and which, if they a re fruitful, will gather researchers
together, whatever epistemologists may say.
   That this type of success could become the model of a theory of gen
eral knowledge, conta ining the disquali fication of what is " merely sub
jecti ve," is the sign of a propaganda operation . The event " here we can
do something ! " is transformed into a norm ( most often emptied of what,
for experi menters, " ma kes an event," so as to extend it to the totality of
what is recogni zed as " scientific " ) , and everything that escapes this norm
                                                         I N TR O D U C T I O N   2 1




is placed in the same sack, defined by the "why" of human subjectivity.
The success story of this operation is part of the question " what has hap
pened to us ? " but i n order to resist it there is no need to " deconstruct" the
experimenta l achievement. On the contrary, it is by accepting it in its se
lective and rare uniqueness that we can understand that it is not " na ture "
t h a t ma kes an experi menter think. Heidegger w a s right: in t h i s sense,
in deed, " science does not thin k ." What matters to experimenters a re the
objections and the tests to which their proposition will be subjected, and
the future it ma kes it possible to envisage.
    Such an a pproach offers a certain analogy with the fa ble of the twelfth
camel, beca use it limits itself to adding an ingredient lia ble to produce a
" sheer disclosure " : the confronta tion only seemed inevitable beca use this
ingredient had been left out of the problematic landscape. This obviously
does not solve the very concrete problems raised by the role of science and
of scientists in our society, but i t separates these problems from wha t, for
the experimenters, can only be a declaration of war: the j udgment that what
produces agreement between them i s nothing more than a purely human
construction . One can l isten to scientists tell the story of their achieve
ments without having to challenge them, for they are situated in, and be
long to, an adventure that has nothing to say a bout what does not answer
to I ts demands. The q uestions that issue forth from this a dventure are
added to the other human questions and may complicate them, but i f they
appear to take the place of questions that matter in other adventures, as
constituti ng the " fina l ly objective " version of them, there is no need for
confrontation, and it is enough to search with trust for how the story has
been transformed into propaganda .
    However, this camel-which I would ca ll " practical," since the ingredi
ent it adds designates what matters for experimenta l practices-does not
accomplish the miracle of instantaneous reconcil iation proposed by the
original fable, any more than Whitehead's " speculative" twelfth camel does.
Instead, it proposes a way of addressing those who are divided into two
antagonistic poles.
    Thus, one can certainly ask scientists many things, but not to renounce
what matters to them, and particularly wha t resonates in the question " i s
it publishable ? " : the primacy of t h e objections of "competent colleagues,"
the only objections that can place their proposition in danger, because they
are the only ones capable of detecting a fault, an over- ha sty hypothesis, a
possible counterinterpretation . Quite the contrary, one would discern the
possible destruction of the experimental adventure if the knowledge econ
omy were to prevail and transform competent colleagues into complacent
colleagues, because they share the same dependencies. On the contra ry,
2 2   I N T RO D U C T I O N




one will wish that the link between rel iability and the presence of those
lia ble to object may be maintained " outside the laboratory " : that is, that
 all those who a re competent to put every proposition to the test should
actua lly be gathered a round it.
    In our academic world, however, where publication has become a ques
tion of life or death and where everyone henceforth depends on " compe
tent colleagues," particularly when gathered in reading committees or
eva luatory committees, questions also arise for those who have gathered
around the other pole, which could be ca l led the "critica l " pole. They too
a re situated by the questi on of success, and of what success renders im
portant. Is your success that of Grendel ? That of the justice-dea lers,
working in the name of a general truth, which demands the destruction
of those who do not bow down before it ? Or else, what a re the ques
tions that make you think, around which the demands that defi ne what
matters for you a re organized ?
    And it arises, in particular, for me. Who are my col leagues ? What defi
nition of what matters do I share with them ? To what tests sha l l my
proposition be subjected ? The person who raises this question is in
tensely aware of the fact that, if her publ ications had depended on most
of her "competent colleagues," that is, on those who mimic the sciences
by demanding that an a rgument present itself as capable of forcing the
agreement of a l l competent philosophers, she would have been profes
sional ly condemned . To think with Whitehead is also to a ffirm that the
success of a phi losophical proposition is not to resist obj ections but to
give rise to what he himsel f calls a " leap of the imagination " ( PR, 4 )-and
the point is to experiment with the effects of that leap: what it does to
thought, what it obl iges one to do, what it renders important, and what
it ma kes remain silent.
    Un l i ke French, English does not a l low the word " experiment" to be
used for an experience that implies an active, open, and demanding at
tention. No more than laboratory experi mentation can be reduced to
careful, systematic observation, can experience or the transformation of
experience brought about by a scientific proposition be reduced to a new
way of seeing. In both cases, a reciprocal influence is implied, that puts to
the test both what brings about and what is brought about. This is the
type of test that this book, which is written " with " Whitehead, demands.
What is at stake in it is not to share a vi sion, nor to provide a definitive
interpretation of Whiteheadian thought, but to experiment/experience in
the present what it means to ask the question "What has happened to us ? "
i n the way h e suggests .
                                                           I N TR O D U C T I O N   2 3




Choices of Writing
To try to render a philosophical proposition " present" means first of all to
try to avoid the form of commentary that is suitable for the exposition of
an author's beliefs, of what he or she thinks. It is to make thought insepa
rable from the problem of " how to think " that obl iges this thought. This
is why I have chosen an approach that has the look and feel of a narration,
accompanying Whitehead over the course of a few years ( from The Con
cept of Nature, published in 1 920, to Process and R eality, publ ished i n
1 92 9 ) , in which an iti nerary is accompl ished from nature t o metaphysics,
and from metaphysics to cosmology. This is not a real story. As I have
already emphasized, we have practically no biographical testimony that
allows us to tel l the story of how the person of interest experienced this
iti nerary. It is in the text itself (with one exception : "Apri l 1 92 5 " ) that I
have tried to fol low the construction of the problems and the way they
mutate and ricochet by colliding with the q uestions and demands for
which they open the way.
    The narrative form indicates that the person who is reading The Con
cept of Nature or Science and the Modern World is not reading them as a
contemporary of their writing, but with the knowledge of what was going
to happen. This does not, I hope, mean a finalized readi ng, imposing upon
the texts an end that was not theirs, but a reading that tries to deci pher
the paths of an adventure that has the nature of a riddle. At the beginning
of The Concept of Nature, Whitehead emphasized the extent to which it
would be hard for his readers to accept that he would indeed confine his
problems within the narrow limits he had j ust described, whereas it is
precisely beyond these limits that things usually start to get exciting ( CN,
4 8 ) . At the end of Process and Reality, the same author seems to have ex
ploded all the limits that modern good manners impose upon thought.
    Another approach would have been possible: it would have started out
from the questions raised by this world, and would have sought the way
they arise in Whiteheadian terms, as opportunities for " a pplications " of
the conceptual scheme proposed by Whitehead . In pa rticular, it would
have been possible to give more space to contemporary q uestioni ngs, that
is, to " bring Whitehead up to date," and to affirm his relevance today. One
of the reasons that turned me away from this possibility is the ease with
which releva nce can become a model, that is, a source of answers. White
head's proposition does not address itself to knowledge in the sense that it
could be detached from the situations in which it is operative. It does not
constitute a vision of the world or a " new paradigm "-indeed, this is prob
ably the worst confusion that can occur with regard to it. It is addressed
2 4   I N TR O D U C T I O N




to our " modes of thought," in the way a tool addresses our modes of ac
tion, modifying the relation that provides their identity relative to those
who act and to that on which they act, by redistributing what is proposed
as doable or not doable. In other words, it addresses the thinker qua situ
ated, in the way that the thinker defines his or her situation .
   I had the great good l uck to experience the efficacy proper to White
head's thought on the occasion of a twice-annual course, which had the
particula rity of gathering senior students in ph ilosophy and other senior
students who had never done ph ilosophy before. Each time, an experi
ence took place, both collective and individual, that suppressed a l l hier
archy between philosophers and non-phi losophers, but gathered them
together in a sheer discovery that is di fferent for each, because it is relative
each time to their a rea of competence: " one can think like that! " Faced by
the problem of a book to be wri tten, my concern was to red iscover, by
other means, what the i nterventions, questions, and astonishments con
tributed to the oral exercise of the class. Or else, to use an expression dear
to Gilles Deleuze, to provide myself with the constraints capable of forcing
me to " think Whitehead down the middle" in the twofold sense of the
term: without a " begi nning" from which the rest could be deduced, and
face to face with the problems to which it gi ves rise. How could one fash
ion a textual appa ratus that could introduce the unforeseen nature of the
objection that hinders the unfolding of a sovereign intentiona lity ?
   It is said that Whitehead hated to be bored, and elaborated his thought
in the presence of his students. Most of his philosophical writings have
their origin in lectures, which he later worked up. Perhaps the procedure I
have chosen is in response to this peculiar character of theirs: I chose it
first of all as an experi ment, " j ust to see," and then with a surprised inter
est in its effects, which stripped me of an author's position without thereby
constra ining me to disappear, quite the contra ry : " to let Whitehead " (and
a few others) " do the talk ing" in long fragments which, rather than quota
tions, are interventions, and to make my own text the sol iloquy of a per
son who is exploring in her way, always in her way, what the intervention
ma kes happen for her.
   Some of these interventions will be "cries," others elaborations, in which
thought is " put to work " in real time, but sti ll others are genuine operators
of brutal bifurcation. To let Whitehead do the talk ing at some length al
ways means exposing oneself to the risk that he may play the nasty trick of
derailing the orderly train of an explanation toward a seemingly incongru
ous horizon. And that is precisely what students do when a class awakens
their thought, incites their objections, thei r " but thens," their " in that cases."
Perhaps, as well , this is the way Whitehead himself functioned when the
                                                           I N T R O D U CT I O N   2 5




presence of his students provoked the risk of thought " i n real time," re
crea ting at every step the meaning or the necessity of the next step. I do
not know to what extent the solution I have experimented with will suit
those who will read this book. What I can say is that it has made of its
writing an adventurous and demanding itinerary, in which " what I already
knew" has not ceased to produce new consequences and also the most
close-fought work of negotiation with syntax and composition I have ever
known.
   The reader will note that I have, moreover, made the somewha t acro
batic choice of avoid ing a l l footnotes. This is not the easy sol ution, but
instead, once again, a constra int: the text should " hold " as it is, and above
all should not have the appearance of an exhaustive exposition . A note,
in genera l, refers either to a d i rection that the textua l iti nerary could have
ta ken, and which the a uthor decides not to ta ke any further, or to a tech
nica l d iscussion that the a uthor believes would overburden the text. The
former type of note implies that the number of decisions a bout the itiner
ary is l i mited, but here it is not, for at every step other d i rections could
have been taken, since each step is i n fact a decision i n the heart of a
labyrinth. As far as the " technica l " notes are concerned, most of them
would have referred to the network of discussions and controversies that
wea ve the links between process philosophers. But this book was written
in French, that is, for readers who a re foreign to this network, la rgely
unk nown in Fra ncophone lands. I a m aware that transla tion tra nsforms
th is aspect of situation, but it does not transform the conception of the
book itself, which is also the situation of the person who conceived it and
who did not encounter "process philosophy " unti l wel l after her encoun
ter with Whitehead . With the crucial exception of the reading proposed
by Lewis Ford, which I adopt, it is the baton of Whitehead's text that I
have wished to take up, and not of the d iscussions that concern him, for
the question for me was not-above al l-to claim to hold the " right inter
pretation," that is, to d iscuss other possible i nterpretations as well . What
matters to me i s to inhabit the movement that Whitehead proposes for
thought, and, without stopping this movemen t, to experience and put
to the test the way in which it is or is not able to receive questions that
Wh i tehead did not ask beca use they are not those of his time. In other
words, my choice is not to i nterpret but to try to transmit, that is, also, as
every lover of Whitehead knows, to take up again in my way, tying it i n to
my questions, that which has no other truth tha n the set of resumptions to
wh ich it will give rise.
   Another testimony to this choice is the absence in the index of the "great
Whiteheadian concepts ." They intervene " everywhere " ( for insta nce,
2 6   I NTRO D U C T I O N




" event," "object," " nature," or " organism" i n the first pa rt, " to feel,"
"concrescence," " actua lization," " society," "subject " in the second pa rt),
and ta king them up aga i n in the index would ha ve produced something
monstrous. I have, however, privileged certa in tra nsversa l themes that
characterize the way I ha ve inhabited the Whiteheadian movement. Some,
such as interstices and infection, are not even included in the Whiteheadian
i ndices, while others are not properly Whiteheadian. Yet they have im
posed themselves upon me as themes, in the musical sense of the term, and
I thought that the index might help those who might encounter one of
these themes in the manner of "well, here it is again" a nd would wonder
where it has a l ready intervened .
   By another aspect, the index bears witness to the way this book tries
to prolong the Whiteheadian movement outside of the usua l categories
of philosophy: the heading " socia l roles or types " brings together names
of practitioners ( mathematician, physician, chemist, biologist, psycholo
gist, etc. ) and na mes of animals (rabbit, fly, bacteria, etc . ) . I have taken
my inspiration in this rega rd from Bergson who, in the index to his Evo
lution creatrice, j uxtaposed the names of those who, for him, tra nslated
the culmination of two di vergent paths of evol ution: philosophers, on the
one hand, parasites and i nsects on the other. Except that the point here is
not to propose a sca le of bei ngs, distributi ng to each that to which it may
lay claim. What interests me is the adventurization of the experience that
philosophies of the subject have too often " d omesticated " under the cat
egories of the reflexive consciousness.
   It is the task of ethologists, and a l l those who live in attentive contact
with a ni mals, to q uestion, speci fy, and enrich what animals make us feel
and think. It is the job of scientific communities to test the releva nce of
the problematic definitions that make them work . But it belongs to specu
lative thought to fight against the i mpoverishment of experience, pa rticu
larly against its confiscation by the great theoretica l debates that oppose
ma nk ind, " endowed with consciousness," to a l l the others supposedly
deprived of it. Obviously, speculative adventurization does not produce
miracles: I do not cla i m to speak for flesh and blood physicia ns, psy
chologists, a nd sociologists any more tha n I claim to ha ve access to the
experience of a butterfly or a ra bbit. When I refer to practitioners a nd to
animals, then, the goa l is not to penetrate their own experience but to
think on the basis of the " habits" that ena ble us to say "a ra bbit" or "a
sociologist," that is, to evoke a style or experience or adventure that is en
dowed with a certai n sta bility.
   Alongside the Whiteheadian references, I have therefore added a few
others, fa ithful in this regard to the nomadism proper to British philoso-
                                                         I N T R O D U C T I O N   2 7




phy, as it has been cha racterized by Gilles Deleuze and Feli x Gua tta ri :
not to build nor to found, but to inhabit. "A tent is enough for them [ . . . 1
The concept is a habi t acquired by contempla ting the elements from
which one proceeds ( hence the very special Greekness of British phi loso
phy, its empi rica l Neoplatonism ) . We a re all contemplations, and there
fore habits. I is a ha bit. There is concept wherever there is habit, and
ha bits are made and unmade on the level of immanence and rad ica l ex
perience: they are 'conventions'. This is why British philosophy is a free
and savage creation of concepts. Given a proposi tion, to what conven
tion does it refer, what is the ha bit that constitutes its concept? This is the
question of pragma tism " ( Q Ph, 1 0 1 ) .
   " A free and savage creation o f concepts," perhaps: but one can only
" think with Whitehea d " if one is willing to sepa rate the adjecti ve " free "
from the noun " freedom," in the sense of absence of constraints, and the
adjective " savage " from the noun "savagery," in the sense of an appetite for
destruction. Free and savage creation, therefore, but not, especially not, fe
rocious, not defining that with which it deals as a prey to be attacked . The
point is not to declare war on the conventions that bind us, the habits that
enable us to be characterized . Instead, it is merely to place on the same level
that is, in adventure-all of our j udgments, or our "as is well knowns,"
and thus to separate them actively from what gives them the power to ex
clude and to disqualify.

In closing this introd uction, I would l i ke to offer my apology to the read
ers who might be shocked i f they encounter a physician or a poet "in the
ma sculi ne." Insofar as they are figures of thought, I would have l i ked to
place them in the neuter, as I would ha ve liked to place in the neuter that
God who, for Whi tehead, is a " he." But I could not bring myself to asso
ciate them with this kind of a problem, for they would then have desig
nated real persons. I hope these excuses will be accepted, for I feel deeply
indebted for the attention that American thi n kers have ta ught us to de
vote to the way in which word s infl uence thought.
