The Mathematician and the Sunset


This is going to be about nature.
But how can we define nature?
It is what we are aware of in perception (eN, 28).




              H I TE H E A D H A S P ROPOSE D a starting point that seems to be
              quite i nnocent. A bit too genera l or simplistic, one might say,
              although it attri butes a most interesting role to " awareness," a
word that we French-language phi losophers have some reasons to envy
our Anglophone colleagues. All we have availa ble is the word " con
science," which is a trap here because of the reflexive dimension that is
often associated with it. That is why 1 chose, when writi ng i n French, to
use the word " experience" (Ia nature est ce dont nous avons /'experience
dans la perception). My goal was to poi nt out tha t awareness designates
a mode of experience that includes a contrast between a " self" and " that
of which there is experience," but without d uplicating it by reference to
a n " I " or a " me " : a contrast, not an opposition. The question then a rises:
who is this " we," who is aware of nature, and what does i t i nclude? Most
ethologists will say without hesitation that a chimpanzee, a dog, or a rab
bit are " aware." Their perceptual experience, without implyi ng reflexive
consciousness, must give meaning to the possibility of an exploratory
activity, beari ng witness to the fact that that " that which" is perceived may
raise the q uestion of meaning: when a ra bbi t turns i ts head in the di rec
tion from which a noise comes, it is exploring that noise's meaning. Yet
the discussion may begin with the idea that bees a lso "explore." Does it
not conceal a much more radical di fference by means of a handy meta
phor ? Hesitation thus comes into play for bees, ticks, ants, or spiders.
And it d isappears when we have to do with thistles or mignonette.
   Whitehead's sta rting point, which leads us so q uickly i nto ethological
speculations, thus seems high ly indetermi nate, too indeterminate to be
3 2   FROM   T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




able to guarantee a selection of wha t ca n testi fy, in a rel ia ble way, for that
nature whose concept is to be constructed .
    We must bewa re, however, as we conclude, that we will certa i nly have
to go beyond this starti ng point. Whitehea d is a mathematicia n . For a
mathema tician, a sta rting point is not what ena bles one to go beyond. It
is what commits us. It is that to which one must succeed in holding fast.
    To restrict ourselves to what we are aware of i n perception: this is the
archetypal Empiricist decision. Yet we must immed iately forget the cli
ches that often fol low that decision, a nd which Whitehead knows well,
beca use they a re those in which his former colla borator Bertrand Russell
henceforth indulges.
    If Whitehead had wri tten " nature is what we percei ve," a version seem
ingly close to the initial statement, what would ha ve fol lowed wa s a lmost
automatic. What do you perceive ? A grey stone. What does what you
perceive a uthorize ? The a ffirmation that " this stone is grey." In contrast,
the question " what a re you aware of in the perception of this stone you
ca l l grey ? " blocks the pedagogical series of explanations. A contrast in
sinuates itself, between the words immed iately a va i lable for saying "what"
we perceive, a nd the question, open for its part, of what we are aware of
" i n percepti on." An indefinite constellation of components becomes per
cepti ble, which " that stone is grey "-that statement appa rently so simple
and transpa rent-had skipped .
    First of all, however, when would I express such an appa rently simple
statement ? Perhaps I might say it to a pa inter, if I am sca ndalized by the
lack of fa ithfulness of his reproduction of the stone ? Or else, upon receiv
ing them, if I had ordered ochre-colored stones? I n this case, however, the
contrast between what I perceive and wha t I am aware of in this percep
tion becomes intense, for my experience will be dominated by the risk of
cha llenging the pai nter's choice, or by the prospect of entering into an
unpleasant discussion with a distracted or even dishonest mercha nt.
    As a starting point for philosophica l reasoning, what we are aware of
in the perception of the pri nted phrase " this stone is grey," is not, more
over, any simpler. The work of mourning to which rea ders a re going to
be obliged is a l ready announced to them. They will be asked to limit
legitimate sta tements a bout experience to those that designate a " pure"
perceptua l experience. The stone might, moreover, as the case may be,
become a "grey patch," if readers are constra ined to admit that the visua l
data do not let them affirm anything more.
  Thus language habitually sets before the mind a misleading abstract of
the indefinite complexity of the fact of self-awareness (eN, 1 0 8 ) .
  The empi ricist decision to limit oursel ves to what w e a re aware o f i n
perception, could thus b e called resisting what language proposes, trying
                              T H E   M AT H E M AT I C I A N   A N D   T H E   S U N S ET   3 3




to stick to the i ndefinite complexity of this " what." In this case, however,
one must immediately add " succeeding in sticking to i t." Without surrep
titiously moving from the selection of the " what" to a nother selection,
dealing this time with the case we choose. Without privileging the " pure
cases," whose false simplicity designates not nature, but a theory of
knowledge or subjectivity that remains to be founded . Whitehead was a
mathematicia n . If he said " what," his statement commits h i m : the goal
is to understand " everyth i ng " we are awa re of. If he said " perception,"
this means any si tuation in which perception comes i nto play. And if na
ture is ( a l l ) we are aware of in perception, then:
   [ . . . 1 everything perceived is in nature. We may not pick and choose.
For us the red glow of the sunset should be as much part of nature as are
the molecules and electric waves by which men of science would explain
the phenomenon (eN, 2 9 ) .
    " We may not." B u t o f course w e may, a n d i n fact w e do nothi ng else.
Nor is it a question of criticizing those who pick and choose. When men
of science describe the i nteraction between electromagnetic radiation and
the suspended molecules that inhabit the atmosphere, linking the red glow
to atmospheric pol lution, they do not insult the poet. Unless they want to,
unless they want to confer upon the relation they are studying the power
to red uce na ture to the terms of scientific expl anation.
    The " we" to whom this " we may not" is addressed does not exist prior
to the demand posited by Whitehead, the demand that the " concept of
nature " to be constructed must be bereft of the power of divid i ng, and
declari ng that one type of experience is right and another wrong. It is the
" we " of the problem when a mathematician takes charge of it, simulta
neously bringi ng i nto existence the problem and the constra ints that the
solution will have to satisfy. Here, moreover, this "we" affi rms the most
artificial demand: not to take advantage of the power to choose as we
wish, however theoretically well-founded this wish may be.
   Yet the problem must sti l l be wel l formulated, that is, formulated i n
terms that do not surreptitiously confuse the characteri zation of a situa
tion with a ready-made solution that commits the approach before it has
even begun. For i nstance, i f we were to accept as well-founded the scien
tists' affi rmation that electromagnetic radiation provides a n expla nation
for the red glow that poets try to celebrate, the matter would be under
stood from the outset, and the problem of affirming both the red glow
and the molecules together woul d be " missed " : what we are aware of
i n perception would i ndeed have to be called molecules, radiation, and
so on. The poi nt is therefore to state the terms of the problem i n a way
that resists the pretensions of sol ution i ncluded i n the usual modes of
formulation.
34   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   For example, the fire is burning and we see a red coal. This is explained
in science by radiant energy from the coal entering our eyes. But in seeking
for such an explanation we are not asking what are the sort of occurrences
which are fitted to cause a mind to see red. The chain of causation is en
tirely different. The mind is cut out altogether. The real question is, When
red is found in nature, what else is found there also? Namely we are seek
ing for an analysis of the accompaniments in nature of the discovery of
red in nature [ . . . I In other words, science is not discussing the causes of
knowledge, but the coherence of knowledge. The understanding which is
sought by science is an understanding of relations within nature (eN, 4 1 ) .
   Whi tehead does not hesitate to speak of radiation, molecules, and
electrons. The construction of his problem does not need to presuppose
the epistemological discussion of the well-founded ness of our specialized
statements, even if they mobil ize beings that we can not perceive di rectly.
It affirms itself as superbly indifferent to all technical and theoretical me
diations that enable scientists to construct their explanations. In contrast,
what matters to him is the trick to which scienti sts would have recourse
if they clai med to have explai ned " that which" causes perception , that
which explains the fact that we " see red ." These scientists can affirm that
rad iation has caused the excitation of such-and-such reti nal receptors;
they can, if their science has invented the means for such a proced ure, fol
low the repercussions of this excitation in the great population of neurons.
And they will probably succeed in reconstituti ng a continuous series of
relations: if they were to be surprised, it would be by the eventual brutal
interruption of that series, that goes from the perception of the red coal to
everything that can accompany that perception within nature. Yet from
explanation to explanation, from experi mental situation to experi mental
solution, the " mind " remains in brackets, in the sense that the characteriza
tion of the experi mental relation does not include the person for whom it
constitutes an explanation . To clai m to explain the " perceived red " is to
claim that there will suddenly surge forth, like a rabbit pulled out of a
magician's hat, a term that designates not what the scienti sts have suc
ceeded in perceiving but that which a l l thei r achievements presuppose.
   For Whitehead, when scientists claim that their approach should " some
day "-because you can't stop progress-come to " explain" that which,
in fact, it presupposes, one will not speak either of " scientific spirit" or of
" material istic persuasion." There is nothing to accept, nothing to negotiate,
nothing to respect. The rabbit will not come out of the hat. The explanatory
ambition translates and prolongs a problem that has been badly formu
lated, an arbi trary di stri bution, in the midst of what we are aware of,
between what is supposed to perta in to objective nature, independent of
                              T H E   M AT H E M AT I C I A N   A N D   T H E   S U N S E T   3 5




knowledge, and what perta ins to the mind . That this badly formulated
problem should finally wind up as the ultimate mystery, the dizzying ques
tion of the possibility of a " materialist" explanation that would no longer
even limit itself to " that which is perceived," red, but would deal with per
ception or consciousness, is neither surprising nor interesting for White
head . The problem has been badly tackled from the outset, as soon as the
selection has been made, both of what explains and of what m ust be
expla ined.
   Will the mind then appear as the place of irreducible mystery, that which
science will a lways fai l to explain? Does Whitehead demand that the sci
entist bow down before the inexplica ble ? Not in the least. What White
head asks them to admit is not at a l l that their questions will a lways fa i l
in the face of the problem of the m i n d . There is n o defeat, insoluble prob
lem, or mystery. There is the simple fact that the scientists' questions do
not enable them to formulate the problem of the " mind " beca use these
questions and their answers presuppose it.
   The distinction between an insoluble problem and a badly tackled prob
lem might seem insignificant to those who decide to understand, first and
foremost, that Whitehead imposes limits on science, and will immediately
oppose their " material ist" convictions to this shameful " spiritualist." For
Whitehead, however, it is not a question of limits to be respected . It is
rather a question of " behavior," in the sense in which " to behave badly"
would here mea n to insult one's own work, to expect from it something
entirely other than what gives it its own value. It is impossible to describe
the scientists' work, the creation of ever more unexpected and inventive
experimenta l apparatuses, without ta king for "granted " the possi bility of
knowing, that is, a reference to a mind, as presupposed by a l l the questions
to which they seek an answer. Everything to which scientists could refer,
insofar as they are aware of it in perception, including the electromagnetic
radiation witnessed by "that which" their specia lized instruments give them
to perceive, is indeed a part of nature; that is, l ike the concept of nature it
self, it designates the mind qua presupposed and bracketed .
   Whitehead 's approach is thus not that of a j udge, imposing l i mits on
the approach to explanation. It is, once aga i n, that of a mathematician.
An art of problems, and of the creation of their possible solutions. White
head is not afra id of the scientists' materia lism; he is a fra id of badly for
mulated problems. And every problem will be badly formulated which,
dea l ing with the knowledge we ca n have of nature, forgets wha t it pre
supposes, namely, that there is knowledge.
   K n owledge is ultimate. There can be no explanation of the "why " of
k no wledge; we can only describe the "what " of knowledge ( eN, 3 2 ) .
3 6   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   There is nothi ng dizzyi ng, here, a bout what is ulti mate; it simply cor
responds to the question ra ised . It does not forbid any d ream, but desig
nates the path by which d reams can become nightmares, because it de
nies the d reamer, the path by which the construction of explanations can
become the construction of the best way of dissimulating, of making a
paradox or a fasci nating mystery out of what goes without saying. There
is noth ing mysterious, nothing paradoxical a bout what is ultimate. Its
designation corresponds to the d ifference between the problem of what
Whitehead calls " metaphysics," which must imply both what is percei ved
and what perceives, and that of a philosophy of nature or of science.
When it comes to science, a l l metaphysica l questions must be excl uded .
  The recourse to metaphysics is like throwing a match into the powder
magazine. It blows up the whole arena ( eN, 2 9 ) .
  Yet t o limit oneself t o na ture itself, as Whitehead dema nds o f scientists
but as he a lso demands with rega rd to the construction of his "concept of
nature," does not at a l l mean to ta ke the first step towa rd reducing na
ture to the question of knowledge, as it would, for i nsta nce, in a phi
losophy of the cri tica l type. It is the mind that is bracketed, not the mind,
always identica l to itself, that brackets nature, qua a function of its own
operations.
   No perplexity concerning the ob;ect of knowledge can be solved by
saying that there is a mind knowing it ( eN, 2 8 ) [ . . . I In making this
demand I conceive myself as adopting our immediate instinctive attitude
towards perceptual knowledge which is only abandoned under the influ
ence of theory. We are instinctively willing to believe that by due atten
tion, more can be found in nature than that which is observed at first
sight. But we will not be content with less (eN, 2 9 ) .
    The true problem that confronts the concept o f nature, the cha l lenge
that constrains us to invention, is thus not the " bad behavior" attested by
certai n explana tory pretensions. The point is to succeed in ma intaining
oneself at the level of what we are insti nctively willing to believe, to resist
the theories that do violence to what we ca nnot help but believe. Nature
is by no means nature insofar as we know it, in the sense of any kind of a
theory of knowledge; it is the nature we dea l with, with which we esta b
l ish many relations, and it is therefore also all that is presupposed, as fa r
as "it" is concerned, by these multiple relations.
    Later on, in Science and the Modern World, Whitehead was to speak
of " i nstinctive fa ith," and, in Process and Reality, he would use the ex
pression " a nimal fa ith" of the philosopher Santayana, his contemporary
(diverti ng it from its origi nal meaning ) . Yet the reference will always be
to the sa me movement, the same demand: to recognize that our " i mmedi-
                               T H E   M A T H E M AT I C I A N   A N D   T H E   S U N S E T   3 7




ate instinctive a ttitude" irresisti bly exceeds the limits assigned by such
and-such a critical theory, and to adopt what this attitude presupposes as
a constraint to be satisfied .
   When empiricist philosophy undertakes to fixate its reader on the state
ment " this stone is grey," it does violence to this i nstinctive attitude. If this
stone really does attract our attention, for one reason or another, we know
that we can go look at it more closely, pick it up, weigh it, feel its rough
ness, try to break it into p ieces. In sum, we can multiply " what" we are
aware of in perception . And a ttribute all of it to nature, instinctively.
   In contrast, when scientists express their trust in the experimenta l ap
proach and proclaim its lack of limits, they prolong our " i nstinctive atti
tude " according to which, if we pay what is " d ue," that is, the appropriate
attention to it, we will find more in nature than what we observe at first
glance. And it is not empiricist prohibitions that will force them to give
up introducing unobservable entities, if the latter enable them to a rticu
late their q uestions and hypotheses, nor, in case of success, will they pre
vent them from affirming that these entities do indeed belong to nature
rather than to the knowing mind .
   It is only when scientists u nderta ke to j udge, in the name o f these un
observable entities, what we a re awa re of in perception, when they try
to convince us that electromagnetic rad iation constitutes the only kind
of entity that belongs to nature, that they contradict our i nstincti ve at
titude: they have found " more" in nature, but they propose to red uce it
to " less."
   What men say with words has no importance as long as their activities
are controlled by well-established instincts. Words can ultimately destroy
instincts. But until that happens, words do not matter (SMW, 4 ) .
   The concept of nature that Whitehead undertakes t o construct thus
does not have the vocation of ta king its place in a process of purification,
whether existential or epistemologica l . As long a s a human activity exhib
its its trust i n the possibi lity of finding " more " i n nature than what is ob
served in it at first glance, what it finds wi l l be pa rt of the constra ints that
the concept of nature must satisfy, not of what is to be judged in the name
of any kind of norm . In contrast, the words that will be mobilized by the
concept of nature have the vocation of resisting the power of words that
either contrad ict this trust, convicting it before the tribunal of criticism,
or promoting an a symmetrical version of it, a trust in this agai nst that.
   The vocation Whitehead assigns to his concept of nature is situated his
tor ically. It is primordially associated with " modern thought," haunted as
it is by the distinction between " primary " qual ities, those that one thinks
legitimate to attribute to nature, and " secondary " qualities, those that a re
3 8   F R O M   T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




referred to the mind (tastes and colors, about which one is not supposed to
argue, precisely because they are the subjects of endless discussions) .
   To the positive definition o f the problem-the construction o f a con
cept of nature such that everything we a re aware of in perception belongs
to it-there thus corresponds a negative definition, the determined rejec
tion of any theory that makes " nature bifurcate." And nature " bifurcates"
as soon as, in one way or another, the mind is called to the rescue, qua
responsible for " psychic a d d i tions," to exp l a i n the d ifference between
what we are aware of and what is supposed to belong to nature.
   The theory of psychic additions would treat the greenness [of grass] as
a psychic addition furnished by the perceiving mind, and would leave to
nature merely the molecules and the radiant energy which influence the
mind towards that perception [ . . . I
    What I am essentially protesting against is the bifurcation of nature
into two systems of reality, which, in so far as they are real, are real in
different senses [ . . I Thus there would be two natures, one is the con
                           .



jecture and the other is the dream. Another way of phrasing this theory
[ . . . I is to bifurcate nature into two divisions, namely into the nature
apprehended in awareness and the nature which is the cause of aware
ness. The nature which is the fact apprehended in awareness holds within
it the greenness of the trees, the song of the birds, the warmth of the sun,
the hardness of the chairs, and the feel of the velvet. The nature which is
the cause of awareness is the conjectured system of molecules and elec
trons which so affects the mind as to produce the awareness of apparent
nature ( eN, 29-3 1 ) .
   To resist a l l those theories which, i n one w a y or another, make nature
bifurcate: such is the cha llenge Whitehead imposed upon himself when
he provided himself with his initial definition, " nature is what we are aware
of in perception." The value of this definition by no means depends on
its neutrality or its plausibil ity, its precision, or its consensual character.
It depends on the commitment to which it constrains whomever accepts
it, a nd on the definition of what will then constitute failure or achieve
ment for that person. Every statement that makes nature bifurcate will be
a defeat.
    In other words, Whitehead does not in the slightest propose to " prove "
that we should abandon the great modern divide between primary quali
ties, attributed to the entities that constitute nature, and secondary qualities,
relative to our perception. He does not even bother to name those who
prolong and repeat this d ivision even today: he knows that is it you and
I, the philosopher or the scientist, all those who have accepted th is d ivi
sion as importa nt or as an unquestioned matter of fact. He defines this
division as the absurd ity that his concept will have to escape.
                             T H E   M AT H E M A T I C I A N   A N D   T H E   S U N S E T   3 9




   The a bsurdity here does not resemble the one util ized by a mathemati
cal demonstration. Mathematical absurdity is defined by the fact that at
the end of a process of reasoning, one is obl iged to conclude that 1 3, or              =



else that a number is both odd and even. These are obvious contradictions,
to wh ich no hesitation or possibility of negotiation corresponds: the rea
soning must be abandoned . Except, of course, when the feeling of the
absurd ity of mathematics invades a student to such a point that he or she
is ready to accept anyth ing . . . Wh itehead, as a philosopher, k nows that
the power of mathematics, exh ibited by the possibil ity of end ing up i n a
contradiction, and of organizing a demonstration around this fixed point,
has l ittle to do with philosophy. Philosoph ical a bsurdity is not consensual:
it commits philosophers but does not enable them to constrai n a l l beings
who respect logic to adhere to their commitment. This is why Whitehead
does not base his refusa l on an argument intended to be authoritative for
all . He will not undertake to criticize the theories that make nature bifur
ca te , nor wi l l he demonstrate that the trad itional opposition between
primary and secondary qual ities leads to a contrad iction that would be
recognized by a ny being of good sense. He knows that it is precisely the
slope of good sense that he must climb, that he is faced by what contem
porary good sense suggests that we accept without blinking, and even to
celebrate it as a decisive progress of thought. He wil l limit himself, with
out add ing anything, to exhibiting the consequences of bifurcation, what
it imposes upon us to a ffirm.
  Thus, nature sees itself credited with that which, in fact, should be re
served for ourselves: the rose for its smell, the nightingale for its song,
and the sun for its brilliance. The poets are entirely wrong. They should
address their songs to themselves, and should turn them into odes of self
congratulation for the splendor of the human mind. Nature is a stupid
business, bereft of sounds, odors and colors; it is only matter in a hurry,
without end and without meaning ( SMW, 54 ) .
    If this consequence, that the poets must be said to be m istaken when
they celebra te the smell of the rose, does not ma ke the absurdity of the
theory that imposes it perceptible, then, for Whitehead, noth ing will do
so. And if, today, some scientists and some philosophers identify without
the least hesitation any questioning of this " stupid nature " with a worri
some manifestation of irrationality, a return of ancient beliefs, a denial of
the universal value of physical laws, a nd so on, no argument will make
them change their minds. Later, in Science and the Modern World, Wh ite
head was to ask the question of the history we inherit, which has turned
the absurdity in question into a k ind of consensua l self-evidence, the rejec
ti on of which enta ils the greatest risks. For the moment, as in every dem
onstration by the a bsurd, the rejection of the theories of the bifurcation
4 0     F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H YS I C S




of nature is a principle of construction. The problem is not to polemicize
but to accept the risk, to try the adventure, to explore what the rejection
of a bifurcation of nature obliges us to think.
      A ll we know of nature is in the same boat, to sink or swim together
( CN, 1 4 8 ) .
    The fact that the statement o f the problem raised b y Whitehead can be
understood as a veritable cry attests to the convergence, in this cry, of all
the registers usually distinguished by argumentation. It is not a matter of
negotiating in a finer way what will be " saved," attributed to nature. Every
thing is going to have to be saved together, at the same time, and by the
same means. What engages Whitehead may be stated just as well in terms
of intel lectual obl igation, as in terms of one that is aesthetic or ethica l.
Every line of division, whatever its plausi bility, will refer to misbehavior:
it will translate the transformation of a defeat, for which the phi losopher
bears responsibi lity, into a disqualification of what has resisted the invita
tion to take its place in the boat this philosopher formulated.
    Correlatively, the concept Whitehead i s going to try to construct will
be neither true nor false. For truth and falsity, when they are attributable to
a statement-no, that's not Oliver's car-imply a hesitation that refers to
the demands of a particular mode of knowledge-I was sure I recognized
it. But the poi nt here is to construct a concept that satisfies the most arti
ficial demand, that is, the one that requires the highest power of invention:
not to privi lege any particular mode of knowledge. This is why, in White
head's vocabulary, the terms "general " and "general ity " will never have
the meaning given to them by logic. They will never provide the power to
forget pa rticularities, but, on the contrary, will point to the ambition to
affirm all of them together.
  Sense-awareness is an awareness of something. What then is the general
character of that something of which we are aware? (CN, 2 8-2 9 ) .
   All m e n are morta l . Socrates is a ma n . Therefore . . . T h i s " therefore "
means: whether you like it or not, Socrates, I have here the power to tal k
about you, even i f I have never met you, even i f I know nothing a bout
you except th is general property: " you a re part of the set of human be
ings." The power of defining sets, of choosing them in a way that ena bles
one to decide what wi l l be i ncluded or excluded, is the best-shared thing
in the world. Whitehead does not denounce this power, a ny more than he
denounces specialized languages. Phi losophy, for him, is not denunciation.
Yet it can indeed be said to be resistance, internal resistance to the properly
philosophical temptation to found this de facto power in iure.
   Neither true nor false, Whitehead ian genera li ties expose their a uthor
to a wholly di fferent risk: thei r success or their fa i lure wi l l always depend
                            T H E   M AT H E M AT I C I A N   A N D   T H E   S U N S E T   4 1




on whether or not they succeed in not giving any power to the person
who constructs them, in not founding any j udgment that will enable him
or her to transcend the multiplicity of experiences, or to tame this multi
plicity by defining the norms to which all experience must respond.
   The Concept of Nature, however, does not yet deal with experience in
general, but with what we a re aware of in perception. This choice of the
question indicates that Whitehead takes his place within the Engl ish Em
piricist trad ition, and this is indeed the challenge he will try to take up,
that haunts this tradition since Berkeley, Locke, and Hume: the cha l lenge
of an articulation to be made explicit between perceptions and that para
digmatic knowledge called mathematical physics, which has been focused
since Newton on the questions of space and time.
   When Wh itehead comes to ask other questions, when he becomes in
terested no longer in what scientists perceive but in what they seek, when
he no longer recognizes " Cleopatra 's need le," standing i n the center of
London, every time he sees i t, but asks himself how to understand the
story that insists through it, that of ancient Egypt or that of the rapine of
colonial England, he will have moved from the question of " what" we
are aware of in perception to the " how" of this awareness. From the explo
ration of what we a re commi tted to by the refusal to make nature bifur
cate between percepts, on the one hand, and a reality that is essentially
spatio-temporal a nd functional on the other, to the exploration of what
is req uired by the way we relate to experience. He wil l not mod i fy the
concept of nature then, but will abandon it, for it is no longer adapted to
the problem, since the problem must henceforth include what the concept
of nature designates as ulti mate: knowledge.
                                                                C H A P T E R TWO
