E vents and Passage




           E KNOW LI TTLE A BOUT Whitehead 's life i n the sense that ex
               cites the curiosity of historians of philosophy: what did he read,
               and when ? What is more, Whitehead by no means respects the
academic rule according to which one cites the authors by whom one is
i nspired . There a re not many footnotes i n The Concept of Nature, nor
any precise d iscussion of the way he introduces concepts that come from
elsewhere without warning. We can, however, already hear genuine " cries "
i n it, in which what can be negotiated only gradually, in the close struggle
with what is demanded by a concept once it is posited, and what may
force the concept to be reworked or even abandoned, is concentrated and
explodes a l l at once. Cries that have not been smothered by the construc
tion of concepts, and that a re remembered by those who have heard
them, whether students or visitors.
    Thus, on December 1 5, 1 939, when he was quietly discussing the Bible
with Lucien Price, Whi tehead
    [ . . . I suddenly [ . . . I stood and spoke, with passionate intensity,
" Here we are, with our finite beings and physical senses in the presence
of a universe whose possibilities are infinite, and even though we may not
apprehend them, those infinite possibilities are actualities " ( DANW, 1 1 1 ) .
    How can one address experience in the sense in wh ich it resonates in
this exclamation, that is, before it is invaded by the words that judge a nd
d istribute what belongs to the subject and what belongs to the object ?
How can one bring to l i fe the difference between ( a l l ) we a re awa re of
i n perception and the object eventually perceived, associated with the
ready-made words that designate it? Whitehead shares the question of
                                                 E V E N TS   A N D   PASSAG E   4 3




the " return to experience itself " with a multitude of other modern philos
ophers. And it is obviously possible to attempt pa ra l lels, and even com
parisons, with some of them, and in particular with the phenomenologi
cal approach of his contemporary Husser\. Yet there is a risk of losing the
movement and neglecting what philosophers seek to bring to life, thanks
to their concepts, and especially what they are trying not to lose, what they
are afraid to lose, that which, as the case may be, they cry out. Whitehead
wi l l not ask, wi l l never ask of experience that it admit its finitude. Any
resemblance between one Whitehead ia n statement a nd a nother coming
from elsewhere wi l l be declared null a nd void if the latter orients thought,
in one way or another, toward a mode of judgment that turns the infinite
possi bil ities that haunt our experience into a temptation that must be
resisted .
   If thought must ca rry out a j udgment, it is not about experience but
about itsel f, about the power it can assume of j udging that experience in
terms of what it captures of it i n a way proper to explanation. But nei
ther does j udgment mean contrition, or the sel f-critique of a thought that
betrays the experience from which it proceeds. Whitehead will not, will
never ask thought to condemn itsel f. Any resemblance between one White
headian statement a nd another coming from elsewhere will be null a nd
void if it orients thought, in one way or a nother, toward a nostalgic relation
with what escapes it, with that to which, through origi nal sin or wander
ing, it has lost access. Wh i tehead 's philosophy has nothing to do with a
culture of dereliction. It simply brings into existence the importance of not
confusing the " what" of thought, or its terminus, a nd " what we a re aware
of in perception ."
   To sum up: the termini for thought are entities, primarily with bare
individuality, secondarily with properties and relations ascribed to them
in the procedure of thought; the termini for sense-awareness are factors in
the fact of nature, primarily relata and only secondarily discriminated as
distinct individualities.
   [ . . 1 The transition from the "red " of awareness to the "red " of
    .



thought is accompanied by a definite loss of content, namely by the tran
sition from the factor "red " to the entity "red. " This loss in the transition
to thought is compensated by the fact that thought is communicable
whereas sense-awareness is incommunicable (eN, 1 2-1 3 ) .
  Wh itehead's ambition i s not to oppose but to d istinguish, i n a way that
confirms what we know i nstinctively. The goa l is not to define a nature
that is " k nowable " in the philosophers' sense, that is, where the point
would be to define nature and the legiti mate mode of knowledge, in one
Way or another, but always correlatively. Instead, the goa l is to confirm
4 4   F R O M T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




that it is indeed nature that is at sta ke in knowledge, the multiple modes
of knowledge, whereas as soon as we state " what" we perceive, a transi
tion occurs for which " na ture" cannot account. In other words, the point
will be to approach " what we a re aware of" simulta neously a s what
awareness "offers " to the transition, as that a bout which the transition
takes place, and as that which must be characterized in such a way that
" what" we perceive does indeed designate nature rather than the perceiv
ing mind. In sti l l other words, whatever relations may be between " words"
and " things," no theory can make Whitehead change his mind : we are not
the pri soners of a closed circuit between perception and denomination . As
soon as we pay " d ue attention " to it, we are gra ppling with " nature."
   To construct the concept that a nswers this ambition obviously req u i res
words, or, more precisely, names. From the names Whitehead will a ssoci
ate with " what we a re aware of," one will not expect anything other than
a dyna mics of evocation, creating an experience of contrast, consti tuting
the contrast as an experience for thought. This was already the case when
Whitehead " na med " the transition from factor to entity: denomination
functions not as the starti ng point for a process of reasoning but rather
as a point of accumulation around which other na mes w i l l come to be
added . Like a proper na me uttered when we meet a person who is dear to
us, the function of the Whitehead ian name is to celebrate, and in this case
to celebra te a factor that belongs to what we a re aware of, in a way that
prevents us from confusing it with an object of thought.
   " Event " is the fi rst of the names Whitehead a ssociates with what we
are aware of in perception.
   What we discern is the specific character of a place through a period of
time. This is what I mean by an "event." We discern some specific character
of an event. But in discerning an event we are also aware of its signifi
cance as a relatum in the structure of events ( eN, 52 ) .
   The verb " to discern " is interesting, because it is indeterminate. It can
be used in an active sense, which refers it to the discerning subject. Yet
Whitehead thwa rts this usage. The factor discerned is a part of what I am
aware of in perception. Activity begins when, for one reason or another, I
become interested in what is then selected as " what" I have perceived . In
addition, what I am aware of is not defined by the character " that is d is
cerned ." We discern a character qua factor of something, which Whitehead
names event. What is more, this event itself does not present itself in an
isolated mode. What I have auditory experience of testifies to the fact that
other events, although they are not discerned , include the event of which
the sound is a factor, while this event itself incl udes others. The name
"event" celebrates the " fact" that what we discern always has a beyond .
                                                  EVENTS   A N D   PAS S A G E   4 5




   It is very important, even a t this early stage, not to block the move
ment that Whitehead invites us to experience by questions that are overly
hurried . Above all, not to demand a more precise definition of the event.
What Whitehead meant is what he said, however d isappointing his an
swer may seem to be: the event is that of wh ich we discern a specific char
acter, whereas, "as we know instinctively," this event is linked to other
events . The cry of a bird . The refrigerator motor starting up. A laughing
exchange between two passersby beneath my window. All this took place
while I wrote these l ines: specific cha racters, tend ing to be auditory since
my visual attention was fixed upon my screen, but which cannot be re
duced to a sound. I did not d iscern a sound but a specific character, sono
rous, of events whose meaning I am " well aware " is not exhausted by this
cha racter. I know that if I go to my window, I will see the laughing people
continue their conversation or go away, and I know that if I had been at
my window two moments earl ier, I would have witnessed their meeting.
I have awareness of all that in the perception of their laughter, wh ich is
why, moreover, I do not j ump as I would if I heard a desperate screeching
of brakes: some day one of these idiots is going to kill a child instead of
a cat.
   Whitehead thus affi rms that a d iscerned event is connected to other
events within a structure. Yet structure, here, must also function as a name,
celebrating, of course, as one might guess, what will be required by the
definitions of space and time, but not being confused with them . In con
trast, the term "extension " will be a primary term for characterizing the
event qua connected. A discerned event a lways has an extension because
it includes or comprises others, and it testifies to the extension of other
events that include or comprise it. This is part of its meaning, as we a re
awa re of it in perception.
  A discerned event is known as related in this structure to other events
whose specific characters are otherwise not disclosed in that immedi
ate awareness except so far as that they are relata within the structure
(CN, 5 2 ) .
  This complete general fact is the discernible and it comprises the dis
cerned. The discernible is all nature as disclosed in that sense-awareness,
and extends beyond and comprises all of nature as actually discriminated
or discerned in that sense-awareness (CN, 5 0 ) .
   O n e c a n speak of the noise of the city, b u t where does the city end ?
Whitehead was a mathematician. If what is discerned has no power to
define what is discernible, to assign l i mits to it, there a re no li mits. That
which, in the mode of the d iscerni ble, is disclosed or is signified in a sen
sible experience is then " a l l of nature."
4 6   F R O M T H E   P H I L O S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H YS I C S




   The need to translate the verb disclose into French raised a problem for
me that was all the more acute because the word is important for White
head. Was he not to write later, much later, that " The a i m of philosophy
is sheer d isclosure " ( MT, 4 9 ) ? The most usual French translations for " is
disclosed " are "est devoile" or "est revele," or "est rendu manifeste," which
might give the impression that the philosopher's goal is to experience
someth i ng hidden, latent, and implicit, which woul d be more " true," in
one way or another, than our usual perceptions . French translations of
Whitehead have yielded to this temptation all the more easily in that the
influence of Heidegger and of phenomenology are strong in France. I had
to counteract this influence, that is, affi rm the fact that Whitehead belongs
to the Empiricist tradition, in which the goal is never to go " beyond "
usual experience but rather to transform it, to make what usually " goes
without saying " matter. Consulting Harrap's dictionary, I found " declarer "
among all the possible translations of " disclose," and I adopted it, because
it can be placed in communication with a situation that has nothing phe
nomenological a bout it: when a customs officer asks a traveler, " Have
you anyth ing to decla re ? "
   The officer would be surprised if, i n response to his question, the traveler
bega n to spout an i nterm inable l ist of everything he might be l ia ble to
decla re . . . To declare, here, refers to a special ized situation, stable enough
for a ny deviation to be surprising. Of course, the custom officer's surprise
would not bear upon the discovery that a traveler is indeed capable of
declari ng something other than the merchandise he or she is transport
i ng, but only on the fact that in these ci rcumsta nces, th is traveler should
undertake to demonstrate such a capacity. The customs officer discerns
that's his job-the traveler qua potential bearer of merchandise lia ble to
be taxed , but he a lso knows, when he asks his q uestion, that the declara
tion he anticipates does not define the traveler. What he is charged with
discerni ng could, moreover-and will be, when the fraudulent and re
lieved traveler returns to his family or his accomplices-be declared in a
very di fferent modal ity: " Whew ! "
   The event that constitutes the traveler's arrival, d iscerned in the experi
ence of the customs-officer-who-sees-a-traveler-arriving-who-might-have
something-to-declare, is thus known by the customs officer qua connected
to other events which, for their part, a re only declared/disclosed in the
mode of the discernible. He does not know these other events, but he knows
that, if he gave himself the means to pay due attention to them, he could
discern many other things. The customs officer's experience can no more
be reduced to the purity of what such an officer has as his mandate to
discern than the event " traveler's arriva l " can be reduced to the purity of
                                                  E V E NTS   A N D   PA S S A G E   4 7




the specific character that discerns it. In other words, the experience of the
meaning of the event qua connected to other events which are " signified "
is not a " psychic addition " to the event. It is the event that, in the customs
officer's experience, declares itself to be linked to other events: it is the
traveler's answer " no, nothing " that declares itself as passing over in si
lence an indefinite number of possible decla rations.
   What such and such a traveler might say, how the event is l i nked to
others, is an entirely different problem. Thus, a t its simplest, the event of
the " traveler's arriva l " may engage other modes of discernment, in the
specia lized sense of the term, and in particular that of the policema n who
might appear beside the customs officer and d rag the traveler, suddenly
tra nsformed into a suspect, away to a n office where he will have to
answer a few q uestions. In this case, perhaps, the traveler's face, which the
customs officer had not inspected, was the specific characteristic of the
event, unless it was his " facies," the fact he did not look Ca ucasian
enough, or his bearing.
   Of course, the event of the " traveler's a rriva l " lends itself rather poorly
to the type of specialized knowledge that the physicist sets in motion in
the quite different context of a laboratory. The physicist's goal is to ex
plain the meaning of an event-this ura nium salt has left an impression
on a photographic plate-and in this case the q uestion of the structure to
which this event must belong will be explicitly raised . If a policeman is
lying in wait behind the customs officer, it is not in order to explain, but
to spot. This difference is not, however, the starti ng point of a hierarchy.
In general, " structure " in Whitehead 's sense neither promises nor guaran
tees any explanation, although it is exhibited by any explanation that suc
ceeds in the experimenta l sense, that is, by any experimental staging that
succeeds in making the event a relia ble witness with regard to relations
more general than i tself.
   In other words, what Whitehead names has nothing to do with truth,
whether it is objective, vei led, or transcendent, a truth toward which one
would have to turn, in one way or another. We a re not invited to j udge
the customs officer or the policeman in the name of the truth of the trav
eler. Nor, above all, are we urged to return to the condition of all possible
knowledge, the traditiona l approach of philosophers when they under
take to separate the problem of knowledge as such, " the problem," from the
teeming multiplicity of ways of knowing. To speak of meaning does not
authorize us to define anything, does not found any j udgment, does not call
for a ny purification. It will never be a matter of access to the intel ligible
beyond confusion. O r else, such access will have to be understood in
its irredeemably selective and partia l dimension: on the basis of what is
4 8   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




"offered," this rather than that, by taking advantage of the possi bi l i ty,
never warra nted by any principle, of abstracting from this. To speak of
meaning, however, commits us. Insofa r as the meaning of an event, qua
linked to other events, is a factor belonging to what we a re aware of in
perception, the q uestion of meaning engages the way in which the q ues
tion of knowledge will be raised, that is, of the meanings that each type
of knowledge will select, privilege, and render explicit.
   There is obviously nothing neutral about Whitehead's strategy, but this
is to be expected, since the concept he is trying to construct is not neutral
but has as its vocation to resist the bifurcation of nature. This is what is
indicated by the importance of the term " to exhibit," which is and remains
crucial in Whitehead 's thought. This term must be understood in the sense
of mathematics: according to the language used in the course of the adven
ture of mathematics, the circle has exhibited in di fferent ways what makes
it a circle, and has thus been an ingredient of distinct adventures. A philos
opher's description is not neutral, any more than that of a circle is for a
mathematician. It starts out, of course, from what is concrete, and for White
head concrete experience will always be its touchstone, what puts it to the
test, that whose test it must accept. Yet philosophers are responsible for
the way they describe or define what a concrete fact "exhibits," that is, also
which obl igations it entails. In the present case, the adventure Whitehead is
attempting in The Concept of Nature commits him to ask the concrete fact
to exhibit the way it allows the proscribed maneuver, the recourse to psy
chic addition, to be avoided . If the " mind " is to be responsible for some
thing, it is in terms of selection and simplification, not of addition, that this
responsibility must be defined, and if "what we know instinctively" is to
be confirmed, selection and simplification-in short, abstraction-must
not define "knowledge," but always such-and-such a way of knowing,
which may be modified if we choose to try to explore how to pay d ue at
tention to what we are dealing with.
   In somewhat more technica l terms, this commitment i mpl ies that what
Whitehead asks sense awareness to exhibit m ust be stated in terms of
" requisites." The concept of nature will have to be such that what we
instinctively know is j ustified, as well as what is presupposed by the ex
planations attempted, at their own risks and perils, by our special ized
branches of knowledge. It must therefore satisfy what knowledge re
quires: that by d ue attention more can be found, that is, learned .
   It is important to distinguish " requisites " and "cond itions." To this
disti nction corresponds the question of the plural nature of the special
ized branches of knowledge that we can produce with regard to nature,
and the lack of a guarantee with rega rd to their respective achievement,
                                                EVE NTS   A N D   PASS A G E   4 9




as is, moreover, indicated by Whitehea d 's formulation " due attention."
The kind of attention we must pay is a q uestion, as scientists a re wel l
aware, tha t gives its interest to the adventure of science.
   In fact, when philosophers spea k of " conditions," the point is emphati
cally not to relate knowledge and a dventure, but instead to define the
cond itions that must be answered by a description that is purified of a l l
interpretative overload . The conditions a re thus the vehicle of the ambi
tion to move from fact to j ustification, from a description that is more or
less arbitrary to a description exhibiting guarantees of its rel iable charac
ter. And the satisfaction of this ambition wil l enable the selection of the
kind of knowledge that best satisfies the conditions that have been made
expl icit. The conditions thus enable us to sort branches of knowledge, to
determine which of them are illusory, which of them a re " subjective,"
and which a re worthy of defin ing an " object."
   Correlati vely, conditions are supposed to answer a fundamentally anon
ymous problem, which anyone cou l d ra i se, the answer to which will
therefore be valid in principle for anyone. This is where the crucial d is
tinction between conditions and req uisites l ies: req uisites, for their part,
are immanent to the problem raised; they are " what this problem needs
for a solution to be given to it." In this case, the point will be to name
what is req uired from nature i f " a l l that we are aware of in perception "
is to be able to be " placed in the same boat," instead of being judged and
sorted i n the name of "additions" for which the perceivi ng mind a lone is
held responsible.
   We have already encountered this kind of distinction with regard to
" mind." If mind is what is ultimate a s soon as the problem of the concept
of nature is raised, it is, for Whitehead, the ultimate that corresponds to
this problem, and not the ultimate that dominates this problem, with re
gard to which this problem would be a simple path. Both the requisites
and the position of the ulti mate thus engage the responsibility of the
person who formulates the problem .
   In addition, the disti nction between condition and requisite is obvi
ously parallel to the d istinction between " knowa ble" nature and the na
ture which we instinctively think is " worth knowing," but of which we do
not by a ny means demand that it declare how it m ust be known, or that it
be subject to any principle that would gua rantee the wel l-foundedness of
a particular bra nch of knowledge. What is req uired by our instinctive
kn o wledge, far from leading to a foundation of knowledge, a s condi
tio ns would do, instea d refers each mode of knowledge to its opera
tio ns, its choices, its a mbitions and priorities. Without a beyond. At its
o wn risk.
5 0   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   Of course, the distinction between condition and requisite is relevant
only insofar as there a re candidates for the function of " cond ition," that
is, a privileged mode of knowledge, j udged to be capable of transcending
all the others and raising the q uestion of its conditions. Here, we must
a bandon the customs officer, the pol iceman, and the noises in my street
to confront the physico-mathematical characterization of space and time
that appears as such a candidate since Newton and, in Whitehead's time,
with Einstein. If a theory of space-time, whichever it may be, Newton's
or Einstein's, were to be recogn ized as rendering explicit the conditions
of sense-awareness, these conditions would " found " this theory, which,
reciproca lly, could boast of transmitting, in a finally purified way, what
every experience has to decla re.
   The classification into discerned and discerni ble events is not enough
to confront this question, for, as we have seen, it designates an event as
linked to " a l l of nature." Other cha racteristic features of what we a re
aware of a re necessary, which enable us to name other factors in the fact
of nature. First of all, the point will be to exhibit what is declared by
these events that happen " a t the same time," that is, "now."
   These are the events which share the immediacy of the immediately pres 
ent discerned events. These are the events whose characters together with
those of the discerned events comprise all nature present for discernment.
They form the complete general fact which is all nature now present as
disclosed in that sense-awareness. It is in this second classification of events
that the differentiation of space from time takes its origin. The germ of
space is to be found in the mutual relations of events within the immediate
general fact which is all nature now discernible, namely within the one
event which is the totality of present nature. The relations of other events
to this totality of nature form the texture of time. The unity of this general
present fact is expressed by the concept of simultaneity ( eN, 52-5 3 ) .
  The differentiation o f space a n d time. The germ o f space. The texture
of time. Si multaneity. The key terms are here, which do indeed seem to
promise a theory of space-time. Yet the point, quite the contra ry, will be
to exhibit the labor of ela boration necessary for such a theory, that is, the
contrast between what this theory puts on stage and the " complete gen
eral fact," "nature that is now d iscernible," which is required if our knowl
edge is not to be illusory. In particular, the point will be the contrast be
tween the unity of " now present " and the tempora l identification
supposed by " in the same instant."
   It is important to distinguish simultaneity from instantaneousness. I
lay no stress on the mere current usage of the two terms. There are two
concepts which I want to distinguish. and one I call simultaneity and the
other instantaneousness ( CN, 5 6 ) .
                                                  E V E N TS   A N D   PAS S A G E   5 1




   The notion of an instant communicates with that of continuous time,
that can be decomposed into an infinite succession of instants. Mathemati
cal physics gave this time the status of a condition for its definitions. From
Galileo and Newton, the point was to describe the state of a system in a
given instant. Since Einstein, the situation has become compl icated because
the point henceforth has been to avoid characterizing two distant events as
occurring " i n the same instant," independently of the person characterizing
them. There is nothing to criticize about all that, unless this mode of defini
tion is presented as a simple explication, the production of a purified defini
tion, of the " now " proclaimed by experience. For the knowledge elaborated
by mathematical physics would then have the privileged status of being
directly a uthorized by experience, even if it means that this knowledge
then turns against the experience that authorizes it and declares it to be
relative.
   There is no such thing as nature at an instant posited by sense-awareness.
What sense-awareness delivers over for knowledge is nature through a pe
riod. Accordingly nature at an instant, since it is not itself a natural entity,
must be defined in terms of genuine natural entities (CN, 5 7 ) .
   What experience declares, what must belong t o nature, is not what con
ditions the definitions of the physico-mathematical sciences. A new name
is required, evoki ng the contrast between the instant, which conditions an
exact definition of simultaneity, and what we a re aware of in the percep
tion of the nature that is " now" discernible. This name is " duration."
  A duration is a concrete slab of nature limited by simultaneity which is
an essential factor disclosed in sense-awareness ( CN, 5 3 ) .
   We can therefore return to the customs officer. A traveler a pproaches, his
gaze crosses that of the customs officer, a negative, scarcely perceptible nod
of the head, the traveler goes away. If nothing i nterrupts the routine, i f no
educated or wild guess has made the customs officer decide to do what he
knows he can do, direct upon the traveler the attention that will turn him
into something more than an anonymous baggage-carrier, this customs of
ficer may have experienced this interaction as similar to a thousand others,
the opposite of an event. And it is precisely because nothing has disturbed
his routine, because nothing has distracted his attention toward other ad
ventures, that the traveler's passing before his eyes can be sa id to be l imited
by simultaneity. If he is later asked to describe this passage in detail, the
customs officer could probably break it down, but only by appealing to his
knowledge of the fact that the traveler must have approached, slowed
down or stopped, and gone away, hastening his pace but not by too m uch.
But the concrete event, the " that of which " there has been awareness, the
"now " that it declares, if they can be broken down, have not in fact been
bro ken down: a-traveler-passes. A concrete slice of nature, such that all the
5 2   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




components of the customs officer's experience, his aching foot, the low
roar of the ai rport, the movements of travelers in the background, must be
said to occur "at the same time," " simultaneous to this duration."
   Once the traveler has passed, he has passed, and will not return. Or
else, if he returns, for one reason or another, it will be a whole other ex
perience. Duration, as a concrete fact, can be cha racterized by this state
ment of the highest generality: it happens a nd passes.
  It is an exhibition of the process of nature that each duration happens
and passes. The process of nature can also be termed the passage of na
ture (CN, 54 ) .
   Insofar as i t happens and passes, each duration exhibits the passage of
nature, but no duration provides a pri vi leged testimony with regard to
this passage. Every Whitehead ian passage is qualified insofa r as it contains
other durations and is contained in other durations. Thus, the duration of
the experience of the customs-officer-in-front-of-whom-a-traveler-passes
could have been broken down into shorter durations. In fact, it was not,
and if it had been, it would no longer be the same, routine, experience but
a series of distinct experiences, whose " that of which " would have mutated
several times. Yet we know it " i nstinctively," and this is what is designated
by "would have," the fact that there was an experience that was not bro
ken down, a-traveler-passes, qualifies a particular experience, that of the
customs-officer. The traveler's passage could, quite obviously, have been
broken down by someone else who, for one reason or another, observed
the scene: a policeman or a manager of human traffic, on the lookout for
unnecessa ry slowdowns. Even a gesture positi vely experienced as non
decomposable by the person accomplishing it can be broken down into
smaller units, as, for instance, when experts in ergonomics discreetly time a
worker's activity. The duration of the customs officer's experience thus
discloses other distinct durations, which are part of its meaning.
   In contrast, what no duration discloses is the fact that it is made up of
durations without thickness, or instants that happen and pass. Every
duration has a thickness. The passage to the l i mit of this thickness to
ward the instant, which has none, is therefore not the passage from an
imperfect, approximate knowledge to an exact knowledge. It is an ab
straction that is constructed, and that is constructed only when it can be
constructed. For this abstraction presupposes the choice of the properties
that make this passage to the limit possible. It therefore imposes the ac
tive selection of what will be retained, the eli mination of what, in what
we are aware of, is lost when we take the path of the ever-mare-exact.
  Exactness is an ideal of thought. and is only realised in experience by
the selection of a route of approximation ( CN, 5 9 ) .
                                                  EVE NTS   A N D   PASSAGE   5 3




   The insta nt responds to an ideal of thought. Whether it is Newton's
time, a ffirming a bsol ute simultaneity, or Einstei n's time, which makes it
relative to the observer, what physicists take a s the sta rti ng point of thei r
reasoning, a moving obj ect, or a dyna mical system, or an event, each time
in an i nstant, corresponds to a dema nd for exactness that does not be
long to the concept of nature because it does not correspond to any expe
rience. The same holds true for the point, corresponding to the definition
of an exact posi tion in space, and Whitehead will show tha t its construc
tion is very much more complex than that of the instant, si nce it presup
poses the i dea l of an i nsta ntaneous space.
   This is obviously not a matter of denunciation: the ideal of exactness
to which the instant and the point respond conditions the specific risks of
physics, but the condition must not be confused with what is requi red by
every process of knowledge, including this specialized knowledge.
   Whitehead will devote long pages to analyzing the proced u re of
" extensive abstraction," which ena bles the characterization of the " paths
of approximation " leading from a uthentic natural entities, " what we have
perceptual experience of," to physico-mathematica l determi nations, spa
tial and temporal . The definiti on of i nstants, of mea surable space, of
lines, and of the spatio-tempora l metric includes its own risks, which a re
those of ax ioma tics. It entails defining a starti ng point such that no stage
of the reasoning may be convicted of having given an i mplicit role to a
property that has not yet been demonstrated . Here, we are at the thresh
old of Whitehea d 's great work in the phi losophy of the natural sciences.
   Whitehead was never to a bandon this work . Some cha pters are sti ll
devoted to it in Process and Reality ( Part IV, " The Theory of Exten
sion " ) , which take up the work carried out in The Concept of Nature
(and in An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Natural Knowledge),
but with a renewed sta rting point. For, as he explains,
   [ . . . 1 the "method of extensive abstraction " developed in those works
was unable to define a "point " without the intervention of the theory of
"duration." Thus what should have been a property of " durations " be
came the definition of a point. By this mode of approach the extensive
relations of actual entities mutually external to each other were pushed
into the background; though they are equally fundamental.
   Since that date Professor T. de Laguna has shown that the somewhat
more general notion of "extensive connection " can be adopted as the
starting-point for the investigation of extension; and that the more limited
not ion of "whole and part " can be defined in terms of it. In this way, as
Professor de Laguna has shown, my difficulty in the definition of a point,
with out recourse to other considerations, can be overcome ( PR, 2 8 7 ) .
5 4   FROM   T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   It is not beca use Whitehead will soon j udge unsatisfactory the method
of extensive a bstraction set forth in The Concept of Nature, a path of
approximation based on the part-whole relation, that I have chosen not
to venture further i n this question. It is simply beca use this proj ect per
tains to what Whitehead himself calls the " phi losophy of the natural
sciences," which he someti mes, as i n The Concept of Nature, treats as
equivalent to the " phi losophy of nature " or " natural philosophy," but
which seems to me to be distinct from the construction of the concept of
nature as " that of which " we have awareness.
   To carry out a sepa ration, as I am in the process of doi ng, between two
components of a work or of a book is always debatable. It might, more
over, give rise to the only objection that would rea lly matter to me: the
objection that would produce the "sheer disclosure " of the actual insepa
ra bility of the two components, thus modifying the way I understand
them. My choice thus conveys a wager that I would be glad to lose: that
of a possibil ity of distinguishing two regimes i n Whitehead, of i ntellec
tual and affective functioning. When Whitehead prolongs or undertakes
the la bor of axiomatization that was, if not the first of his passions, at
least the one that nourished his mai n professional work, he worked as a
mathematician in a worl d inhabited by his col leagues, such as Professor
Laguna , who were perfectly capable of sharing, evaluating, and question
ing his method and his choice. In contrast, the construction of the concept
of nature subjects the a uthor (and the reader) to a very different test, for
the question does not concern methodology fi rst and foremost. Here,
Whitehead may have friends, students, successors, but he no longer has
colleagues who share with him a terra in that exists prior to all of them.
He is a philosopher.
   It is difficult for a philosopher to realise that anyone really is confining
his discussion within the limits that I have set before you ( CN, 4 8 ) .
   Indeed, the questions that many philosophers would ask a genuine phi
losophy of nature, if not to solve, then at least to approach, a re excl uded,
for instance, the question of values in nature, that of its historicity, that of
its sel f-constructive activity or its dynamics of emergence . Whitehead does
not reject any of these questions, but for him they pertain to what must be
called " metaphysics," since they point in a direction where, i n one way or
another, the mind will no longer be defined as " ultimate " but as that
which may eventually and peri lously "emerge from nature." This is a dif
ferent problem, and it implies other concepts.
   Duration, which has a thickness and which exhibits the passage of
nature, i nsofar as it happens and passes, and nature, as that which is al
ways passing ( a lways moving on ) : these are what Whitehead limits him-
                                                E V E N TS   A N D   PA S S A G E   S 5




sel f to. Not without conseq uences, for it allows him to affirm at the same
time that the ideals of exactness conveyed by our measures do not belong
to the concept of nature, and that physics can nevertheless find within
nature what its specialized operations require.
  I definitely refrain at this stage from using the word "time," since the
measurable time of science and of civilised life generally merely exhibits
some aspects of the more fundamental fact of the passage of nature. I
believe that in this doctrine I am in full accord with Bergson, though he
uses "time " for the fundamental fact which I call the "passage of na
ture " ( eN, 54).
   It is rather seldom that Whitehead expl icitly names a philosopher, and
when he declares himself to agree with a philosopher, one must always
pay " due attention " to this agreement.
   In this case, it is fairly obvious tha t Bergsonian time is metaphysical in
Whi tehead's sense. This, moreover, is why Bergson fights with, or agai nst,
the definition of measura ble or " spatial ized " ti me, whereas Whitehead
wishes to construct a meaning of it that renders explicit the way in which
it i s extracted or a bstracted from sense-awa reness. The d i fference is
i mportant: it does not merely convey what some call Bergsonian " a nti
intel lect u alism," but a bove all a d ivergence with regard to the articula
tion between concepts and the experience that these concepts must be
able to thi nk. What is foreign to Bergson, "what is hard for a philosopher
to understand," is that Whitehead's concepts respond to what is req uired
by the problem he raised, and that none of them has meaning indepen
dently of such a problem (any more than complex numbers have mean
ing independently of mathematical problems ) .
   " Everything must b e in the same boat." Bergson wants the boat to
change captains, wa nts us to recognize that our true experience is an ex
perience in d ura tion. This is why he m ust oppose busy experience, con
sisting entirely of projects and disconti nuities, to this experience of true
duration, a duration that is continuous and indivisible l ike a melody
whose notes may succeed one another, but without it being possible to
break it down into a before and an after. Whitehead, for his part, does
not priv ilege any experience, for all of them a ffirm j ust as m uch the pas
sage of nature, from the most unremarkable to the most extended, from
the most special ized to the most purified of any practical interest, to " the
one most deeply embedded in rea l duration," as Bergson would say.
   Whitehead therefore does not oppose to intel lectual knowledge the
profound truth of d uration, whose experience the Bergsonian texts try to
ind uce in their readers. For him, the experience of a duration is the most
widely shared thing in the world, and the most " democratic." What
5 6   F R O M   T H E   P H I LOSO P H Y   O F   NATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




matters is not to confuse "what" we are aware of in perception and " what"
we percei ve. Whitehead by no mea ns criticizes the fact that we pay to
certain relations the attention appropriate for actively interpreting their
signification . . . that is, for prod ucing specialized knowledge. As long a s
w e a re not mista ken a bout wha t belongs t o nature a n d wha t perta ins to
human approximation. As l ong as we keep in mind that it is the definition
of measurable time and the notion of an insta nt that, as tra nslations of
an ideal of exactness, a re obta ined by approximation. The d urations that
happen and pass a re the concrete fact, the " terminus" of sense-awa reness
(it is what I am aware of), what awa reness offers to knowledge, and what
knowledge requires.
   However, the allusion to Bergson also conveys the risk to which White
head's enterprise is exposed here: to restrict oneself to nature alone, or
to what we are aware of in perception. For Bergson would certainly agree
that " the immed iate data " of awareness itself matter, but he would ask
Whitehead how he disti nguishes between awareness and " what we are
aware of," knowing that as soon as we try to thi nk of awareness, the mind
is no longer ultimate, but it is the problem.
   Thus not only is the passage of nature an essential character of nature
in its role of the terminus of sense-awareness, but it is also essential for
sense-awareness in itself. It is this truth which makes time appear to ex
tend beyond nature. But what extends beyond nature to mind is not the
serial and measurable time, which exhibits merely the character of pas
sage in nature, but the quality of passage itself which is in no way mea
surable except so far as it obtains in 1Iature [ . . . 1 In passage we reach a
connexion of nature with the ultimate metaphysical reality. The quality
of passage in durations is a particular exhibition in nature of a quality
which extends beyond nature ( eN, 5 5 ) .
   The passage of nature thus leads Whitehead t o a zone o f indecision, i n
which the mea ning o f the initial problem-the cha racterization o f " tha t
of which " we have sense-awa reness-is indeed at risk . It ca nnot be de
nied that the mea ning of the " now " belongs to experience itself, not only
to its " that of which." Although Whitehead does not think in terms of
time but of d urations, he has j ust red iscovered the " big q uestion," where
the maximal divergence between philosophers is played out: is time the
" number of motion," that is, a relation between motions belonging to the
world, or does it not rather refer to the subject who " relates" things?
Kant took this step, a ffirming time to be an interna l sense. For Whitehea d,
this is the most complete exa mple of the bifurca tion of nature: time owes
its passage to the human mind! As fa r as Bergson is concerned, he did not
refuse dura tion to thi ngs, but he accorded it to them cautiously. Insofar
                                                 EVENTS    A N D   PA S S A G E   S 7




as he opposes the melody i n multiple continuities, i ntertwi ned and indi
visible, that is our awareness, to the practica l i nterest that carries us to
ward things and leads us to conceive them from the viewpoint of action,
the awareness we have of things is always suspect. Of course, the world
itself must be understood as " in the ma king " as our life is, a nd this is the
project of the metaphysics to which he appea ls. To do so, however, mind
wi l l have to install itself definitively within the mobile rea lity of this
world, become capable of fol lowing it in its curves, i n short, adopt " the
very movement of the i nner life of things " (1M, 1 422 ) .
   For Whitehead, busy knowledge does not betray, but takes its own kind
of risks. Nevertheless, for him, too, the question arises on which the very
project of constructing a concept of natu re outside of metaphysics de
pends. How can one limit oneself to this problem ? How can one celebrate
the fact that the passage extends " toward " the mind, without, however,
including the mind in the passage of nature, without ending up by confus
ing nature and thought in the same " fact," which would henceforth be
metaphysical ?
                                                             C H A PT E R T H R E E
