The Foothold of the M i nd




           E M U S T LI M I T O U RSELVE S   to the problem that has been
             raised, and trust our problem: such is the ethics of a mathema
             tician. The passage of nature is exhibited by what we are aware
of, and is required by our i nstinctive attitude. The problem to be solved
does not concern the " mi nd," but the theories that make nature bifurcate
and disqua lify this i nstinctive attitude, and the concepts that will consti
tute its solution are not neutral, but they respond to the problem, convey
i ng the imperative from which the problem proceeds. It is necessary and
sufficient to characterize " that of which" we have awareness in the mode
req uired by our instinctive attitude. We must confirm the " trust" that is
actually presupposed by any dema nding i nvestiga tion, a ny specialized
k nowledge, even those that claim to disqualify this " trust." And all this
without exaggerating the risk: critical consciousness admits so many
things without criticizi ng them! Whether this is a pipe or this is not a pipe,
the adopted stance ignores with the greatest of ease the abysses of presup
position that logicians discover with terror when they try to " clarify " it.
"Animal faith" in a presence of things, emotion, and trust can be hunted
down by radical doubt, examination, or tests of legitimacy. In fact, the
logical process that i ntends to hunt them down still testifies, by its self
assurance, to this faith, like the movement of a cat chasing its own tail
testifies to the unity of a body from which its pursuit makes abstraction.
For if what words appeal to really does turn out not to answer, if the mis
erable cat, driven mad by the sufferings we are liable to inflict upon him,
chews on his ta il in his cage, this is no longer a game, whether logical or
fel ine, nor is it a laughing ma tter.
                                        T H E   F O OT H O L D   O F   T H E   M I N D   5 9




   Com mitment to an experi mentation capable of freeing the question of
nature from its habitual formulations associated with our specia lized
branches of knowledge, and of succeed i ng i n creating a plan able to wel
come, without privilege or hierarchy, the plura l ity of what we are aware
of, presupposes a trust that needs neither guarantee nor foundation. On
the contrary, it conveys the d ifference between two modes of " trusting " ;
the implicit one presupposed b y o u r certainties a n d habits, a n d the risk
ier one, which exposes the thi nker to adventure.
    Unlike habit, which is carried out in a determinate world, trust is para
doxically exercised in a world of indeterminacy, what James calls the
"plastic zone, the transmission belt of the uncertain, the meeting point of
the past and the future." It is indeterminacy that makes us need trust, but
it is also because we have trust that we take the risk of the indeterminate
[•   • J The feeling of trust makes experience a field of experimentation. It
         •



is therefore the condition for every form of creation (WJEP, 8 7 ) .
    Bergson is cited only once i n The Concept o f Nature, but William
James is never cited, although terms appear unexpectedly, without com
mentary, which point out that Whitehead is thinking " with James ." Ter
minus is one of these terms, stream is another. But the term that will
emerge i n this moment of del icate negotiation imposed by the passage
of nature, between the concept of nature and the metaphysical question,
this moment when it comes to escaping the temptation, designa ted by
Bergsonian thought, of a psychology leading to metaphysics, in order to
take the risk of the indeterminate, is specious present.
   A duration retains within itself the passage of nature. There are within
it antecedents and consequents which are also durations which may be
the complete specious presents of quicker consciousnesses ( CN, 5 6 ) .
   William james's specious present designates the extension of the dura
tion that we experience as " present." Here, extension does not designate
an externa l, clocked measure, but a concrete range, thick with the num
ber of events i t i ncludes in a way that is divisible but undivided.
   [ . . . J The practically cognized present is no k nife-edge, but a saddle
back, with a certain breadth of its own on which we sit perched, and from
which we look in two directions into time. The unit of composition of our
perception of time is a duration, with a bow and a stern, as it were-a
rearward-and a forward-looking end. It is only as parts of this duration
block that the relation of succession of one end to the other is perceived.
We do not first feel one end and then feel the other after it, and from the
perception of the succession infer an interval of time between, but we
seem to feel the interval of time as a whole, with its two ends embedded in
it ( PP, I, 609-6 1 0 ) .
6 0   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   Specious present is often translated i nto French as " present apparent,"
which i ndicates how much the notion of appearance is a powerful attrac
tor, dangerous in this case since it induces a stereotyped confronta tion
between two possibil ities. Either the experience of the present is j udged to
be purely relative to consciousness, and hence a decepti ve appearance
which it is the psychologist's task to describe in the wel l-known mode
of "you think that x . . . but experimental psychology shows that y . . . "
or else consciousness qua what bestows the present confers upon appear
a nce the status of ulti mate reality. For whoever tries to " think with White
head," both possi bilities are equally catastrophic, since the first one makes
nature bifurcate, and the second one eliminates nature in favor of " what
appears." It is therefore important to recall that specious, like " specieux"
in French, first signified "of beautiful appearance," about which there is
nothing negati ve i n and of itself. The suspicion that " this beautiful ap
pearance" is only apparent, intended only to deceive, took hold of the term
at the beginning of the eighteenth century. Such an etymological itinerary,
which bri ngs a bout the triumph of suspicion, discloses the worry that
may be inspired by what, for Wi lliam Ja mes, was of the order of radical
indeterminacy.
   Wha t, for i nsta nce, does it mean to be " captivated " by the bea uty of
an i mage ? If we a re moved , is it the situation that is movi ng, or our emo
tion that ma kes it so ? And i f we say that an idea is " s uggestive," does this
come from it, or from the way we have appropriated it? William James
made this hesitation the very thing tha t experience forces us to think . Of
course, the responsibility for such experiences can be attri buted either to
the world or to the subject, but this wi ll always be an attribution after
the fact, when we ask ourselves, after the fact, the q uestion of what hap
pened . The specious present, that block of duration upon which experi
ence is " perched " a nd which testifies to a quality of the passage that ex
tends " beyond nature to mind," could be the subject of the same rad ical
hesitation, whereas we can, of course, lea rn more about it by paying it
d ue attention.
   Wi lliam Ja mes i ntroduced the " specious present" i n the context of a
"psychologica l " a na lysis, but he took ca re not to relate this present to
consciousness as its producer. In fact, it is rather consciousness that will
be qualified, related, shown to be dependent on what one might call "ce
rebra l i ty." The specious present cannot be defined directly, i n the sense
that one would " become aware of" it, but it may be subject to varia tion,
both ethological and pharmacological : the variety of a nimal species or the
variety of human experiences, as they can be modified, for instance, by
ta king drugs .
                                        T H E   FOOTHOLD   O F   T H E   M I N D   6 1




  In hashish-intoxication there is a curious increase in the apparent time
perspective. We utter a sentence, and ere the end is reached the beginning
seems already to date from indefinitely long ago. We enter a short street,
and it is as if we should never get to the end of it (PP, I, 6 39-640) .
   Wi lliam James interprets this kind o f disturbing sensation o n the basis
of a twofold hypothesis. On the one hand, hashish intoxication gives rise
to a finer discrimination of events, that is, a ugments the quantity of events
of which we have experience qua liable to be distinguished . On the other
hand, whether intoxicated or not, we ( human beings) preserve the same
subjective sensation of time, with the specious present always including i n
an undivided w a y about as many successive events that are liable t o be
distinguished . Everything thus seems to be normal, except that the " ra nge"
of the present is more reduced, which entai ls, for one and " the same" epi
sode (coming to the end of a sentence, crossing a street), an increase in the
number of successive " presents." This is why the hashish-smoker must
often del i berately remember the begi nning of the phrase begun: not only
is this beginning not included in the present, but it is " very far away,"
separa ted from the present by a completely incongruous number of shifts
from the present to the past.
   It is i mportant to emphasize that, according to James, the experience of
hashish intoxication is not abnormal but strange, a vector of strangeness,
because it includes a contrast. The modification of the specious present is
only perceptible, or knowable, when the intoxicated experience is accom
panied by the contrast with similar habitual experience: But this is a short
street! But I usually know without effort how I began a sentence!
   From this viewpoint, there is a big di fference between the characteriza
tion of the specious present and the study of optical illusions, which also
perta ins to experimental psychology. I n the case of optica l illusions, what
is studied is " what" the subject perceives, the interpretative part of per
ception, and psychologists have the means to j udge and know that, what
ever their subject may say, the para l lel lines are " really" parallel, and the
line segments are " really" of equal length: this is why they can speak of
an ill usion. In the case of the specious present, we have to do not with
knowi ng interpretation, but rather with what experience offers to knowl
edge, and the reference to " really" cannot work: no one can objectively
measure what I testi fy to when I say, "This street seems to have no end!"
   Thus, if " specious" means "of deceptive appearance," those who a re de
ceived are those who have gone so far as to define experience in terms of a
succession of instants without thickness. And it is indeed in this sense that
the specious present can be involved in Whitehead's problem, enabling him
to negotiate the connection between nature and " ultimate metaphysical
6 2   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




reality " without, however, slipping into metaphysics. The specious present,
which happens and passes, which can be subjected to variation by drugs
and can be the subject of speculations with regard to the animal variety of
experiences, does not designate the perceiving mind qua creator or respon
sible for experience. It designates what experience delivers to perception,
whether animal or human. It ca n only be defined if we pay due attention to
variety, and it therefore perta ins to the concept of nature, that is, to what
must be restored to nature if it is not to bifurcate.
   Such a restitution is not, however, without consequences, for it intro
duces William James's indeterminacy into the heart of wha t we are aware
of as " passage." "There is a passage," but this passage henceforth includes
the passage of awareness, wha t we are aware of as " passage of the pres
ent " : it has passed.
   Are we really so far from Bergson? No longer quite that far, for the " in
determinacy " of what we a re aware of as passage coincides, if not with the
vocation of Bergson's text, at least with the means th is text sets in motion
in order to transform its reader. It has often been noted how hard it is to
"summarize" Bergson, to present his theses, and to discuss his positions.
One may be tempted to abstract from the highly meticulous, critical de
scription his text offers of the ways in which our la nguages define the self,
the will, freedom, in order to go stra ight to his concl usions, to wha t he
" wanted to demonstrate," for instance, his definition of intuition, mem
ory, or duration . And one rea lizes that the definitions in q uestion are then
so many betraya ls. Bergsonian concepts are not made to enter into a rela
tion of force with others, which they oppose. They a re inseparable from a
practice of writing and from the practice of reading to which writing ap
peals. If Bergson's meticulous descriptions cannot be eliminated, it is be
cause they produce what they describe. The Bergsonian text first functions
as an operator for i nducing va riation, a modification of experience, and
the truth of the duration to which he refers is " specious," for it captivates
his reader.
   Bergsonian inner life may well refer to music, to the melodic quality of
the descriptions tha t succeed one another in a mode that is deliberately
resistant to division, but the experience inspired by Bergson 's text, for its
part, makes one th ink of Wi lliam James's hashish intoxica tion: the cre
ation of contrasts tha t induce indeterminacy. Bergson fashions a " trance
reading," a nd asks the reader what all hypnotizers ask their subject: to
agree to slow down, to let oneself be penetrated by the words, to release
the grip that ma kes us th ink we know wha t they mea n. Bergson na mes
and descri bes duration, but his text induces the experience of it, induces
the trust that transforms experience into experi mentation on duration .
                                        T H E   FOOTHOLD   O F   T H E   M I N D   6 3




And it is precisely at this point that he coincides with Whitehead, for the
concept of na ture a lso depends on a " l iterary " apparatus liable to ind uce
a perception of what we a re aware of in the mode that this concept has
the task of exhibiting.
  The purpose of a discussion of such factors may be described as being to
make obvious things look odd. We cannot envisage them unless we man
age to invest them with some of the freshness which is due to strangeness
(eN, 1 07- 1 0 8 ) .
   O n e of the ways of conferring a biza rre a ppeara nce upon any k i nd
of experience, without recourse to the pa rticular experience provided by
hashish, l isten ing to music, hypnotic induction, or the philosopher's me
ticulous description, is to ca ll attention to the " constant factors," those
we neglect because they inevitably belong to all experience, but which no
experience exh ibits in pa rticular. The point is thus to crea te a contrast
between what I say I perceive and wha t is a lways exhibited by wha t I am
aware of.
   It is because of this habit of letting constant factors slip from con
sciousness that we constantly fall into the error of thinking of the sense
awareness of a particular factor in nature as being a two-termed relation
between the mind and the factor. For example, I perceive a green leaf.
Language in this statement suppresses all reference to any factors other
than the percipient mind and the green leaf and the relation of sense
awareness. It discards the obvious inevitable factors which are essential
elements in the perception. I am here, the leaf is there; and the event here
and the event which is the life of the leaf there are both embedded in a
totality of nature which is now, and within this totality there are other
discriminated factors which it is irrelevant to mention (eN, 1 0 8 ) .
   Not only does experience incl ude the " now" as a constant factor, but
also the " here." And this " here" ra ises the same problem as the " now " : it
is an aspect of experience tha t q uestions the d ifference between na ture
and mind, and therefore includes the threat of mak ing the phi losophy of
nature slide into metaphysics.
   Here we are touching on that character of the passage of nature which
issues in the spatial relations of simultaneous bodies r . . . I Passage in this
aspect of it also seems to extend beyond nature to mind ( eN, 5 6 ) .
   Like the specious present, the " here" must therefore b e pl unged into
indeterminacy. To do this, it is no longer the ideal ization of insta nta neous
ness tha t must be surmounted, but tha t of reversibility. When we think of
" here" and " there," we may be tempted to affirm the intercha ngeabil ity of
the terms: I am here and you a re there, but the relation is reversible, and
you might j ust as well be here, and I might be there; to define " here,"
6 4   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




moreover, any kind of body would do j ust as well instead of me. What
then counts are spatial relations, measured by distances.
   Once again, the point is not to denounce or to deny that the notion of
distance may derive from what we are aware of, and be made expl icit as
" what" we perceive. The point is to attri bute to nature not what we per
ceive, but what we are aware of in perception. The apparent simpl icity of
a space in which " si multaneou'l" bod ies would be located, i ncluding the
one that perceives, conveys the specious character of what we a re aware
of. It is not those who have relied on their instinctive knowledge who
have been deceived, but those who have sought to pass from the contrast
between " here" and " there " to a more precise definition. This contrast must
not be stated in terms of space or in terms of distance.
   Against the abstract ideal of a reversibility guaranteeing that what is
" here " could have been " there," we can appeal to a cat, when he has not
been driven mad by our mistreatment, but offers himself to us as a mar
vel of perceptive experience. A cat on the hunt, ma king perceptible the
vibration of what is not a distance but the release that will cross an inter
va l, or else a contemplative cat, never situated j ust anywhere in a room,
a lways in a location a round which the room seems to be arranged . Expe
rience, for Whitehead, is always situated and always incl udes a locus
standi, or a perspective, or v iewpoint. And he is bold enough to ca l l this
point of view " event here," included in what we a re aware of.
   This locus standi in nature is what is represented in thought by the con
cept of "here " namely of an "event here." This is the concept of a definite
factor in nature. This factor is an event in nature which is the focus in
nature for that act of awareness, and the other events are perceived as re
ferred to it. This event is part of the associated duration. I call it the "per
cipient event." This event is not the mind, that is to say, not the percipient.
It is that in nature from which the mind perceives (eN, 1 07).
   That this locus standi, perspective, or " focus for that act of awareness,"
is an event in nature, a factor belonging to what we are aware of, not a
condition for awareness or a subjective principle of all possible awa re
ness, is vital for Whitehead 's construction . If, in one way or another, the
perspective had been that of the percipient mind rather than " for" the per
cipient mind, the door would have been left open for the bifurcation of
nature. " How " one perceives would have referred to the mind, which
would then be a command post, constructing according to its categories
" that of which " it has experience in perception. The fact that this perspec
tive must be understood as an " event," in contrast, impl ies that the neutral
and impersonal statement " there is a passage" will constitute an ultimate
genera lity belonging to the concept of nature, which thus includes the
percipient event as a factor of experience offered to knowledge.
                                          T H E   FOOTH O L D   O F   T H E   M I N D   6 5




   Like a l l events, the percipient event happens and leaves, and when it is
gone, it is gone. It is rela ti ve, of course, since every event declares itsel f to
be rela ted to other events, a part of some and made up of others . But i t is
not relative to a nyth ing, and especially not to a subject. And i t refers the
delights of i ntrospection-by which the subject declares itsel f to be able
to explore its own perceptions, place them in doubt, explore their mean
i ng, go back to thei r eventual principle-to i ndeterminacy, that is, to the
passage of na ture, which the transformation of points of view is the first
to testify to. You think you a re free to explore your experience, like one
explores a given landscape, to vary points of view and meanings, to ren
der i mplicit mea ni ngs explicit. But you are not the a uthor of this varia
tion. The passage is neutra l, and the standpoint does not belong to you
unless it is i n your quality as occupa nt, but it is what occupies you, much
more tha n you occupy it. The variation of standpoints is not what you
decide but what ha ppens, and you interpret it i n one way or another, and,
for insta nce, in the way that puts you i n cha rge. The event that provides
you with a point of view belongs to the great i mpersonal web of events.
Your standpoint testifies to the whole of nature, is connected to the whole
of nature, even if it takes on the pa rticular mea ning that is required by the
interpretation of perception as yours . This interpretation may be spe
cious, but that does not ma ke it illusory. But what we " know instinc
tively" is not that our consciousness possesses a point of view, but rather
that the " here " of this viewpoint is ours.
   Our "percipient event " is that event included in our observational
present which we distinguish as being in some peculiar way our stand
point for perception. It is roughly speak ing that event which is our bodily
life within the present duration [ . . . 1 The distant situation of a perceived
obiect is merely k nown to us as signified by our bodily state, i.e., by our
percipient event [ . . . l In the course of evolution those animals have sur
vived whose sense-awareness is concentrated on those significations of
their bodily states which are on the average important for their welfare.
The whole world of events is signified, but there are some which exact
the death penalty for inattention (eN, 1 8 7-1 8 8 ) .
   Like the specious present, the declared sign ification o f the percipient
event offered to knowledge does not have to be explained, since it is of the
order of the fact. The fact is that, most often, what sense experience deliv
ers to knowledge al lows itsel f to be interpreted i n a way that lets me d is
sociate the permanence of my body, " here," from a world in which thi ngs
happen, " there." The point is to pay attention to these thi ngs, the k ind of
attention they are due, on pai n of death. But the " death penalty," through
which the question of biological evolution now emerges, does not explain
the " here " of perception, any more than the tests to which scientists submit
6 6   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




their statements explain what these statements say. Just as resistance to
such tests is what is requi red for a scientific statement to survive, attention
to certain events " there" is required on pai n of death, but the relation be
tween the " here" of attention and the body does not have the status of a
general fact. We can therefore, without fear of denying " what we know
i nstinctively," take into account experiences that subject our routines to
adventure.
   Thus, those who testi fy to the well-known out-of-body experiences
testi fy that the " here" of the percipient event is not always defined by a
coincidence between standpoi nt and the body, since, in this experience,
th is body is suddenly signified as distant. The distinction then imposes
itsel f between the permanence of the body and what Whitehead calls
" roughly speaking " bod i ly life. These unusual experiences are associated
not with the mind's decisions but with the adventure of this bodily l i fe,
since they occur at the onset of death, or on the occasion of taking drugs,
or else thanks to the culti vation of that bodily life implied by spiritual
techniques. All are situations in which " survival " and its pragmatic ur
gencies do not play a dominant role.
    Biologica l evolution would thus only explain a habitual correlation,
also attested by the pla usibil ity of the ( metaphysica l ) temptation to which
we yield when we affirm that our mind percei ves " on the basis of our
body," or that this body, as it is localized by biology, would be its " seat,"
its " prison," or its " production site." Likewise, biological evolution would
explain not the specious present as such but perhaps the type of conserva
tion that James hypothesizes, which could well extend to all animal expe
riences (including huma n ) . The fact that flies seem to experience the mo
tion of my hand, fast as it is, as a slow arrival that allows them plenty of
time to fly away cannot be assimilated to the experience of an i ntoxicated
person si nce the fly has actually had the time to fly away. Is the fly aware ?
Does it have a percipient experience in the present ? In a n y case, whatever
may be the way in which the approach of my hand affects it, its experi
ence probably integrates, as does our " specious present," a correlation with
events that exact a death penalty if its reactions are too slow.
   Whitehead has thus succeeded in avoiding a twofold da nger: he has
ta ken away from the mind its responsibil ity for the " here" and the " now"
of all experience without referring this explanation to biology, that is,
without subjecti ng the concrete fact of passage to special ized knowledge.
What seems to extend from nature to the mind has been referred to the
register that no one can claim to appropriate: the event.
  The complete foothold of the mind in nature is represented by the pair
of events, namely, the present duration which marks the "when " of aware-
                                        T H E   FOOTH O L D   O F   T H E   M I N D   6 7




ness and the percipient event which marks the "where " of awareness and
the "how " of awareness ( eN, 1 07 ) .
   Here, " foothold " does not designate the act of taking hold but what the
mind, or knowledge, requires from nature, what it needs to be offered by
nature if its operations are not to be illusory, if the trust that leads us to
speak of a knowledge about nature is to be confirmed. And i nsofar as what
nature "offers" a rticulates a pair of events as "constant" factors, the mind's
foothold in nature does not found any j udgment that goes beyond the con
crete fact: " there has been a foothold ." Hence the image of the mountai n
climber evoked by the term Whitehead chooses: " foothold." The mountain
eer's climb depends, and counts, on a ledge found by her hand or foot. If the
vertical wall were completely smooth, there would be no mountain-climber:
the mountain-climber's mode of existence requires that of the ledge that of
fers her a foothold . It is not the job of the mountain-climber, who takes
adva ntage of the foothold to exist qua mounta in-cl imber, to j usti fy that
foothold's existence . Nor, moreover, is it up to her to turn this existence
into that which, in one way or another, could j ustify the mounta i n . The
" nature that offers a foothold to the mind " i ndeed designates the percipi
ent mind as ultimate, for its concept is relative to the mind 's mode of tak
ing hold. A perfectly smooth wall, giving the mountain-climber no foot
hold, poses no problem for a fly, and could be ascended ( but not cli mbed )
by someone who obtains an adequate system of suction disks. The possi
bility of a foothold is the requirement immanent to the problem to which
the term " mountain-climber" constitutes a set of risky solutions. Li kewise,
the present event and the percipient event are the " footholds" required by
the problem of " d ue attention," a problem designated by the term "aware
ness," and to which all perceptual special ization, whether it refers to bio
logical evolution or to practical life, brings a risky solution.
   What I now want to discuss is the special relation of the percipient
event which is "here " to the duration which is "now " [ . I Within the
                                                                    .   .



short present duration the "here " of the percipient event has a definite
meaning of some sort. This meaning of "here " is the content of the spe
cial relation of the percipient event to its associated duration. I will call
this relation "cogredience " ( eN, 1 0 8 ) .
   What I want to bring out is that the preservation of a peculiar relation
to a duration is a necessary condition for the function of that duration as
a present duration for sense-awareness ( eN, 1 09 ) .
   The present snaps into a past and a present when the "here' " of cogre
dience loses its single determinate meaning. There has been a passage of
nature from the "here " of perception within the past duration to the dif
fere nt "here " of perception within the present duration ( eN, 1 08-1 0 9 ) .
6 8   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   NAT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   For Whitehead, then, the preservation of cogredience has the status of
a "condition," and this condition designates a duration, " a concrete slab
of nature limited by simultaneity " ( CN, 5 3 ) . Conditions and limits can
play a role i n this case because they do not dea l with experience but with
the way knowledge ca n appeal to experience, not, this ti me, with rega rd
to the " here " and the " now" but to the simultaneity "I and my world at
the same time," to the " here and now" that designates the present.
   Once again, the point is to resist the theories that presuppose that we
can base oursel ves on what we perceive. In this case, what Whitehead has
in view is the specious character of the " here and now" that proposes itself
as a stable, reliable starting point from which it seems possi ble to i nterro
gate all possible experience. To make the preservation of cogredience a
condition evokes what the specious character of experience may make
us forget: the " here and now " is not that which, belonging to all possible
experience, also enables us to " think of experience." It creates neither right
nor access, because it is itself conditioned by " it holds together." What
counts in the " here and now " is the " a nd," and this "and " conveys a fact:
the preservation of a relation of which we can only observe, once it has
" passed," that it has ceased to hold true. And it certainly ceases to hold
true as soon as the mind seizes hold of experience to call it as a witness.
   The duration may comprise change within itself, but cannot-so far as it
is one present duration-comprise change in the quality of its peculiar rela
tion to the contained percipient event. In other words, perception is always
"here," and a duration can only be posited as present for sense-awareness
on condition that it affords one unbroken meaning of " here " in its relation
to the percipient event. It is only in the past that you can have been "there "
with a standpoint distinct from your present "here " ( CN, 1 1 0 ) .
   Whereas the usual " here a n d now " treats space a n d time symmetrically,
the "and" of the relation of cogredience breaks this symmetry. The thick
ness of the present, that indivisible compound of multiple durations that
constitutes " nature now," has as its condition and limit the duration of the
percipient event that it includes. The experience of the passage, the shift of
the present into the past, is primordially the passage of the percipient
event, the passage of the " here," but also, and perhaps above all, of the
" how." For the perci pient event not only marks the " where" of experi
ence but also its " how," and whereas the " here " can refer in a somewhat
specious way to the body's permanence, the " how" raises the question of
the " bodily life i nside present duration" constituted by this percipient
event. A sudden noise attracts my attention: it is the " how " of the experi
ence that has changed when an event " there" is suddenly discerned . The
cat's ears stand up. It is utterly approximate to say " I am where I am while
                                         T H E   FOOTHOLD   O F   T H E   M I N D   6 9




time passes," but the specious character of the approximation is interest
ing. It designates an " I " that is first and foremost " bodily life," a set of
multiple correla tions unified by the series of " here-how " that pass in such
a way tha t " the sta ndpoint is always here."
   Events there and events here are facts of nature [ . . I cogredience has
                                                            .



nothing to do with any biological character of the [percipient] event
wh ich is related by it to the associated duration (eN, 1 1 0 ) .
   The relation of cogredience belongs to what is required . It is crucial
that it cannot be explained by specia l ized knowledge such as biology, for
it is what is required by a l l our expla nations, whether biologica l or other.
One will therefore certa inly not say that it is " subject" to bodily l i fe, but
perhaps one can say that it is what makes bodily life crucial for percep
tion. Every l iving being the biologist can compare with other living be
ings would thus consti tute a specia l ized response to the questions orga
nized around the preserva tion of the relation of cogredience, a n answer
that presupposes this relation itsel f as a fact belonging to the concept of
nature. It is qua stratified, stabilized answer, proper to a l iving species,
that the sense organs in particular should be described, and that we
should characterize the way these organs discern, sift, and capture what,
for them, " makes an event," that is, brea ks the rela tion of cogredience.
   All the descri ptions produced by neurophysiology, all the experiments
of experi menta l psychology aiming to mea sure the extent of the " spe
cious present," a l l the compari sons between living beings of d i fferent
species, all the body's adventures, whether i ntoxicated or spiritualized,
then begi n to si ng in harmony with the positive definition that White
head has given of nature: we know that if we pay it due attention, we will
find more i n it than wha t we observe at first glance. The sense orga ns
testi fy to the importa nce of paying due attention to nature, on pain of
death. Each one proceeds from a wager on what is due. And the body is
therefore not wha t explains but what testifies.
   Attention itself would thus be that aspect of bodily l i fe that testifies to
a risky sol ution, to the choice of the events capable of " attracting atten
tion," or breaking the relation of cogredience. For survival depends on the
relevance of what this choice offers to knowledge, and especially on the
irrelevance of all that is signified without thereby ma king the present slip
into the past. The cat lying in wait for its prey, immobi le and vibra nt, is
proba bly living through an experience such that what for her prey has the
quality of an undivided " here and now" is for her a succession of presents
that happen and pass . Attention explains nothing: the testi mony con
ce r ns the solution by which the problem exhibits itself but does not ex
plain the problem.
70   FROM    T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   Wi lliam james's " specious present" belonged to psychology, beca use
James was trying to characterize it. But the relation of cogredience, in its
factua lity, refers instead to what James, in his Essays on Radical Empiri
cism, calls " pure experience."
   The instant field of the present is always experienced in its "pure " state,
a plain unqualified actuality, a simple "that," as yet undifferentiated into
thing and thought, and only virtually classifiable as objective fact or as some
one's opinion about fact [ . . . I Only in the later experience that supersedes
the present one is this "naif" immediacy retrospectively split into two parts,
a "consciousness " and its " content " and the content corrected or confirmed.
While still pure, or present, any experience-mine, for example, of what I
write about in these very lines-passes for "truth " (WPE, 74-75 ).
    james's pure experience is " true," but unlike Descartes' " I am think
ing," its truth does not authorize anything. It is up to the experience that
follows and supersedes it to give this truth its consequences, perhaps to
j udge it, always to restore it in a different way, according to the different
" hows " associated with a d i fferent standpoint. What William James pro
poses is nothing other, and nothing less, than to betray every " and there
fore " that would undertake to transcend the facts: it is in this way, and in
no other, that this present has appropriated this past. Pure experience is
" pla in," that is, mute with regard to what it will signify retroactively. The
experience that sl ips into the past may well be appropriated by an experi
ence dominated by reflexivity: " I " have this experience. But that means
that the experience has changed . The new " reflexive" experience is a
" reflection on" the one that has slipped into the past, in the sense of a
resumption rather than of an outcome or an elucidation. James thus pro
poses a version of experience, i ncluding the experience dominated by the
" I " of reflection, which exhibits that this " I " always comes later, included
in a new experience. And the experience of the " I " appropriating the
past, ma king this past " its " experience, is again plain, mute with rega rd
to the consequences that will be produced concerning it. The continuity
of the " I " is one construction among others, which only holds as long as
the resumption in the mode of reflexive appropriation is continued .
    Wi lliam James's pure experience functions as a proposition that read
ers must accept to inhabit, that they must take the time to i nhabit. And
Whitehead certainly took the ti me to inhabit it, for his characterization of
the perci pient event operates in the same way as that of pure experience:
it induces an experience in which the event is always " this" event, which
happens and passes . Nevertheless, we should reca ll that for Whitehead
the " mind," bracketed in The Concept of Nature, must stay that way:
experience itself is not in q uestion, and the percipient event is not experi-
                                         T H E   FOOTH O L D   O F   T H E   M I N D   7 1




ence, only that factor of experience that testifies to the " passage " that is
the ultimate concrete fact.
   Already at this point, however, Whitehead a nd James agree at lea st on
one thing: all the reasons we can give with regard to the passage, with
rega rd to experience insofar as it passes, come later. My attention was d is
tracted by that birdsong; 1 suddenly thought of the chicken in the oven; in
spite of your glance, 1 did end my phrase, to be sure, but without believ
i ng in it a ny more, and so on. We attribute responsibil ities to elements of
experience that we can name, we construct reasons, and these reasons are
not fa lse. They are simply a bstracted from what ( specious ) experience
offers to consciousness, and a re presented in a ma nner that tra nslates the
way it has seized hold of them: in this case, by inverting them, by confus
i ng the interpretation that has come a fterward with the reason why the
present has sl ipped into the past a nd has become a past signified by the
present. This must not be denounced, for it is one way of paying due at
tention to certain factors of our experience.
   Even today, ma ny readers of Whitehead encounter this difficulty: he
seems to deny " self-consciousness," or the possi bil ity of an immediate rela
tion such that we ca n feel and feel ourselves feel at the same time. Likewise,
he seems to deny the possibil ity of saying, "I see my child there, smi l i ng at
me," two bei ngs in direct contact. Yet, the person who mobil izes this ex
ample will protest, it is i ndeed at me that my child is sm iling, 1 feel it at
the same time that 1 see her, that her smile is di rected at me, a nd this smile
testifies to a genuine contact between us a nd therefore testifies for me, for
the ultimate truth of my awa reness of bei ng me. Any way of compl icat
i ng the description of this situation would be a form of cheating with
regard to the truth of this experience.
   We must take this protest seriously, beca use there can be no question,
there can never be any question, either for James or for Whitehead , of
transforming experience that is indeterminate with regard to the way it
will eventually be appropriated into a n i nstrument of judgment or dis
qualification of a n experience. What the statement "I see my child there,
smil i ng at me " i ntends is an experience. Yet a sl ight variation may ma ke
us feel that it is neither the same experience as " my-child-is-smiling-at-me "
nor its truth. Let us imagine that this smile is fi xed, that the child's gaze is
suddenly turned away, or that she suddenly winces. The " I " that was mo
bil ized to turn the smiling child into a privileged case of " i nterpersona l "
relations ( for instance) will then have little chance o f appearing, o r com
ing to reinforce the initial experience, giving it an i nterpretation that
transforms it into an argument or an objection. What happens does not
place the veracity of the experience " my-child- is-smil ing-at-me " i n doubt,
7 2   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




but the capacity of this experience to play the role of a foundation, which
the argument had assigned to it. What happens " passes for truth," but the
content of this truth does not belong to it.
   To attribute to William James the inauguration of a new period in phi
losophy would make us neglect other contemporary influences. In any
case, however, it is still relevant to compare his essay, Does Consciousness
Exist ? , published in 1 904, with The Discourse on Method, published in
1 63 7. James clears the scene of the accessories of the past: more precisely,
he gives the scene a completely new illumination (SMW, 1 4 3 ) .
   I t remains, o f course, t o explore this renewed scene, to construct what
it obl iges us to, and Whitehead will do so later when he will ask not Wi l
liam James but the problem created by Ja mes how to construct the con
cepts imposed by a succession of experiences, each one of which takes
the preceding one for an ingred ient while conferring a meaning upon it.
In no case, however, will the point be to transcend the scene ill uminated
by James toward a higher truth . When Whitehead beca me a metaphysi
cian, conscious experience became a creature of passage, which itself has
become creativity.
                                                               C H A P T ER   FOUR
