Attention to Objects




              H IT E H E A D NE VE R T I RE S of emphasizing that a sense-object is
              not an attribute or a property. We cannot solve the problem
              by returning, short of bifurcation, to the quiet world of utter
ances of an Aristotelian type, a ffi rm ing a plural ity of existents endowed
with properties: the bird " is " a songbi rd, song is attri buted to the bird .
Yet neither must w e disqualify the operations of the attributive i ntel lect,
defendi ng the " pure" sonorous song against the busy activity of the per
son seeking to identify the bird that is responsible for it. Nor, moreover,
are we to defend the bird as a living source, actively conditioning the
song, against questions addressed to the modes of vibration of the air and
their propagation. The point is, first, for us to remember that the song,
like everything we are aware of, signifies the totality of nature into which
it makes i ngression. Even when we are aware of a vibrating sound in its
haughty, sol itary singularity, this sound is situated , is in a relation of situ
ation . Nor is it enough to say that hearing a birdsong pres upposes a rela
tive situation between the " there" where it is emitted and the " here" of the
percipient event, a two-term relation. If the sonorous object has a singu
larity, it is precisely the i rred ucibil ity of its situation to a ny local ization.
This is wel l known to those who build concert halls. Whatever the hall,
the musician will be inside it, but the sound , for its part, will testify to a
sonorous quality that is nowhere in particular.
   It is not, therefore, because of a fundamental simplicity that Whitehead
places the sense-object at the base of his hierarchy, but because the way
th is object makes ingression into nature does not req uire us to identify its
source, or its function, or what it relates to. It is an obj ect-there it is
8 6   F R O M   THE   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   NATURE   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




again-it does not, as such, take part in the passage of nature, and it is
not itself-unl i ke the blackbird there on that branch, who is singing, a
sma ll black sil houette with a yellow bea k and a shining eye-a relation
among other factors of nature.
  [ . . . 1 A particular sort of colour, say Cambridge blue, or a particular
sort of sound, or a particular sort of smell, or a particular sort of feeling.
I am not talking of a particular patch of blue as seen during a particular
second of time at a definite date. Such a patch is an event where Cam
bridge blue is situated. Similarly I am not talking of any particular
concert-room as filled with the note. I mean the note itself and not the
patch of volume filled by the sound for a tenth of a second. It is natural
for us to think of the note in itself, but in the case of colour we are apt to
think of it merely as a property of the patch. No one thinks of the note as
a property of the concert-room ( CN, 1 4 9 ) .
   Why is the mention of a musical note o r of a birdsong more effective
in slowing down the al most automatic movement that lea ds us, when it
comes to color, to make it the property, for instance, of a piece of cloth?
We shall attribute to the a rtist's interest and training the possibil ity of
seeing " bl ue" where others see a flannel coat that happens to be blue. But
we shall also attri bute to the piano tuner's interest and training the pos
sibility of turning a specific sound into the property of a chord that is
more or less tightly stretched. Or to the interest and training of the con
noisseur in architecture the abil ity to turn it into a property of the room
in which the note resounds. For Whitehea d, the q uestion cannot concern
a difference between sense-objects. This d ifference designates our prac
tices, including those that are stabil ized by what we ca ll " sense orga ns."
And in fact, while the literature is filled with cases of " optica l illusions,"
exhibiting the deceptive d ifferences between " what" one sees and " what
is there to be seen," one spea ks rather of " sound effects," as if the possi
ble unrel iability of " what" one hears, as compa red to " what is emitted "
or produced in a n identifiable way, caused us fewer problems.
   Correlatively, i f objects a s d i fferent as a bird, Cleopatra 's Needle, or a
" Cambridge-blue" -colored flannel coat are gathered under the common
category of perceptua l object, it is beca use they ra ise, for their part, a
common problem that is not raised by the sense-object: the pragmatic
problem conveyed by the q uestion of whether a given perceptual object
is " i ll usory," for instance, as a reflection in a mi rror, or whether it is an
" active condition " i n the ingression of the sense-obj ects we perceive.
   In general the situation is an active conditioning event; namely the coat
itself, when there is no mirror or other such contrivance to produce ab
normal effects. But the example of the mirror shows us that the situation
                                               ATT E N T I O N   TO   OBJE CTS   8 7




may be one of the passive conditioning events. We are then apt to say
that our senses have been cheated because we demand as a right that the
situation should be an active condition in the ingression ( CN, 1 5 3 ) .
   Once again, the hierarchy among events has nothing to d o with a ques
tion of value, whether aesthetic or epistemological . It exhibits the diver
sity of materials required by our j udgments, our compa risons, a nd our
discernments i f the practices to which they respond a re to confirm the
trust that by paying due attention we will find more in nature than what
we observe at first glance. In this case, whereas the empiricist tribunal
has the vocation of pursuing all claims to find i n nature anything other
than " what " we perceive-that is, aga i n and aga i n sense-objects-the
concept of nature constructed by Whi tehead is not to found or to guar
antee this claim but to provide it with a respondent that constitutes it as
a legitimate ri sk. As legitimate as the risk taken by a mountain-climber
whose foot seeks the foothold it needs on the rock-face.
   It is a law of nature that in general the situation of a sense-object is not
only the situation of that sense-object for one definite percipient event,
but is the situation of a variety of sense-objects for a variety of percipient
events [ . . . 1 Furthermore this concurrence in the situations of sense
objects has led to the body-i.e., the percipient event-so adapting itself
that the perception of one sense-object in a certain situation leads to a
subconscious sense-awareness of other sense-objects in the same situa
tion. This interplay is especially the case between touch and sight. There
is a certain correlation between the ingressions of sense-objects of touch
and sense-objects of sight into nature [ . . . 1 I call this sort of correla
tion the " conveyance " of one sense-object by another. When you see the
blue flannel coat you subconsciously feel yourself wearing it or other
wise touching it [ . . . 1 The perceptual object is not primarily the issue
of a judgment. It is a factor of nature directly posited in sense-awareness
( CN, 1 54-1 5 5 ) .
    I see this " Cambridge-blue" coat, but the words that make blue an at
tri bute of the flannel do not state what I am aware of. They make my
perception communicate with a judgment about which q uestions of exac
titude could be raised-no, it's a jacket-or of legitimacy-what you call
a coat is only a blue patch; it could, moreover, be a hologram. It may be a
jacket, and nothing guarantees that it is not a hologram, but what I am
aware of in my perception of this blue fla nnel coat did not have m uch to
do with these q uestions, except for pa rticular circumstances. The blue
conveyed the touch of the cloth, a gentle sensation of flannel, the supple
fluidity of the d raping on my body, the comfortable warmth of the wool.
Not the a bstract possi bility of touching it, feeling it, wearing it, in case my
8 8     F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




j udgment is legitimate, but the very sensation of touching it, wearing it,
feel ing the folds of the wool accompany the motion of my body. And i f
m y trusting fingers encountered only the void, my shocked surprise would
testify to the fact that the point was not to veri fy, but to prolong. A brutal
interruption: the hologram was perfect, and the trust that was declared i n
the correlations conveyed b y the visual object has been disappoi nted.
   One may be tempted to j udge that this correlation, which Whitehead
na mes conveyance, is quite incapable of j ustifying the coat's " objective "
existence. However, the experience of worry, admiration, or amusement,
according to the situation, that occurs if my hand encounters the voi d
where I had seen a blue coat bea rs witness: the mode of ingression of the
" blue flannel coat" into the event declares itself to be di fferent from that
of blue. The perceptual object is what is requi red by this difference, what
is demanded by this experience whose declared meaning is cal led seeing
a-bl ue-coat, the experience exhibiting the coat as a n object.
   Yet one ca n still insist: would nature bifurcate if we made conveyance
a " psychic addition " ? Whitehead himsel f, moreover, writes as follows:
      The perceptual object is the outcome of the habit of experience
( eN, 1 55 ) .
   That the blue coat results from a habit seems to bring u s straight back
to the empi ricist tribuna l : conveyance is a mere habit, what we add, as a
result of past associations, to visua l perception. Shocked surprise is merely
disappointed habit.
   But why shou ld we say " merely," as if habit did not need a respondent,
as if it did not itsel f exhi bit a " fact of nature," its existence testifying to
its usual veri fication ? Habit presupposes a world in which a sense-object
often signifies a perceptual object: it indicates a wager concerning such
a world, and is not added to it like a fiction for which the mind alone
would be responsible. At the limit, the problem is reversed : why are there
sense organs if what is discerned has as its respondent only the shimmer
ing, noisemaking, a nd odor-emission of a nature in which no situation is
an active condition for anything at all ? Even if we speak of an " aggres
sive bl ue," no one dies from it, but the l ittle match girl, for her part, fed
only by the fumes of the Christmas feast, died of hunger.
   Habit thus testifies to nature, j ust as the existence of a mountain climber
testifies to the fact that in general, the side of a mountain offers reliable
footholds. Of course, habit corresponds to a risk with no guarantee, to a
" law of nature " that is only valid " i n general," but it cannot be questioned
by an intellectual judgment that makes it " merely a habit." Quite the con
trary, it is the fact that the habit does, most often, pay off that must be
affirmed by the concept of nature. And it is this fact that is the requisite of
the intel lectual j udgment providing it with its materi al: after all, when
                                               ATTE N T I O N   TO   O BJ E C TS   89




j udgment is not transformed i nto a tri bunal, demanding i n a maniacal
and systematic way guara ntees that habit is quite unable to provide, it
typically intervenes when habit is disappointed, together with what we
call " interpreti ng," " trying to understand," or " taking a closer look." Cor
relatively, one can descri be disappoi ntment but not a satisfied habit. The
maniacal tri bunal is always a simulation, tacitly accepting an entire tissue
of trusts a nd habits to stage an eventual disappoi ntment, which it would
not even have words to designate without the tissue itself.
    Some wo rks dea l i ng with the etho logy of newborns provide quite
a ppropriate nourishment for Whitehead 's thesis, more precisely the dis
ti nction between " habits of experience " and their empiricist translation
" habits constructed by the s ubject on the basis of her experience." D aniel
Stern claims that a newborn's sense-experience may be tra nsmodal or
amodal, with one " sense-object " always conveying another, whereas the
experience of the senses as distinct ( seeing is not touchi ng, touching is
not tasting, etc . ) does not come unti l later. Indeed, among other objects
of various forms, a newborn visually " recognizes " ( preferentially fixes her
gaze upo n ) an object she has felt without having seen it. In other words,
i f there is a habit when we sense the possibility of a " soft touch " at the
sight of a " blue flannel coat," this habit is not constructed on the basis of
experience, but is i ndeed a habit of experience.
    The conveyance of some sense-objects by others might one day, of
course, be given neurophysiological descriptions. It would be miraculous
i f it did not, and if the neuronal processes that accompany " seeing blue"
were not themsel ves accompanied by activities " elsewhere " i n the bra i n,
perhaps a k i n to the experience of " touching" or even " tasting." The cru
cial point is that conveyance does not explain the perceptual object, but
celebrates it as a " factor of nature." The fact that the situations of disti nct
sense-objects concur, or co-occur in a regular way, which relates them to
the same object as their active condition, is the ultimate fact that the
habit of experience i ndicates and exploits.
    Whereas the sense-object can only be a term i n a relation, the perceptual
object is that which exhibits a relation whose terms a re sense-objects. It is
this ultimate fact of nature that is ratified by the attri butive j udgment,
which makes every sense-object the property or attribute of a perceptual
object. A ratification which, because it transforms what is a requisite i nto a
right, takes on a certain exaggeration. It is as if the fact that the slopes of a
mountain usually provide rel iable footholds were established as a property
defini ng the mountain. Whitehead often comments on i ntel lectual ab
stractions i n this way: it is not that they are false, but they a re somewhat
exaggerated in thei r claims. Even the i dentification of sense-objects with
the terms of a relation is a bit exaggerated . This leaf is green: so be it. But
9 0   F R O M   T H E   P H I LOSO P H Y   OF   N ATU R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




at the same time as my experience exhibits the materials of this intel lec
tual judgment, a mass of disti nct or indistinct sounds, odors, and varia
tions in ambient luminosi ty ha unt my concrete experience. A sudden si
lence, and " nature falls silent " : it is terri fying, even i f the thousand noises
of nature that have j ust fa l len silent did not declare their source. But I
also know that multiple smells that I do not recognize, whose active
cond ition I cannot loca lize, are the ma teri a l required by the dog's pas
siona te activi ty, without which he would be a poor, bewi ldered thing.
And I a l so know that the rhythm impressed upon the female spider's
web by the ma le spider who ventures upon i t to copulate corresponds
to a crucial sense-object, which must turn the mode of exi stence of she
who experiences i t u pside down, ma king her change from predator to
fema le: a trust that constitutes the male, and is most often legitimate, but
only most often.
   Sense-objects, in their i ndefinite multi plicity, are so many signs, a lim
ited number of which exhibit a meaning for a living being, a l ways a spe
cific living being, and a mong these, some, in an even more limited num
ber, exhibit themselves as condi tioned by an object of another type, by a
perceptual object. Are they rea lly such ? Whereas many li ving bei ngs are
incapa ble of not letti ng themselves be fooled by appeara nces, as is at
tested by the ease with which ethologists can identify the habits of their
specific experiences by setti ng lures for them, humans know they can be
wrong. To this knowledge corresponds the possibi l i ty of doubting, bei ng
wary, that is, the trust that by experi menting, by taking a closer look, one
wi ll know whether one ca n trust: in particular, one will know whether
the object is illusory or not. Whitehead calls what has emerged victorious
from this trial a " physical object." The si tuation, the " there " of the sense
object, has been confirmed as the situation of a physical object: the situ
ation of the sense-obj ect was indeed indicative of the active condition for
the ingression of this sense-obj ect. It was indeed a coat, it is blue, and not
white but bathed i n a blue light, I can touch it, I can mani pulate it, my
suspicions are a ppeased, and my criteria are sati sfied . " Substantialist"
philosophers rati fy this with some exaggeration when they make sense
objects the attributes or properties of physical objects.
  There is a great difference in the roles of the situations of sense-objects
and physical objects. The situations of a physical object are conditioned
by uniqueness and continuity (eN, 1 5 7 ) .
   To recognize a coat, placed immobile o n a chair, a leaping tiger, o r an iri
descent, precarious soap bubble . . . in three seconds, the coat wil l sti ll be
there, the tiger may have killed me, and there wil l-be no more soap bubble.
And yet there exists a duration short enough for the tiger to be said to be
" there where it is " : the uniqueness of the situation. And there exists a
                                                 ATTE N T I O N   TO   OBJECTS   9 1




passage of events, a passage of nature, such that I recognize the same
bubble situated in distinct events, such that the bubble belongs simultane
ously to my past and to the experience that has j ust slipped into the past:
continuity in passage.
   Uniqueness and conti nuity are what is usually attributed to a " sub
stance," or to that which, as soon as nature bifurcates, is assigned to what
is " really there," " local izable," as opposed to what depends on the subject.
Uniqueness and continuity are also what is required by the extremely so
phisticated operation that leads us to " locate " an object, to define it by
assigning to it a posi tion in an insta nt. The relative confidence we can
have in our attributions and our definitions bea rs witness to uniqueness
and continuity as factors of nature, but these are prerequisites, what these
operations take advantage of, at their risks and perils, as mountain cli mb
ers take advantage of wha t offers them a foothold. As for the notions of
space a nd time, on the basis of which we transform into a right the pos
sibility of locating an obj ect i n reality, since we demand of an object " if it
really belongs to nature" that ideally it should be at a determinate point at
each i nstant, they do not by a ny means render explicit what we are aware
of, but only what conditions our definitions. They testi fy, first, to the fact
that science and philosophy take their abstractions too seriously. In par
ticular, they reduce the question of ingression to that of si tuation.
   Science and philosophy have been apt to entangle themselves in a simple
minded theory that an object is at one place at any definite time, and is
in no sense anywhere else. This is in fact the attitude of common sense
thought, though it is not the attitude of language which is naively express
ing the facts of experience. Every other sentence in a work of literature
which is endeavouring truly to interpret the facts of experience expresses
differences in surrounding events due to the presence of some object. An
object is ingredient throughout its neighbourhood, and its neighbourhood
is indefinite [ . . . 1 we are driven to admit that each object is in some sense
ingredient throughout nature; though its ingression may be quantitatively
irrelevant in the expression of our individual experiences (eN, 1 4 5 ) .
   In The Concept o f Nature, Whi tehead w i l l m a k e n o other a l l usion to
literature as a testi mony that is at least as rel ia ble as science, as fa r as the
general problem of ingression is concerned . Here, however, the a l l usion
suffices. It evokes what we could so easily forget when we limit ourselves
to the situations that have i nspi red the bifurcation of nature. When we
deal with bi rdsongs, or with birds perched on branches, we forget that
what we are aware of i n perception can also be ca lled "presence."
   Who could ever define i n l i mitative terms the multiple ways in which
the sudden presence of my neighbor in this room, where I was working
alone wi th Whitehead, modi fies my experience ? In any case, the ingression
9 2   FROM T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




transforms my experience, which is no longer primarily in this room, alone
in front of this screen . Correlatively, far from being there in the doorway,
and therefore located relative to me, my neighbor, smiling or annoyed,
friend ly or hurried, is first of all a presence that de-localizes me and signi
fies a world from which I have suddenly ceased to be protected .
   Presence is not a simple matter of psychology, making the mind inter
vene as a responsible promoter. Quite the contrary, if we can believe stud ies
of the ethology of newborns, it is what we call " psychology " that requires
this experience of presence. According to Daniel Stern, a newborn, wel l
before memory or operations of intel lectual judgment can be attri buted
to her, " reacts " in differentiated affective modes to the facial features pre
sented to her. As if the features of faceness were the pri mord ial requisite
for human young to construct the twofold correlative emergence that
will make them human bei ngs, endowed with what we call a " psychol
ogy " : that of a sense of sel f, and that of a sense of others, not as " there "
but as " present." Of course, " presence," like perceptual objects, might then
result from a habit of experience, but there would be nothing " merely
psychological " about this habit, which would define what is requi red by
what we call psychology : what must become an important factor of ex
perience for human young, on pain of death, if not biological then at
least affective.
   " Presence," of which we cannot give an abstract definition, woul d thus
be the requisite for sophisticated intel lectual operations, which, as the
case may be, will end up denying what they take advantage of: what pro
vides a foothold for the mind in nature.
   This kind of hypothesis would have i nterested Whitehead all the more
in that the infant's testimony with respect to what, for her, as early as her
first weeks, constitutes a smiling-human-face, seems to exhibit what he
ca lls an "object in the complete sense." In the infant's experience, the
i ngression of a smil i ng face must no doubt be said to be "a specific set of
correlated mod ifications of the characters of all events," whose center is
designated by the situated smile.
   An object of one of these types has relations to events other than those
belonging to the stream of its situations. The fact of its situations within
this stream has impressed on all other events certain modifications of their
characters. In truth the object in its completeness may be conceived as a
specific set of correlated modifications of the characters of all events, with
the property that these modifications attain to a certain focal property for
those events which belong to the stream of its situations [ . . . 1 The con
ventional limitation of the object to the focal stream of e vents in which it
is said to be "situated " is convenient for some purposes, but it obscures
                                                 ATT E N T I O N   TO   O BJ E CTS   9 3




the ultimate fact of nature. From this point of view the antithesis between
action at a distance and action by transmission is meaningless. The doc
trine of this paragraph is nothing else than another way of expressing the
unresolvable multiple relation of an object to events ( eN, 1 8 9-1 90 ) .
   Soon, i n Science and the Modern World, Whitehead was t o listen to the
poets testifying to the somber a nd heavy presence of the a ncient hills. Of
the hill, the poet does not say " there it is agai n," but " it's sti ll there." The
continuity of the perceptual object will then have become endurance, an
end urance we can be aware of in a way that exhibits the communication
between perception and a ffect, that gives meaning to a "complete fact "
exceed ing the definition of the hill as a geographical or geological entity.
    In The Concept of Nature, however, Whitehead will ask so-cal led scien
tific objects to testi fy to the ultimate fact of nature, which is obscured by
the conventional construction of a well-defined identity of the situated
object. No doubt we can see in this a reflection of the li mits of the prob
lem that Whitehead has set for himself in this book: to construct the "con
cept of nature " against the threat of a bifurcation of that nature. For a
mathematician, the limit of a problem is neither a weakness nor a defect.
What is a weakness or a defect is to forget that limit: to forget that a prob
lem has a price, to forget that the concepts created respond to a question,
not to a vision.
                                                                C H A P TER   S I X
