The I ngress ion of Scientific Objects




         E RE , THE CONSTRUCT I ON of the concept of nature must con
           front the risk of bifurcation, for nature, " what we are aware of
           i n perception," wi l l become populated by " objects " that declare
themselves to be " independent of the perci pient event " ; those very ones
that, as the case may be, will be evoked to " explai n perception." El ectro
magnetic radiation would constitute the objective explanation for what
you are subjectively awa re of as " red ." To dea l sepa rately with the ques
tion of the mode of i ngression of scientific objects does not mean to con
fer upon them a " fundamenta l " character: the singing bird or the leaping
tiger are j ust as important. Once again, what is at sta ke is not to explain
everyth i ng we are aware of. In this case, a s we remember Whitehead has
emphasized , i ngression should be decli ned according to a n i ndefinite
number of disti nct modes, all of which exhibit multiple relations . The
discrimi nation between the three types of mode, correspond i ng to sense
objects, perceptual, and scientific obj ects, responds to the need to prevent
nature from bifurcating. The goal will be to show that " scientific ob
j ects," far from designating a nature that is " i ndependent of perception,"
imply, like sense-objects and perceptual objects, that nature has "given a
foothol d " to the mind. They too thus belong to nature, as respondents to
this foothold that refer to the mind, which is what is ultimate.
    By the time Whitehead undertook to think of " scientific objects," the
point was no longer merely to articulate with the concept of nature state
ments expl icating the regula rities proper to observable phenomena.
Physics and chemistry have succeeded i n transgressing the li mits that tied
them to the genera l izations articulating measurable factors ( pressure,
                          T H E   I N G R E S S I O N   O F   S C I E NT I F I C   O BJ E CTS   9 S




temperature, and so on) in various roles. These sciences actual ly identi
fied, beyond the phenomena, the " ti ny bod ies " supposed for centuries
by the bi furcators of nature, but which others denounced as the perfect
exa mple of d ubious speculative constructions, menaci ng the rationa l
identity of the scientific enterprise. But Whitehead is happy to accept this
event. He who was trying to construct a concept of nature a ffirming what
we a re awa re of i n perception did not ha rbor a ny nosta lgia toward what
rema ined possible until the end of the ni neteenth century : to assign l i mits
to scientific descri ptions that a ffirm the i ndisputable pri macy of what we
are directly aware of, what we can observe and measure.
    Physicists and chemists, it is said, have succeeded in " going beyond the
phenomena," but this expression has many meanings. There is one that
Whitehead would rej ect: identifying the phenomenon with what is i llu
sory. Thus, when astronomers ma ke fun of astrologers, they oppose the
constellations, " appearances " on which the astrologers have relied, to their
knowledge that constel lations designa te groups of stars tha t a re com
pletely unconnected, some of them close, others very far away. The group
exists only for inhabitants of the ea rth, for only the terrestrial viewpoint
can thus unite stars that do not have the least privileged relationship
among themselves. However, this opposition is polemical, in that it rests
enti rely on an abstract resemblance: astronomers, like astrologers, con
template the heavens. But the astronomers' heaven is " scientific," insofar
as they are interested in the luminous points they observe in a mode that
defines them as " physical obj ects," that is, playing the role of active condi
tions for the emission of light. The astronomical tradition has d iverged
from astrological practice, insofar as it has devoted itself to discovering
what attention is d ue to these physical objects, how one " finds more" in a
sky which, by this very fact, finds itself practically defined as bereft of any
other meaning.
    It is also on the basis of the attention devoted to what has a role, to
what actually plays the role of active condition for the ingression of ( mea
surable) sense-objects, that the difference can be stated between the elec
trons, atoms, and molecules that henceforth populate physics, and the
atoms of ancient hypotheses. Physicists and chemists have thought of the
atom, and other unobservable entities, as actors, that is, on the basis of
their roles in " events " (collisions, chemical a ssocia tions, emissions, de
compositions, and so on), and they have conferred upon these events the
hypothetical role of "situations," the active conditions of certain experimen
ta l observations. Their success means that these hypotheses have allowed
them to " find more," that is, to produce specific experimental situations in
which a precise and " falsifiable" reference to those unobservable actors is
9 6   F R O M   T H E   P H I L O S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




necessary to explain what can be observed . This is the pa rad igmatic ex
peri mental achievement. The experimenter is now in a position to affirm
that atoms are not a mere interpretative hypothesis, since no one can in
terpret what she has observed without recourse to them: they are the re
spondents to which the di fference between an interpretative hypothesis
and a fruitful hypothesis refers.
   Whi tehead can thus serenely celebrate the atoms of the physicists a nd
chemists because they have nothing to do with the " tiny bodies " associ
ated with the bifurcation of na ture. These a toms are by no means active
participants in an operation of distribution between what pertains to " us "
a n d what pertains t o nature. They a r e a response t o the kind of attention
associated with the experimental effort. " Going beyond the phenomena,"
here, does not at all mean going " beyond " secondary qua l i ties towa rd a
nature " i ndependent" of our perceptions; it is to prolong the test al ready
pointed out by the d istinction between perceptual object and physical
object. It is not merely a matter of verifying, like a ra bbit turning its head
in the di rection of a noise, the conveyance " noise-movement of a preda
tor," but of explaining the multi ple signi fications that can be assumed by
the term " active condition." Nor is it a matter of l i miting onesel f to mul
tiplying experi mental regularities and to defining the d istinct roles of
each measurable factor that plays a part in the corresponding situations
as active cond itions for observation. The scientific object responds to an
additional achievement: these " roles " no longer respond only to the first
experimental question " What 's going on? " They can a lso be related to
the presence of " objects " which, for their part, do not pass.
   The origin of scientific knowledge is the endeavour to express in terms
of physical objects the various roles of events as active conditions in the
ingression of sense-objects into nature. It is in the progress of this investi
gation that scientific objects emerge. They embody those aspects of the
character of the situations of the physical objects which are most perma
nent and are expressible without reference to a multiple relation including
a percipient event [ . . . I In fact the whole point of the search for scientific
objects is the endeavour to obtain this simple expression of the charac
ters of events. These scientific objects are not themselves merely formu
lae for calculation; because formulae must refer to things in nature, and
the scientific objects are the things in nature to which the formulae refer
( eN, 1 5 8 ) .
   The question o f the active condition is central, both for the scientific
undertaking and for living beings. If nature were made up only of sense
objects, ghostly contacts, floating odors, sounds, luminous shimmerings,
all without an identifiable source, the scientific enterprise would not have
                           T H E   I N G R E S S I O N   O F   S C I E N T I F I C   O BJ E CTS   9 7




been possible. But neither would there have been any physical object nor
any living beings, for living beings testify to a world where, like the little
match girl, we die if the odor does not announce, at least sometimes, a
nourishing encounter with what is its active condition. This is true whether
the living beings are aware or not. Thus, we may think that a butterfly
does not real ly have the perceptual experience " of a world," and that its
flight responds to what we would call " detection," not to the experience
of the signs of the world that sense-objects represent for us. Yet when its
flight is oriented in the direction in which what is detected increases in
intensity, there most often occurs, fortunately for it, an encounter with
what we cal l a flower, what we, for our part, identify as an active condi
tion for the ingression of the odor, and what, for it, will be a concrete,
delectable experience, the eventuality of which was presupposed by its life
as a butterfly.
   To cite the exa mple of the butterfly as an experience involving detection
rather than perception does not mean to designate it as an a utomaton, but
to cal l it to witness to understand a " scientific object " that declares itself
to be i ndependent of the percipient event. The butterfly, whatever its own
experience may be, testifies to the flower a s a physical object. A specific
flower, i n the sense in which we recognize it as an object-say, there's that
rose again!-may wel l be illusory-another hologram! And what attracts
the butterfly may be a l ure set by an entomologist. Yet the butterfly, hu
man disappointment, and the very notion of a l ure celebrate the trust that,
" by going to take a closer look," we will most often discover what plays
the role of an active condition in the ingression, both of what the butterfly
detects and of what we perceive as odor and color.
   The scientific enterprise, l i ke l iving beings themselves, l ike common
sense itself, requires a world in which sensible signs signify in a generally
rel ia ble way; in which, when discerning a sense-object, we can anticipate,
without being wrong too often, certai n features of what only declares itself
in experience as discernible. The butterfly's mode of existence requires that
the detection of what is for us a specific color or odor a uthorize anticipa
tion that is often enough confirmed and verified by its consequences, by
what we can characterize as a satisfying "nectar! " encounter. Human be
ings, gardeners, naturalists, perfume makers, a nd creators of new, fragrant
floral species, have addressed themselves to flowers as physical objects
with some success, and have studied the various roles of the events that
contribute to the active cond itions of the ingression of the object " odor."
They have confirmed the well-founded nature of what is presupposed by
the distinction between the flower, as a physical object, and the flower as a
habit of percipient experience: the flower responds for the habit, and, by
9 8   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




paying it due attention, we can find even more in it that what it offers to an
insect. Yet it is the ambition proper to chemists to succeed in defining, and
then to synthesize an "object " common to h uman beings and butterflies,
a molecule whose presence plays a determi na nt role both for what we
call " odor" and for the detection attested by the butterfly's flight.
    Such an achievement would have no mea n i ng i ndependent of the
physical object, " fragrant flower," from which perfume makers have long
since learned under what conditions the " principle" could be extracted i n
a w a y t h a t could conserve it a s a n active condition for t h e ingression
of the sense-object " odor." Nor would it have a meaning independent of
that organ we baptize " nose," or else of i nsects that could be assimilated
to "detectors." Scientific objects presuppose physica l objects, at the same
time as they decla re themselves to be independent of the percipient event.
They are indeed at the summit of the logica l ascending hierarchy, in which
each member presupposes the lower type, and whose base designates
sense-objects. However, this hierarchy can be stated in another way, and
this is where the risk of the bifurcation of nature resides.
    Quite obviously, there is a relation of contemporaneity between the
scientific enterprise and the great theme of bifurcation: both confer a cru
cial importance upon entities that declare themselves i ndependent of the
percipient event. For Whitehead, however, this feature is not the privilege
of a truth that would finally be " objective," naked, beyond the motley
trappings of sense-experience. It is because it reflects an achievement, a
" reliable foothold " of the mind in nature, that the scientific object is i m
portant, and as such this object may revea l its usual association with the
general theme of the bifurcation of nature, and be together with, or placed
" i n the same boat" as, other objects, particularly sense- and physical ob
jects. Just as " sense-objects " testify to a world in which their ingression
signifies, in a way that is sufficiently regular to be rel iable, a physical ob
ject that is worth paying attention to, certain physica l objects testi fy to
a world in which it is worthwhile to vary their situations, to extract the
factors that play a role in this situation as " active conditions," in order to
set the spotl ight on them. This is not always the case, far from it: a chirp
ing bird can be descri bed as a function of the various roles played by the
events that contri bute to its chi rping, but it wil l always be events (night
fall, the approach of a female or of an i ntruder) that presuppose a bird
that is quite alive and involved in its business. No experimenter has suc
ceeded i n "extracting " from the bird the " active principle " of the i ngres
sion of the sonorous objects for which its situation is the active condition,
but only in identi fying and i mitating these objects, in descri bing their roles
for other birds.
                           T H E   I N G R E S S I O N   O F   S C I E N TI F I C   OBJECTS   99




   The great theme of the bifurcation of nature is thus not the statement of
a general truth that could be confirmed by experimentation. It marks the
forgetting of what constitutes the val ue of experimental achievement:
" here," nature has offered a new kind of reliable foothold to the " mind."
It is this forgetting that al lows it to be said that scientific objects "explain"
sense-appearances or constitute thei r hidden objective truth. The scientific
object is then no longer the respondent required by the experimental foot
hold, but explains what we perceive in general, in a way that claims to be
independent of all perception.
   For Whitehead, then, the molecule obviously does not expla i n the
event " smelling that odor " which it accompanies. Yet its privi lege is two
fold. On the one hand, it has a permanence that the event i n question
lacks. Each time I uncork a jar contai ning a solution of synthetic vanilla,
I will smel l once again that odor that resembles that of vanil la. O n the
other, unlike " natural " vanilla, extracted from pods, synthetic vanilla can
be described and produced without reference to the sense-object " odor,"
and therefore imposes itself as associated with a vast multipl icity of
events and objects to which the type of attention designated by our sense
orga ns is not appropriate. The privilege of synthetic vanilla is not that of
explanation but of a bstraction; and unl ike the a bstraction of perfume
makers, which succeeds i n extracti ng a n active principle from vanilla
pods, this is not a n a bstraction with regard to the physica l object.
When I note, " Yes, that's about the same smell," I celebrate the relative
success of the set of risky a bstractions employed by the practice of syn
thetic chemistry, which presupposes the ingression, in these events we
call "chemical reactions," of those actors with d i fferentiated roles we call
" molecules."
   The molecule of synthetic vanilla is " really " i n nature, but it does not
expl a i n nature: what is a bstract can never expl ain what is concrete. It is
abstraction that must be explained . The molecule has no meaning inde
pendent of nature, i ndependent of the various types of events in which it
makes i ngression. Precisely because it seems self-sufficient, its definition
exhibits its a bstraction, exhibits the ra re achievement constituted by the
definition of scientific objects, the possibility of relating to them what
we a re aware of, of bracketing or leaving aside the percipient event.
   Undoubtedly molecules and electrons are abstractions. But then so is
Cleopatra 's Needle. The concrete facts are the events themselves [ . . . 1
to be an abstraction does not mean that an entity is nothing. It merely
means that its existence is only one factor of a more concrete element of
nature. So an electron is abstract because you cannot wipe out the whole
structure of events and yet retain the electron in existence. In the same
1 0 0   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




way the grin on the cat is abstract; and the molecule is really in the event
in the same sense as the grin is really on the eat's face ( CN, 1 7 1 ) .
   Sense-objects, a s soon a s they are defined a s " what" we perceive, " that
sound," " that smel l," which we recognize "quite a part" from the passage
of nature, a re a bstractions. Here, a bstraction i mplies what are cal led the
sense-organs, but it refers to the ultimate authority constituted by the
mind, in its guise of the extraction of what is perceived, separated from
the event we are aware of in perception. And a bstraction is, of course,
not a rbitrary: it ind icates a foothold that is generally rel ia ble, and in this
sense its respondent must be a " fact " of nature. To be sure, both the dis
cernible a nd the discerned differ from animal species to animal species,
but each ti me they constitute a wager with regard to what matters, with
regard to that whose neglect entails the death penalty. And the modes of
abstraction, the conveyance of certain sense-objects by others, testify to the
importance of the abstraction constituted by the perceptual object, that
Cleopatra 's Need le, for instance, with which I would collide, to my prej u
d ice, if I reduced i t to a simple visual i mage.
   Likewise, the successful a bstraction constituted by molecules implies
the modes of detection made possible by laboratory instruments, a nd
refers to an experimenta l tradition, which may be as rich in presupposi
tions, i magination, and technica l, economic, and intel lectual ingredients
as we may wish, but in a way that defines as what really matters the pro
duction of a mode of abstraction independent of the percipient event. Yet
abstraction is not arbitrary in this case, either. It has nothing to do with
the abstraction proposed by metaphysical statements that seize upon sci
entific a bstractions as if they were achievements due to them, generalizing
them in a way that testifies to their indifference to the risk of failure. What
matters is the vocation of the experimental apparatus, that independently
of which it would not exist: to produce a testimony to the role of scientific
objects that must accept and resist the risks of controversy, to be recog
nized as benefiting from a " reliable foothold," authorizing the abstraction
which, in return, will make scientific objects in nature its respondents .
   In a way, the one that is proper to experimental innovation, the defini
tion of scientific objects is thus situated i n the tradition of the definition of
physical objects, verifying the reliable character of perceptual objects. And
the latter, deriving from the habits of experience, designate in turn the trials
associated with biological evolution. The only difference is that the risk
and importance at stake do not concern the wel l-foundedness of a percep
tion or the survival of a living being. What is at stake is the survival of the
"mind's " new " foothold," and of what is supposed to be that foothold's
respondent in nature, that is, the twofold passage 'to exi stence of the ex-
                         T H E   I N G R E SS I O N   O F   S C I E N TI F I C   OBJE CTS   1 0 1




perimental apparatus qua rel iable, and of the object to which it refers qua
belonging to nature, or to what we have to do with in awareness.
   Some scientific objects exist, however, whose importa nce for the con
cept of nature is of a different type. In their case, the work of mathematical
physics, which organizes a nd a rticulates a set of different experimental
testi monies to relate them to an object, winds up a pproaching the prop
erly conceptual problem of what Wh itehead has called " i ngression." The
point is then no longer to identify a molecule a s a function of the " role"
it plays, but to describe this role itself i n terms of activity. When " laws of
nature" are enunciated, exhi biting the " passage of nature " in a n explicit
way, objects are defined as insepara ble from the events in which they
make ingression, whereas events are defined as " being what they a re,"
beca use molecu les, atoms, and electrons " a re what they a re."
   But in science we have found out that when we k now all about the ad
ventures amid events of material physical objects and of scientific objects
we have most of the relevant information which will enable us to predict
the conditions under which we shall perceive sense-objects in specific situ
ations [ . . . 1 The analysis of these adventures makes us aware of another
character of events, namely their characters as fields of activity which de
termine the subsequent events to which they will pass on the objects situ
ated in them. We express these fields of activity in terms of gravitational,
electromagnetic, or chemical forces and attractions (CN, 1 70 ) .
   The gravitational force proposed b y Newton created a scandal because
it "acted at a distance." It might, perhaps, have sufficed to impose the aban
donment of loca lization, of the idea that the primordial scientific character
ization of the sun, and of the earth as well, is to be where they are. The his
torical fact is that physicists have instead made do with a mathematical
formulation that a ffirms, at the same time, that a massive body is defined
by precise spatial coordinates, and that nevertheless other bodies, defined
by their mass and their distance, intervene in the calculation of its motion,
a double definition that does without the notions of adventure or activity.
As far as "chemical forces " a re concerned, they, in contrast, were deduced
from the activity of a mixture of reagents as such. Yet their activity is at
tributed not to a scientific object, a particular molecule, but to a global
mixture. Chemical forces say nothing a bout the molecule's adventures;
they qualify " relations" specific to two chemical reagents, but this qualifi
cation, since it is i ndependent of the local ization of the molecules, does
not al low this local ization to be questioned . Since Faraday, however, the
electromagnetic field has exhibited properties i rreducible to those of a
force " between " two charged and l ocal ized bodies. And, as a secon d sur
prise, this field has, since the end of the nineteenth century, been associated
1 0 2   F R O M T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




with the presence of electrons in motion, capable of being localized and
endowed with a charge. In this case, the problem is fully deployed at last.
The mode of ingression of the scientific object "electron" questions local
ization as a primordial, " objective " property.
   A scientific object such as a definite electron is a systematic correlation
of the characters of all events throughout all nature [ . . . J The electron is
not merely where its charge is. The charge is the quantitative character of
certain events due to the ingression of the electron into nature [ . . . J the
electron is the systematic way in which all events are modified as the
expression of its ingression [ . . . J We may if we please term the mere
charge the electron. But then another name is required for the scientific
object which is the full entity which concerns science, and which I have
called the electron ( CN, 1 5 8-1 5 9 ) .
  Unlike i t s charge, t h e electron does not let itself b e local ized, a n y more
that the cat whose Carroll ian grin I can see. Not only does mathematical
physics thus testify against the ideal of simple localization associated with
the theme of the bifurcation of nature, but it confirms what ingression
obliges us to think: the event is what it is because the object is what it is,
and objects are what they a re because events are what they a re.
  The conception which most fully expresses the character of nature is
that of each event as modified hy the ingression of each electron into
nature ( CN, 1 60 ) .
   To b e sure, the d ream o f some physicists woul d have been, a n d still i s
today, to deduce the particle from the field, a n d t o make it a local expres
sion of the field . Why, for i nstance, cou ld we not th ink of the particle in
the manner of a wave wrinkling the ocea n ? It woul d of course have a
behavior a l l its own, but we would also know that it is nothing other
than a local expression of the ocean, than this aspect " here " of the ocean
"everywhere." Many physicists have tried their hand at this, and field
theory today is inha bited by this hypothesis when it suggests turning
particles into " excited modes " of a field that is, in principle, coextensive
with the universe. At the risk of making the possibil ity of ta lking a bout
an electron depend on the existence of the detector that is to local ize it.
Just as the wave a ffects us, the particles woul d a ffect our detectors . But
the only "objective real ity " would be the ocean or the fiel d, which ex
plains without being explained.
   I f Whitehead were a mong us today, perhaps he would have objected:
the wave is what it is because the ocean is what it is, to be sure, but
doesn't this meta phor i ncite us to formulate the question of ingress ion in
a way that is too unilateral ? Perhaps the ocean is expressed in the wa ve,
but how does the presence of the wa ve a ffect the ocea n ? The challenge
                          T H E   I N G R E S S I O N   O F   S C I E N T I F I C   O BJ ECTS   1 0 3




associated with the concept of ingression would thus be to succeed i n
formulati ng the idea that t h e ocean, too, is w h a t it is because t h e wave is
what it is. This is the kind of objection some physicists oppose to con
temporary field theory: the adventure of the particle in a field should not
be red uci ble to a mode of expression of that fiel d .
    In other words, the question of how t o represent the electron's i ngres
sion i nto its field, favored by Wh itehead, has indeed become general ized,
but the only sure point i n this experimental and intel lectual adventure
today is the a ba ndonment of the master idea of the bifurcation of nature:
the identification of the relation of situation with that of local ization. For
the rest, the least one can say is that this representation is still under con
struction, trying to take i nto consideration a nd order the multiple a nd
ever-prol iferating aspects of the " field of activity " in an attempt to define
the type of attention that is due to them.
    The fact that mathematical physics i ntervenes to deprive the doctrines
of the bifurcation of nature of their most prestigious support is, of course,
utterly crucial. The fact that, for a century, physicists have been confronted
by the question of how to articulate local a nd delocalized, particle a nd
field, a re j ust as i mportant. Yet it would be catastrophic to transform the
testi mony contributed by mathematical physics today into an a uthority.
This is so whether it be to " rectify " the Whiteheadian notion of i ngres
sion, that is, to a ffirm triumphantly that the particle is indeed what it is
beca use the field is what it is, but that, contra ry to what Wh itehead
thought, the converse is not true; or whether it is to acknowledge that he
was right. Even if mathematical physics one day came to confirm what
ingression a ffirms, i f some day a theory should be formulated that really
does articulate particles and fields, that is, redefines these two physico
mathematical notions on the basis of the problem of thei r articulation,
this would be a matter of science, not of the general ity Whitehead called
" i ngression." For this new theory, whatever may be its interest, would
deal exclusively with situations where the ideal of the exactness of math
ematical physics is relevant, i n particular the ideal definitions of point and
instant. Such a theory woul d still be an a bstraction: there is no such thing
as nature at an i nstant, all events have a duration, and all d urations have
a thickness.
    The temptation to i dentify the Whiteheadian event with the
mathematico-physical notion of a field must therefore be resisted, even if
they both share certain features, precisely those features that have pre
vailed against good sense, first with the scanda lous notion of forces
" acti ng at a di stance," then of a field that is i rreducible to these forces.
Correlatively, the genera l concept of ingression cannot by a ny means be
1 0 4   F R O M T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




assimilated to the problem ra ised by the insepara bil ity between electron
and field. However complicated it may be, for physicists, to construct
what nature obliges them to accept, the very possibility of defining this
compl ication reveals the a bstraction of the definitions whose relations
are to be articulated .
   The aim of science is to seek the simplest explanations of complex
facts. We are apt to fall into the error of thinking that the facts are simple
because simplicity is the goal of our quest. The guiding motto in the life
of every natural philosopher should be, Seek simplicity and distrust it
( eN, 1 63 ) .
                                                                C H A P T ER   S E V EN
