I nterlude

      A Pragmatics of Concepts




            H I TE HEAD H A D WA RNED US :         perhaps what is hardest to
              understand in The Concept of Nature is the limits assigned to
              this concept, and more precisely wha t these l i mits exclude. For
what is excluded are all questions capable of exciting philosophers of a
metaphysical bent, but also-and today, perhaps, above a ll-the cohort of
those who define as the final frontier for science the question of the emer
gence of conscious experience as such from neuronal mechanisms. To
the questions raised by the thinkers who call themselves " Natura l i sts" in
the United States-those who present themselves as modestly, or even
pragmatical ly, a dopting the path opened up by the " natural sciences "
Whitehead would not only answer " that's beside the point, for it would be
metaphysics." He would spea k of badly framed questions, to which there
is no possible answer. Of course, neural mechanisms belong to nature, in
the sense that they are part of what we have lea rned by paying it due at
tention. They are really in nature, in the sense that the grin of Lewis Car
roll's cat is really on the cat's face. Yet they are successful, relevant a bstrac
tions, or " scientific objects," and as such they presuppose what naturalist
phi losophy wou ld have them expla i n : " mi n d " qua " knowing." When it
comes to nature, knowledge is the ultimate.
   Framing the problem in this way will meet with the assent of phenom
enological philosophers, and there is certainly a kinship between phe
nomenology and the Whiteheadian genera l ities known as the p assage
of nature a nd the object " that is there once again." And yet Whitehead
was no phenomenologist, for these general ities have nothing in common
with a "phenomenological red uction," with the ambition of thinking of
1 0 6   F R O M T H E   PH I LOSOPH Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




pure phenomenality, the donation presupposed by everything given . The
threat of confusion, very present in France where phenomenology is ex
tremely influential, concerns the meaning of this word " ultimate." The
ultimate in the phenomenologica l sense is both what is to be thought and
what imposes upon thought a distortion that has something to do with a
conversion, since the point is no longer to think " a bout something " but
to address an experience purified from any particular i nterest in any par
ticular object. The Whiteheadian ultimate, for its part, i s only ulti mate
with regard to the p roblem raised, a nd it is defined by its function-to
avoid fa lse problems-not by an order of truth that transcends our ha
bitua l modes of thought. It does not demand the suspension of what tes
tifies to the certitudes of common sense. On the contrary, the distinction
Whitehead proposes between " factors," belonging to sense experience,
and "entities," implying the transition toward thought, has as its first ef
fect to vindicate common sense, our habits in the world, and everything we
" know," even if our theories of knowledge do not give us the right to know
it. Although the ultimate is " mind," when it comes to the concept of na
ture, this is so not in the sense that everything refers to it or proceeds from
it, but in the sense that nature is to be thought as capable of "giving a
foothol d " to k nowledge.

Nature is th us neither knowa ble-definable, for instance, as a system of
relations between entities-nor unknowable, the famous " m ute rea lity"
upon which we proj ect h uman, linguistic, or social categories. This bi
nary alternative, which nourishes so many philosophical discussions, is
fata l for common sense. Nature is that a bout which relevant knowledge
may be produced . If we pay d ue attention to it, we can learn, discern rela
tions, and multiply entities a nd ratios. Contemplative subjects wondering
whether they are the a uthors of what they see, or whether their vision
gives them access to a rea lity i ndependent of them, is a d i sa strous philo
sophical fiction. To ask such a question, one must already have eliminated,
as unworthy of being thought, all those who bustle a bout, inquire, a nd
carry out tests a nd experiments: from those who, in the darkness of ti me,
learned how to track an animal or discern plants with curative virtues, to
scientific experimenters in their laboratories. And one must ignore that
one is oneself part of all those who learn, every day, what attention must
be paid to in a world that ceaselessly demands attention. " Pay attention,"
says the parent to the incautious chi l d .
   Knowledge a s ulti mate does not designate a " knowing subject," but
corresponds to a problem of a pragmatic kind: the concept of nature
must give meaning to the world with wh ich we dea l, a world we can
                                                            I N T E R L U D E   1 0 7




learn a bout, but which is a lso capa ble of trick i ng us a nd placing us in
danger. In short, a world that demands our attention. It is to this prag
matics that the " hierarchy" of objects responds, as does the i ntermodality
of our senses, for each type of object corresponds to a type of demand
and a possi bility of verification, that is, also a way of paying attention.
From this viewpoi nt, experimenta l science, as a producer of " scientific
objects," by no means carries out a brea k with common sense. It desig
nates the surprising discovery that it is possible, in some cases, to "ask
even more." In this case, the object, which is always " situated " and can
not be a bstracted from the events i n which it makes i ngression and that
actively condition it, provides a foothold for q uestions addressed to an
entity whose behavior is a function of determinate interactions with other
entities. The signature of the pragmatic approach, here as elsewhere, is to
link the production of such an "objective " definition with an achievement,
with the fact that in some cases the mode of attention proper to experi
menta l science is found to be a "due" one, not the general defini tion of
knowledge finally freed of its subjective attach ments.
   Whiteheadian generalities are themselves inseparable from a pragmatics,
a pragmatics of the concepts that pa rticipate in the concept of nature, and
must a lso be eva luated in terms of eventual success. On the one hand, they
must succeed in constituting knowledge as an ultimate, not as central . In
other words, the concept of nature must be such that nature provides a
" foothold " for knowledge, but it must not legitimize any particular form
of k nowledge; it must not dupl icate, by any k i nd of j ustification, the em
pirica l fact of the eventua l success of certai n ways of paying attention.
The q uestion of the type of attention that is d ue in each case is a q uestion
for which there is no conceptual shortcut. They must, moreover, succeed
in situating the mode of attention that gave rise to the bifurcation of na
ture i n a way that verifies that it is always possible to discover more in
nature, but without ever discovering in it that which would enable what is
known to be "expla ined."
   Did Whitehead succeed, from this last point of view ? To verify this, I
will address two technica l terms i ntrod uced to help think of the passage
of nature, the continuous and relational multiplicity of events, and the
qual itative multiplicity of objects: i ngression a nd cogredience. The goal
will be to show that these two terms, which rema in i ndeterminate at the
end of The Concept of Nature, a re so i n the positive sense of the term,
that is, i n the sense that every scientific explanation that targets them
would restore the bifurcation of nature. And the point will be to ra ise the
q uestion of the way this i ndeterminacy resists, or fails to resist, certain
contemporary modes of expla nation.
1 0 8   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   NAT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




    The primary function of an object's ingression is to a ffirm that the ab
straction required by the judgment of recognition, memory, and compari
son is not reducible to these intel lectua l opera tions . When it comes to
what is a bstract, to the entity as an object of thought, it must be sa id
both that it is the product of an a bstraction and that this a bstraction may
respond-although this rema ins to be verified-to an offer for which na
ture is the respondent. The respondent, not the ca use: it is not beca use
" the same objects " have made ingression that we perceive them "aga in."
The criteria tha t render explicit our definition of " the same" do not de
fine the object in the sense that it belongs to nature and does not exist
independently of the event in which it makes ingression.
    It is here that the developments of neuroscience, of cognitive psychol
ogy, and of the "connectionist " models seem to be a ble to contribute some
thing new. For some, they enable us to envisage an explanation, scientific
at last, of the emergence of the percei ved object, that is, of the experience
associated with the Whiteheadian object: "there it is again."
    Let us take the case of the networks of coupled a utomata that serve as
references for the connectionist models of neura l mecha nisms. They were
considered momentous, since an abil ity for " a rtificia l recognition " can be
associated with them, as if the network were a ble to a bstract an object,
that is, to adopt a specific form of behavior that may serve as a signa l : a
given object, of which no one has produced an a bstract definition, is de
tected. Of course, when the connectionist networks function as a techni
cal appa ratus, the technicians know what is to be detected, and they also
know how to act on the connections in a way that stabil izes and specifies
the detection. Technical success is the ultimate. Yet when it comes to the
brain, the person who knows " what " is detected is absent. Could we not
say, then, that such a mechanism "explains" the a bstraction of what we
ca ll an " object," and that the latter is therefore merely a product of neu
ra l mecha nisms, not of a general ity belonging to the concept of na ture ?
Ingression would then be replaced by a process of emergence, expl ica ble
i n terms of connected neura l networks, and nature would bifurcate, for
the perceived object would not be a bstracted but produced as such by
detection.
    As the neurophilosopher Andy Clarke points out, however, such an ex
planatory hypothesis fea tures a cerebral machinery tha t works on itself
and by itsel f, and a world that appears on stage only in as insignificant a
way as possible, ca refully stripped of all that might constitute a landmark
and hence complicate the q uestion of responsibility. It is i mportant for the
stage-managers that the network 's beha vior can be described as expla in
ing an emergence that has no correspondent in nature, as responsible for
                                                            I NT E R L U D E   1 0 9




an emergent "there it is! " Like the networks used by engineers, although in
a different mode, the network is thus situated by what is at stake. The stag
ing in which it plays the role of what is responsible for emergence proposes
a confrontation between two abstractions: the " neuronal brain" and a real
ity conceived as " mute," like an illegible text or image. In contrast, when the
stage becomes crowded, when the brain receives an acting body and this
body is itself situated in a world whose patterns are important, and some
of which must be detected "on pain of death," the brain is no longer that
which explains, but j ust as much that whose workings are explained on the
basis of the activity of living beings capable of recognizing, but also of ex
ploiting, and even creating; w hat matters for their activity. This does not
mean that the question of the eventua l relevance of the connectionist model
loses its interest, but it does lose the power to make nature bifurcate. It con
firms that when the brain is addressed qua belonging to nature, one can
learn more from it. What one will learn will not, however, enable us to sur
mount the indeterminacy a ffirmed by Whitehead with regard to the object's
ingression, unless the kind of answer we seek is the ultimate, that deter
mines the staging.
   As the reader will recall, cogredience, for its part, a l l udes to what ex
ceed s the concept of nature, that is, to metaphysics. It designates the q ues
tion of what constitutes the meeting point between the two " rea lities"
we call " nature" and " mind," respectively: the question of what constitutes
an event for the person perceiving. As a concept, it points out that neither
nature nor mind is in command here. The interruption of the relation of
cogred ience is a fact for which not explanation but notice is appropriate,
even if it can " expla in itsel f" if we can a lways later-but only later
explain it. We then give to what has been associated with the interruption
the power to explain that interruption. In contrast, what can be affirmed
is that the precarious stability of the cogredient relation-the sorti ng pro
cess that d ifferentiates between what constitutes an event and makes the
present slip into the past, and what " escapes notice"-is itself something
that is at stake. At sta ke for survival, for lack of attention may enta il the
death penalty. At stake for spiritual techniques, that aim at the mind th rough
work on the body. At sta ke for magical practices, and for experimental
psychology-although today, the latter knows a great dea l less than the
magicians on ..t:he subject. Yet cogred ience is itself the common requisite
for these sta kes; it is what they all presuppose, a nd what turns all our ex
planations i nto commentaries.
   Today, the science of dynamic attractors a l lows us to make sense of
" phase tra nsitions," and of bifurcations or tipping-poi nts where a system
cha nges i ts behavior wi thout there being any need to assign a ca use
1 1 0   FRO M   T H E   P H I L O S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




responsible for this change. Could we not imagine that the specious pres
ent, the d uration of a here " a nd " now, might be explained in these terms ?
Once aga in, the goa l will not be to deny that, oriented by the models of
systems with attractors, the attention we pay to the brain may make us
better able to learn more about it. Yet once again, the expla natory ambi
tion, which would make nature bifurcate since what " constitutes an
event" would be determined by the dynamic system, is reflected by the
fragmentation of what must be thought of together.
   The explanatory power of systems with attractors is determined by the
possibil ity of sepa rating what explains-a system governed by a l i mited
number of varia bles whose relations rema in fixed-a nd what is to be
explained, the q ua l itative changes in beha vior that characterize this sys
tem. Yet the explanation loses its power if the model dea ls with a bra in
that is not isolated, but a n integral pa rt of what Whitehead called our
" bodily l i fe," a life that is never the same twice, that is never there " once
again." In this case, the explanatory model requi res what it does not
explain: what could be cal led "a viewpoint on bodily life " from which
would follow the defini tion of the variables required by the landscape of
dynamic a ttractors. Once again, the stage is repopulated, preventing
na ture from bifurcating, for such a viewpoint, far from being fixed once
and for all, must include, in one way or another, what it is i mporta nt to
pay attention to in a concrete situation . The question of what constitutes
an event, fa r from being solved, then constitutes the crucial element pre
supposed by the definition of the varia bles requi red by the model .
   Obviously, in neither of the two cases I have j ust envisaged is there any
question of designating a " mind " that makes cerebral complexity its in
strument. The mind as ultimate plays no role when nature is concerned:
its role is to avoid fa lse problems that emerge as soon as the brain, de
scribed as a set of entities in relation, is rendered uni latera lly responsible
for what we are aware of, like mountain climbers capable of producing a
hold by their own means and climbing up a smooth wal l . When the brain
becomes an integral part of what, with Andy Clarke, one could call an
ecologically rea listic situation, the mind is no longer the ultimate, since the
question exceeds the l i mits of the problem answered by the concept of
nature. We no longer have to do with genera lities, or attributing responsi
bilities, but with the i mpassioned and fascinating adventure of living be
ings in environments that are always already partially fashioned, in ways
that matter and signify.
   It is rema rkable that i n The Concept of Nature, ingression has the very
limited role of resisti ng the philosophical d isaster enta iled by the lack of
distinction between different types of object, di fferent types of situation,
                                                              I N TE R L U D E   1 1 1




and between loca l ization and situation. If, of course, instead of identify
ing that bird as a perceptual object associa ted with this sound, I was
moved by the vibrating corporeality of its song, and if I did not restrict
myself to recognizing this face, but felt when I saw it that the discussion
will be stormy or painful, the temptation to deny that the object affects its
environment would be much less sed uctive. But I would twice have ex
ceeded the limits of the concept of nature such as Whitehead constructed
it. As a living being, the bird testifies to a world in which beings sensitive to
its song exist. The expression on the other person's face raises the question
of emotion: not what I perceive, but how what I perceive a ffects myself.
    Whitehead was soon to cross the ocean, and on America n soil he wa s
to provide himself-was to dare to provide himself?-the means of be
coming what, in The Concept of Nature, he had challenged himself not
to be: a metaphysician. There is no contradiction here, for the metaphys
ics he wanted to avoid was the one that is done without knowing it
when nature is asked to expl ain knowledge-or without accepting what
it commits us to-when " m i nd " is i ntroduced to explain what does not
enter into the definition of nature one has provided onesel f. When White
head becomes a metaphysician, neither nature nor mind will subsist, and
knowledge will no longer be the ultimate. The point wil l no longer be to
construct a nature to which this flower, whose scent I recognize, may be
long, but a world in which this enjoyment vibrates: " how nice it smel ls."
    We may i magine that Whitehead, in 1 920, did not suspect the adven
ture on the threshold of which he found himself. No one can know, for
there is no trace left of his feelings in this rega rd . It remains that the op
eration of reading I have attempted certainly does not correspond to the
effect that The Concept of Nature had on contemporary readers. I have
accentuated the wholly mathematical freedom with which Whitehead
defines the problem of nature, whereas for many readers, no dou bt, the
two sou rces he privileges-the scientific definition of objects and sense
experience-were the two normal poles of the problem. What I ha ve cho
sen to exhibit is Whitehead's gesture, the way he decided to establish the
concept of nature as the answer to a problem, that is, on the edge of the
bifurcation that traps thinkers as soon as they to approach it, by attribut
ing responsibilities to subject or object. In so doing, I have presented The
Concept of Nature as the beginning of an ad venture, and I have placed
this adventure under the banner of mathematical audacity: not to sea rch
for some negotiated solution, evaluated accord ing to its plausibility or its
capacity to provide a minimum of satisfaction to the va rious parties, but
to tackle a problem mano a mana and go as fa r as that problem wi l l de
mand. In this case, to accept fu lly and without restriction what we a re
1 1 2   FROM   THE   P H I LOS O P H Y   O F N AT U R E T O M E TA P H Y S I C S




" instinctively will ing to bel ieve," but without trying to prolong, found, or
genera lize the justifications or interpretations we give to this " instinct." A
subjection to adventure, not to j udgment: the point is not to discuss the
genera l question of the extent to which " nature" is the respondent of our
knowledge a bout it, but to take an interest in what testifies to the impor
tance of this question for those concerned by it, in the processes of verifica
tion that include the ra bbit staring at the spot from which a noise is
coming, and the experimenter's art of consequences-If I m right, then       '



I should, in such-and-such conditions, be able to . . .
    The importance of Wil liam James for Whitehead's transformation into
a philosopher cannot be overestimated . Not only are the Essays in Radi
cal Empiricism as wel l as The Principles of Psychology present in The
Concept of Nature, but one could say that the very construction of the
concept of nature accompl ishes a j unction, which had rema ined rather
implicit in James, between radical empiricism and pragmatism, between
nature as what we a re aware of, and nature as providing a foothold. In
pa rticular, unlike Bergson, it is at the level of this foothold, and not of
experience in its immediacy, freed from what makes us ca lculate, verify,
and hesitate, that a relation with evolutiona ry thought is established . This
is why the question ra ised by Whitehead will never be that of knowledge
fa ithful to the truth of that experience . From this viewpoint, Whitehead is,
a fter Wil liam James, one of the very ra re philosophers of the twentieth
century to have fully envisaged the consequences of the Darwinian evolu
tion for the classica l problems of philosophy, that it, to have situated
questions of truth not on the side of right, legitimacy, or a uthenticity, but
on the side of its consequences. Nature neither explains nor j ustifies a ny
thing, but it is pragmatica lly impl ied in the consequences that verify, or
fa il to veri fy, the relevant or important cha racter of a landmark or a gen
era l ization, the appropriateness of a kind of attention. Perception impl ies
the risk of trusting what is perceived, a trust whose practica l consequences
may entai l the death pena lty for i mpertinence.
    However, Whitehead will not genera lize this pragmatic type of approach.
At first glance, the speculative adventure upon which he will embark even
reflects an abandonment of pragmatism. Yet only at first glance: that is,
when pragmatism is reduced to the sad mora lity of the businessman: what
is true is what is profita ble . The fact that William James's expression " cash
va lue" sufficed to j ustify such a red uction is not only indicative of the phi
losophers' laziness, but also of the continuing power of bifurcation, this
time bea ring upon what " really counts " and what is insignificant or illu
sory. And evol utionary biology itself testifies to the sa me power, when it
transforms selective advantage into an explanation and ca n then serve as
                                                           I N T E R L U D E   1 1 3




the base for a psychology or an anthropology that seeks to define a univer
sal huma n nature, forged by biological selection. In other words, the link
between pragmatism and evol utionary thought may easily become a new
instrument of judgment, once again testifying to the power of abstractions
when they function in a polemical mode. Whitehead, for his part, never
broke with the pragmatic art of consequences, which he no doubt learned
from James, because he did not stop for an instant at the idea that what
counts, what matters, might pertain to a generality. If he changed his ap
proach, it was because his problem had changed.
   Whitehead was no longer to limit himsel f to a pragmatics of concepts
aiming to avoid the fa lse problems to which our a bstractions give rise,
beca use, for him, the point was no longer to " civilize" our a bstractions,
to sepa rate them from their polemica l power, but to tra nsform them. In
Science and the Modern Word, the question of bifurcation was given a
new na me: "the fallacy of misplaced concreteness." A fa llacy, not a vice
proper to the intel lect. As an art of consequences, pragmatics forbids a ny
position of truth whose consequence would be to transform the problem
i nto an insurmounta ble horizon of the human condition. A fa l lacy is first
and foremost an exaggeration, an exaggerated impact a ttributed to an
undeniable success.
   The advantage of confining attention to a definite group of abstractions
is that you confine your thoughts to clear-cut definite things, with clear
cut definite relations. Accordingly, if you have a logical head, you can de
duce a variety of conclusions respecting the relationships between these
abstract entities. Furthermore, if the abstractions are well-founded, that is
to say, if they do not abstract from everything that is important in experi
ence, the scientific thought which confines itself to these abstractions will
arrive at a variety of important truths relating to our experience of nature.
We all k now those clear-cut trenchant intellects, immovably encased in a
hard shell of abstractions. They hold you to their abstractions by the sheer
grip of personality (SMW, 5 8 ) .
   I n cauda comes not venenum but humor: there is nothing abstract
a bout the power of abstraction. Whitehead wa s proba bly thinking of
Bertra nd Russell, but we may think of Richard Dawkins or Daniel Den
nett, honorable men, passionately devoted to the service of h umanity. To
underta ke to tra nsform the a bstractions that impose themselves upon
them, and which they try to i mpose in the name of reason, demands a trust
that will not be shaken by the cold logic of deductions, and humor that
does not denounce but knows that such coldness always has the poigna nt
will to convince a s one of its i ngredients .
                                                              C H A P TER E I G H T
