Science and the Modern World

      A Strange Book




           ITH   SCIENCE AND THE MODERN WORLD,             the reader will be
           exposed to difficul ties that are not presented by The Concept
           of Nature. Fi rst of all, there is the difficulty of grasping the
very subject of this book.
  Apparently, it is a work that belongs to the register of the history of
ideas or of civil izations. Th is, at any rate, is what one might think a fter
reading the statements that open and close the book.
   The progress of civilization is not wholly a uniform drift towards better
things. It may perhaps wear this aspect if we map it on a scale which is
large enough. But such broad views obscure the details on which rests
our whole understanding of the process (SMW, 1 ) .
   The moral of the tale is the power of reason, its decisive influence on the
life of humanity. The great conquerors, from Alexander to Caesar, and
from Caesar to Napoleon, influenced profoundly the lives of subsequent
generations. But the total effect of this influence shrinks to insignificance,
if compared to the entire transformation of human habits and human
mentality produced by the long line of men of thought from Thales to the
present day, men individually powerless, but ultimately the rulers of the
world (SMW, 208 ) .
   Whitehead thus presents h i s book, if not as hi story, then i n any case a s
a med ita tion o n the hi story o f Western civilization. And at the conclusion
of the book, there appears that to which these " deta ils," hidden by a la rge
sca le vision, a l l uded : the disproportionate influence of a l i ne of " pow
erless " thinkers . This, of course, inspi res a slight d i scomfort on the pa rt
of the su spicious rea der. Undoubted ly, Whitehea d , the mathematician-
                                 S CIENCE   A N D   THE   MODERN   WORLD    1 1 5




philosopher, is to be situated in this lineage. On the way he will ana lyze
the influence of his precursors depends the way he envisages his own in
fluence, and often, when one expla ins the way philosophers situate them
sel ves by means of the terms of their analysis, one reaches the trivial ity
of a story of progress: h istory as a long path lead ing toward " me " (or us,
when the a uthors a l low themselves to spea k in the name of thei r epoch ) .
Bergson himself fell into this trap, since the intuition of which he is the
philosopher accompl ishes the exploit of reconnecting intelligence, whose
power and excesses can be understood thanks to the long line of philos
ophers, and instinct, whose perfection and closed nature can be expli
cated thanks to the long l ine of insects and parasites.
    If Whitehead's story differs from many other med itations on the prog
ress of civilization, it is precisely because, as he will make fully explicit in
Adventures of Ideas, what interests him is not the great story of the pro
gressive revelation of the truth of h istory that inevitably makes the West
the thinking head of humanity. What i nterests him is an " adventure of
reason," a nd it is th is ad venture that creates its subject. Reason is thus
defined as what is ventured in the course of this h istory. In other words,
what is sought is not a definition of reason, but a particular description of
the historical process that exh ibits what we call " reason " as one of its
questions. The meaning of that " rule" that the long l ine of thinkers, from
Thales to Whitehead, has impressed upon the world, a lso depends on this
process.
    In the present case, if Alexander, Caesar, and Napoleon were victors
over identifiable enemies, strength aga inst strength, it was the h ighly un
heroic victory of persuasion over strength that the ad venture of White
headian ideas was to describe in 1 93 3 . Here, the power of ideas must be
said to be suggestion rather than truth , for, l ike what we call suggestion, it
travels along roads that do not have much to do with deduction, reason
ing, logical necessity, or the principle of reality. What was originally an
extravagant ideal, transported by a visionary thought, by an individual
bereft of social or pol itical power, beca me a " habit" or " routine," stabi
lized by institutions, laws, and professional regulations. If ideals a re victo
rious, then, it is without glory or glamour, by all the practices that are in
deed invented by men but that also fashion them in return, creating the
social environment from which new risks, new experimentations with ideas
become possible.
    Whitehead's great example, in Adventures of Ideas, is the complete im
plausibil ity of the saying of Jesus, calling upon men in the midst of a civi
l ization based on slavery, to recognize each other as the children of God .
The history that fash ions us today, " respectful of the rights of man," in
1 1 6   FROM T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




the na me of which slavery can be routinely condemned, had the Chris
tian idea l as an ingred ient, but it also constitutes a betraya l of this idea l .
We know t h i s today even better than Whitehead. The adventure contin
ues, he would have sa id: i n each new social environment, idea l s judged
to be utopian by the new norms will express the new formulation of the
problem these norms claim to have sol ved .
   This " pragmatic" conception of a story woven by experimentation with
the ideas and routines of habit refers to a conviction, an aesthetic, and an
ethic that were Whitehead's well before his philosophical adventure. They
are, for instance, already perceptible in the articles col lected under the title
The Aims of Education. And it is remarkable that the concepts created by
Whitehead in Process and Reality did not constra in this conception to new
risks but merely conferred on it a new amplitude, with the apotheosis of
the fourth part of Adventures of Ideas, in which beauty, truth, adventure,
and peace acquire the power to define all civil izations.
   This, moreover, is a difficu lty proper to the reading of Adventures of
Ideas: the concepts are present without the problems they answer, like a
quasi-poetic dupl ication of what is na rrated . It is therefore tempting not
to pay attention to them and to confuse what is narrated with one his
tory of ideas or of culture a mong others: it is simply more grandiose, or
naively a udacious, than most. In contrast, there is no temptation of this
kind in Science and the Modern World. Here, the concepts seem to intrude,
interrupting the narrative, brutally widening a perspective, ceaselessly im
posing upon the reader the question of whether she has to do with a deliri
ous eru ption or an inspired thought.
   To be more complete, let us describe the surprises this very strange
book has in store for its rea der.
   Right from the first chapter, Whitehead raises the problem of faith in an
order of nature, without which the flourishing of modern science would
ha ve been inconceivable. There follows a rather original reading of the ori
gin of that science which, as we shall see below, places it under the banner
of a historical revolt aga inst rationality. The reader, sed uced by this origi
nality, is nevertheless, like many scientists, ready to ma ke faith in the order
of nature a mere psychologica l adjuvant, a simple vision gua ra nteeing the
legitimacy of the quest: reality is determinist, or causa l, or written in math
ematica l characters. At the end of the chapter, however, Whitehead will
suddenly unfold all that this faith implicitly requires:
   There is no parting from your own shadow. To experience this faith is
to know that in being ourselves we are more than ourselves: to know that
our experience, dim and fragmentary as it is, yet sounds the utmost depths
of reality: to know that detached details merely in order to be themselves
                                 SCIENCE   AND   THE   MODERN    WOR L D    1 1 7




demand that they should find themselves in a system of things: to know
that this system includes the harmony of logical rationality, and the har
mony of aesthetic achievement: to know that, while the harmony of logic
lies upon the universe as an iron necessity, the aesthetic harmony stands
before it as a living ideal moulding the general flux in its broken progress
towards finer, subtler issues ( SMW, 1 8 ) .
    The succession o f "cola " marks the equivalence o f the propositions, each
of which, however, seems more stupefying than its predecessor. Whitehead
has done nothing other than explain the faith or trust of the scientist, and
especially of the practitioner of the theoretico-experimental sciences, but he
has explained it completely. Whereas scientists often express themselves as
if the order in which they have faith were already there waiting for them,
what they " discover" is inseparable from their shadow, from their own
presence in the landscape they describe. In order to come into being, the
logical harmony they make explicit and celebrate required a living ideal of
aesthetic harmony, without which the " scattered details" could never have
become themselves and found their logical place. Whitehead thus restricted
himself to explaining this living ideal, without which scientists would not
rack their brains over a detail that resists, would not expect their statements
to be able to predict the result of a new experiment, nor that their theories,
appropriately formulated after an eventful itinerary, could come to exhibit
a form of beauty and simplicity without which they would not be satisfied .
Yet unprepared readers might wel l conclude that the author is not only
original, but endowed with a solid poetic verve.
    Other surprises awa it our readers. They will realize, for insta nce, that
Whitehead never confines himself for very long to historical narrative.
Thus, in the course of Cha pter 4, when one might think the subject was an
interesting evaluation of the practical successes that marked the eighteenth
century, from the invention of English parliamentary government to that
of the steam engine, the story suddenly stops. We suddenly learn ( p . 64)
that space and time have two characteristics in common, "separative" and
"prehensive." For several paragraphs, the reader will attempt to follow the
elaboration of what a prehensive unity of volume means, but this analysis,
suddenly qualified as deceptively simple because it induces the idea that
space-time is a sel f-subsistent entity, independent of perception, is i n turn
interrupted . And Whitehead turns to Bishop Berkeley to ask what percep
tion is. He seems to accept the answer . . . except for one simple substitu
tion: where Berkeley speaks of the mind, Whitehead will speak of a process
of prehensive unification and general ize it to all that exists . . .
    Here, the reader who is a bit fa m i l i a r with the hi story of philosophy
( I dare not i magine what has become of the others ) is seized by a slight
1 1 8   FROM T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




dizzi ness. To ca ll upon Berkeley to resist a " ready-made," self-subsistent
space-ti me is to cal l upon the man who a ffirmed that " to be is to be per
cei ved." One might therefore have expected a l l notions implying a real
ity " i ndependent of perception " to be suspended . Yet Whitehead has j ust
transformed " being perceived " into a model on the basis of which this real
ity can be thought. An origi nal and poetic a uthor, no doubt, but also en
dowed with a strange sense of h umor . . .
   The reader, more and more dumbfounded, can certainly hang on, per
haps at the cost of proceeding to a selective reading. By the time she
reaches chapters 1 0 ( "Abstraction " ) and 1 1 ( " God " ), however, a l l possi
bility of selection collapses: the history of ideas has yielded to a meta
physical construction, and a construction that seems, moreover, to require
a reference to God as the "ground " of a l l l i mitation. Our reader then runs
the risk of abandoning Science and the Modern World: originality, poetry,
and humor, perhaps; delirium, certainly.
   What I have j ust descri bed was my first experience with Whiteheadian
reading, years ago. In other words, this reading was a defeat. Later on,
once I understood that Whitehead was not a historian of ideas liable to
deli rious surges, but a metaphysician, I came to a " non-reading" of Sci
ence and the Modern World, situating this work, as Whitehead himself
seemed to i nvite his readers to do in the preface to Adventure in Ideas,
within a conti nuity. Science and the Modern World, Process and Reality,
and Adventures of Ideas, writes Whitehead, a l l express one way of under
standing the nature of things, but in a complementary way, supplementing
each other's omissions and compressions. I thus accepted the idea that
these three books had the sa me a uthor, who chose, according to the per
spective adopted, to put forward his ideas in a specific way. A " non
reading " : the bizarre mode of composition no longer counted, because at
any rate I " knew " what Whitehead meant, and what he said, moreover,
much more explicitly in Process and Reality.
   It was then, in the early 1 980s, that I heard Lewis Ford present the re
sults of his work for the first ti me, work without which, I bel ieve, I would
never have envisaged to attempt the present essay. According to Ford,
Science and Modern World ( li ke Process and Reality later) was the result
of a genuine work of montage, not only in the sense that some chapters
come not from the Lowell lectures, whose publication the book officia lly
constitutes, but from other lectures (the chapters on mathematics and in
science and religion ) . In fact, one should read the two chapters, on a b
straction and on God , as well as what Whitehead in his Preface calls a few
"slight" a mplifications inserted in other chapters, as i f they had been writ
ten by " another author," introducing ideas that the former neither pos-
                                 SCIENCE    AND   THE   MODERN     WORLD      1 1 9




sessed nor foresaw. This i s confirmed by the analysis of the notes ta ken
at Whitehead's classes given at Harvard by one of his students: rea ding
them, as we shall see when the time comes, one can fol low " i n rea l time"
a rad ical change that took place in April 1 925, two months after the Low
ell lectures.
   Lewis Ford 's great book, The Emergence of Whitehead's Metaphysics,
1 92 5- 1 92 9, will constitute a permanent reference for my reading. I thus
uneq uivocally take a stand in the midst of the controversy that d ivides
Whiteheadian philosophers today, between partisans of the analysis called
"compositional " or "genetic," and partisans of the "systematic " analysis,
accordi ng to which a single system is, as Whitehead himself wrote, ex
pressed in various modes by all the "American " books. Yet my problem is
not the same as Ford 's: it is not to reconstitute the various strata that
make up a book; I accept the results of his analysis. It is to bring to exis
tence that Whitehead who, in June 1 925, when he signed his preface to
Science and the Modern World, knew what had j ust happened to him
and nevertheless insisted that the reader accept this book as representing
"one tra in of thought."
   Was Whitehead hiding the truth ? Did he think that if the transforma
tion to which this book bears witness were known, he would be asked to
rewrite the whole thing, which bored him i n advance (Whitehead appar
ently hated bei ng bored ) ? O r else, wi thout exclud ing this fi rst hypothesis,
can we not understand that we have to deal, despite everything, with one
trai n of thought ? In that case, Whitehead will have said nothing b ut the
truth, a l beit not the whole truth .
   As I will not tire of emphasizing, Whitehead was a mathematician. My
reading of The Concept of Nature has tried to show a mathematician
engaged by the definition of the problem he assigns himself. My reading
of Science and the Modern World will try to bring to life a mathemati
cian seeking how to formulate a problem a nd learning from his problem
what it obliges him to . A unique trai n of thought, so be it, for the prob
lem is one, i nsofar as it refers to a unique imperative, its " having to be
thought." Yet this unique character does not contradict the possibility of
brutal transformations in the formulation of this problem, with regard to
the construction of its possible sol utions.
   A philosopher never stops reshuffling his concepts, and even changing
them [ . . . J ( QPh, 26-2 7 ) . A concept is bereft of meaning as long as it
is not connected to other concepts, and is not attached to a problem it
solves or contributes to solving ( Q Ph, 76 ) . Problems and solutions are
constructed of which one can say "A failure . . . A success . . . " but only
gradually and according to their coadaptations ( QPh, 79 ) .
1 2 0   FROM T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




    The mode of reading I propose to adopt implies an active staging, the
creation of explicit distinctions where, as Ford has shown, Whitehead
proceeded with the most radical indifference, making coexist what I wil l
bri ng to existence as distinct. One way o f specifying this contrast would
be to say that Whitehead seems to have tried to induce a transformation
in his reader by setting up a kind of "total spectacle " : he trusted brutal
transitions and unexpected coexistences to carry out a destabilization of
al l the habits that had to be surmounted, deliberately j arring thought out
of its ruts. My reading, for its part, is addressed to the creator of this spec
tacle. And perhaps it is due to the fact that the defeat of my first reading
means that I resisted the spectacle itsel f, and that, in any case, I was not the
only one to do so. From the viewpoint of the effect sought, it must be said
that Whitehead missed his mark, and my mode of reading tries to draw the
consequences from this.
    However, this reading also translates a obstinate, i rreduci ble fact: at
the same time as I was learning to read Whitehea d , I was a l so learning
to i nha bit the " i mage of thought" G i l les Deleuze cal l s into existence in
D ifference and Repetition. From the outset, therefore, I thought Deleuze
with Whitehead and Whitehead with Deleuze, two distinct and insepa
rable explorations. Yet these two explorations made the compositional
analysis proposed by Lewis Ford something quite other tha n a useful
survey: what Ford had discovered had a l ready been descri bed by De
leuze, and conversely, what Deleuze descri bed had been experienced by
Lewis Ford 's Whitehead .
   Problems o r Ideas emanate from imperatives of adventure that present
themselves as questions. This is why the problems are not separable from
a deciding power, a fiat, which, when it traverses us, makes us semi-divine
beings. Doesn't the mathematician already claim to belong to the race of
the gods? In the two fundamental processes of adjunction and condensa
tion, this power of decision, based on the nature of the problems to be
solved, is exercised to the highest degree, since it is always with regard to
an ideal body added by the mathematicians that an equation turns out to
be reducible, or not to be so ( D R, 255 ) .
   If my reading o f Science and the Modern World does not " miss its
m ark," the enigmatic terms of adjunction and condensation wil l come
a live for the reader, and if they come alive, what Whitehead tried to trans
mit will be transmitted by other means. As a sign, no longer of a wager of
reading, but of a commitment to reading, I propose an initial presentation
of it here.
    Adj unction : Deleuze takes his inspiration here from the method of
sol ving a lgebraic eq uations ina ugurated by Abel , then Galois. Algebra ic
                                  SCIENCE    AND   THE   MODERN     WORL D     1 2 1




equa tions such as " 3x + 5 = 1 4," for instance, capture the features of the
problem in such a way that it becomes explicated qua lia ble " in itself " to
provide the missing information, in this case the solution "x = 3 ." However,
in the general case, the goal is to complete the problem by adjoining to it
elements, dimensions, expectations that do not belong to its original formu
lation (such as the "twelfth camel " of my introduction . . . ). The " ideal
body " that is to be adjoined means that the solution no longer corresponds
to an item of information contained i mplicitly in the problematic situation,
and which is to be explicated. It can be cal led " idea l " because it designates
the "idea," the i mperative of the problem to be solved, which intervenes
explicitly in the new formulation conferred upon the problem. It therefore
reflects the learning process of what the solution obliges. The mathemati
cian, working simultaneously on the formulation of the problem and the
determination of the path that wi ll lead to its solution, does not limit herself
to orga nizing the description of a situation: adj unction designates her as
a creator, prohibiting this mathematician from separating the " fact," "the
problem has found its solution," from her shadow, that of the mathemati
cian, whose trusting intervention-the problem must have a solution-has
created the path toward this solution.
   Between the first lines of Science and the Modern World and the two
chapters added by Whitehead a fter April 1 925, plus the minor " amplifi
cations" inserted in other chapters, the train of thought can then i ndeed
be said to be " unique," responding, moreover, to a problematic situation
which Whitehead more than proba bly medita ted upon long before he
crossed over to America . If one admits that the problem did not d ictate
his solution, the " additions " nevertheless mark a turning poi nt, the one at
which Whitehead " ma kes a decision " : decides that the process of explana
tion in which he trusted is insufficient, and makes up his mind to construct
what the solution demands. It is then, and only then, that he commits him
sel f to a creation of concepts that wil l make him the most a udacious of
twentieth-century speculative thinkers.
   Condensation: Deleuze ta kes his i nspiration from Charles Peguy's
Clio: a difficulty one encountered suddenly passes through a point of res
olution that is a l most physical in the sense of critical poi nts of physics,
such as condensation, fusion, and so on. As a l i q uid condenses brutally,
the possibility of a path of solution bursts forth, and both the thought
and the way in which what was to be thought presented itsel f, all at once,
determine one another as i f i n a new begi nning of the world . A new be
ginning, not an ill umination, nor new, instantaneous evidence. Everything
begi ns ( aga i n ) , for the difficulty, having become the principle of sol ution,
wi l l obl ige us to go through once aga in what seemed to be stably
1 2 2   F R O M   T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




acq uired, and this itinera ry will ulti mately decide what the principle
demanded .
   And indeed, everything will begin again, but in Process and Reality. For
in this case, the strata of composi tion wi ll no longer concern only chap
ters or paragraphs, but sometimes sentences that transform the meaning
of the paragraph when they are inserted . It will no longer be a matter of a
strange book, but of a labyrinth-book, a book about which one no longer
knows whether it has an a uthor, or whether it is not rather the book that
has fashioned its author, in an incessant hand-to hand combat between
what has been written and that to which what has been written will oblige
the writer. Whitehead was " traversed " by a " decision," a "fiat," which re
defined both thinker and problem, both of whom a re subject to a series of
questions that henceforth no longer belong to one or the other.
   Questions are imperatives, or rather q uestions express the relations of
the problems with the imperatives from which they proceed . Should we
take the example of the police to manifest the imperative nature of the
questions? "I'm the one who asks the questions," but in fact it is already
the dissolved ego of the interrogated that speaks through his executioner
( D R, 255 ) .
   The commitment t o read has been made, a n d it remains to answer it.
And first of all, to avoid going straight to Whitehead 's fiat. We must start
by exploring the initial formulation of the problem, in this case the thought
of the organism Whitehead intended to propose, since it is this thought
that must summon the adjunction through the discordant separation be
tween the percei ved possibility of a sol ution and the means to construct it.
And before this, once again, it remains to perceive something of the im
perative from which Whitehead 's adventure proceeds: the " trust " that
enabled him to create the modern epoch, that is, his epoch, as a doma in of
experimentation .
                                                              C H A P TER N I NE
