A New Epoch?




          N A GENERATION
      I
                          which saw the Thirty Years ' War and remem
       bered Alva in the Netherlands, the worst that happened to men of
       science was that Galileo suffered an honourable detention and a
mild reproof, before dying peacefully in his bed ( SMW, 2 ) .
   A certa in tone has been struck, the history o f what w e cal l modern ra
tiona lity wil l not be placed under the banner of heroism. It was in vain
that Galileo, not without a rrogance, mounted an assa ult on the Roman
fortress: he will not figure in Whitehead's story as a ma rtyr brea king with
a tradition, but fa r rather as the hera ld of a cha nge in menta l ity.
   This new tinge to modern minds is a vehement and passionate interest
in the relation of general principles to irreducible and stubborn facts. All
the world over and at all times there have been practical men, absorbed in
"irreducible and stubborn facts "; all the world over and at all times there
have been men of philosophic temperament who have been absorbed in
the weaving of general principles. It is this union of passionate interest
in the detailed facts with equal devotion to abstract generalization which
forms the novelty in our present society ( SMW, 3 ) .
   The multiple, i ntricate event constituted by the appearance o f "the
modern mind " has, of course, caused many gal lons of ink to flow, and
every analysis, every tra nsformation into a story, every transformation
into thought is insepa rable from the d iagnosis given by the author to the
world in which she li ves: from the great song of progress, the decisive mo
ment when Man emerges from darkness, down to prophetic impreca tions
agai nst technology, calculation, or reason . Whitehead 's story is, of course,
no more verid ica l than any other, but it is origi nal in that his goa l is
1 2 4   FROM   T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M ETAPH YS I C S




neither to celebrate nor to denounce. Whitehead thought he was living at
a key moment, he thought he was telling the story of an epoch that was
slipping into the past. He was certa i nly wrong i n this, for what he de
scribes sti l l constitutes the dominant mode of thought today. Yet it is
precisely this opti mism, factually unj ustified, that gives his prose its actu
al ity: today's reader can share, if not his optimism, at least his diagnosis.
And this very diagnosis fashions a form of " non-factual " optimism, the
possibility of breathing, laughing, separating the quite j usti fiable fear, in
spired in us by our history, from any duplication making that history the
justification for a judgment. It may be a very bad story, but it is no more
than that.
    In any case, it is an astonishing story. Whitehead 's goa l is not to judge
but to shake our judgmenta l routines, particularly those that feature " a
modern m i n d " in harmony with itself. A harmony supposed t o manifest
itself in particular by the convergence between the progress of science and
the new turn taken by phi losophy: the world must henceforth be de
scribed in terms of possible knowledge, and the "cosmos," that which one
does not decipher wi thout learning to inhabit it, must be relegated to the
storehouse of illusions. Thus, right from the first chapter, it is amply em
phasized that the dominant phi losophies of science have not been a nd are
still not in the least participants in the adventure of that science, which
they nevertheless clai m to understand and even to found. Of course, mod
ern scientists and phi losophers all testi fy just as well to the new authority
of facts, but in an antagonistic way.
    David Hume is paradigmatic in this regard. Does he not claim, to his
greater satisfaction, that the link between cause and effect can only be ar
bitrary, si nce no fact can establish it? By so doing, he disqualifies the faith
attested by scientists in an order of nature that it is their role to deci pher.
Whitehead admits, of course, that some aspects of Hume's doctrine were
taken up verba lly by some men of science, but, as we already know,
words don't count for him. What matters is that
    [ . . . 1 scientific faith has risen to the occasion, and has tacitly removed
the philosophic mountain ( SMW, 4 ) .
    The relevance o f Whitehead's proposition, rather shock ing for those
who cha l k up the critical spirit to science, is of course parti a l . It concerns
only " realist" scientists, not those-I have in mind many specialists in the
so-called human or social sciences-who limit themselves to identifying
or constructing regula rities, while boasting of not going any farther. And
it concerns only the critical philosophers, be they the descendants of
Hume or, l i ke Kant, those who were awakened by Hume from their dog
matic slumber. Yet it is also these philosophers who took charge of pro-
                                                      A   N E W   E P O C H ?   1 2 5




moting the rationality known as modern. And the way they promoted it
is i ndeed, even today, capable of inspiring in scientists the reaction de
scri bed by Whitehea d. Let us l isten to Stephen Weinberg, one of those
physici sts who dream today of a " fina l theory," closing the search for the
laws of na ture and i mposing itself as the starting point for a l l rational
questions about all that exists:
   Ludwig Wittgenstein, who denied even the possibility of explaining
the slightest fact by reference to another, affirmed that "at the basis of
every modern conception of the world lies the illusion that the alleged
laws of nature are the explanations of natural phenomena." Such warn
ings leave me cold. To tell a physicist that the laws of nature are not ex
planations of natural phenomena is to tell a tiger in search of its prey that
all flesh is grass. The fact that we scientists do not know how to state in a
way that would garner the approval of philosophers what we do when
we search for scientific explanations does not mean that we are indulging
in a vain activity. Professional philosophers could help us to understand
what we are doing, but with or without them, we will continue to do it
( DFT, 2 1 -22 ) .
   For Whitehead, the conflict is modern insofar as i t opposes two types of
protagonists united by the respect for " facts " : phi losophers, who ensure
that the facts are not asked for more than they can deliver, and scientists,
who undertake to ask those facts to explai n themselves, to explain reality,
even u ltimate reality. And this conflict places modernity under the banner
not of a progressive history, but of a revolt: a " historical revolt" against
medieval rationalism, against which "observable, irreducible" facts became
a weapon. The hi storical fact is that modern science repudiates philoso
phy, without thereby repud iating the trust in an order of the world to be
deciphered, whereas modern philosophers, for their part, are devoted to
repudiating this trust, which they associate with an uncritical past, and to
betting on the individual mind, which alone can be rendered accounta ble
for the well-founded ness of the reasons a ssociated with an order, what
ever it may be.
   Thus the evolution of thought in the seventeenth century cooperated
with the enhanced sense of individual personality derived from the Mid
dle Ages. We see Descartes taking his stand upon his own ultimate mind,
which his philosophy assures him of: and asking about its relations to the
ultimate matter-exemplified, in the second Meditation by the human
body and a lump of wax-which his science assumes. There is Aaron's
rod, and the magicians ' serpents; and the only question for philosophy is,
which swallows which; or whether, as Descartes thought, they all lived
happily together ( SMW, 1 42-1 43 ) .
1 2 6   FROM T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   The modern epoch is thus placed under the banner of a recurrent dif
ficulty, not of a progress of reason to be interpreted . Yet this difficulty
might perhaps not be very important if it affected only such special ized
thin kers as scientists and philosophers. For Whitehead, the true problem
is that we-a nd this " we " includes a l l those who accept the image of a
reality ruled by laws-have fallen into the habit of thi nking in an incoher
ent way.
   This radical inconsistency at the basis of modern thought accounts for
much that is half-hearted and wavering in our civilisation. It would not
be going too far to say that it distracts thought. It enfeebles it, by reason
of the inconsistency lurking in the background. After all, the men of the
Middle Ages were in pursuit of an excellency of which we have nearly
forgotten the existence. They set before themselves the ideal of the attain
ment of a harmony of the understanding. We are content with superficial
orderings from diverse arbitrary starting points. For instance, the enter
prises produced by the individualistic energy of the European peoples
presuppose physical actions directed to final causes. But the science which
is employed in their development is based on a philosophy which asserts
that physical causation is supreme, and which disjoins the physical cause
from the final end. It is not popular to dwell on the absolute contradic
tion here involved. It is the fact, however you gloze it over with phrases
(SMW, 76 ) .
   Whitehead's analysis is diagnostic, a nd the d iagnosis sti ll holds true.
Suffice it to think of the i neptitude of the propositions induced by the
postulate that Darwinian selection must suffice to explain the evol ution
of living beings because it acts as a barrier agai nst the i rrationality of fi
nal ca uses. The transmission of genes and their selection give meaning to
the only way of accom modating our own " finalized " enterprises ( i nclud
ing science ) to a world in which physica l causality reigns supreme. In the
name of this " holy war" against fina l causes, a l l human activities are sum
moned to a ffirm their submission to selective logic. As a result, the i ntel
lectua l a nd artistic capabilities of human beings, whose problem is that
they appear to be somewhat excessive with regard to strict surviva l needs
in these mammals, have been related by some contemporary spokesper
sons of Darwinism to sexua l selection. This means, whatever circumlocu
tions may be used, that the person who summons us to accept this sober
truth is also in the service of the only thing that rea lly matters: the trans
mission of her genes . Nor is it a matter of becoming indignant at the i dea
that one's ardor responds to a project of seduction, copulation, and re
cruitment of as many vehicles as possible for one's own genes. The point
is simply to note the imaginative poverty, the "enfeebled though t" of
                                                         A   N E W   E P O C H ?   1 2 7




those who expose themselves i n such a deliberate way to the oldest argu
ment in philosophy, the retorsive argument, which can be expressed as
follows: as a test, apply to yourself the statement you j ust made, what
your statement affirms about everybody else: turnabout is fai r play.
   Whitehead does not denounce the modern epoch, but speaks of it as of
something that must, a nd will, pass. His diagnosis is also a prognosis. He
identifies the weak ness, the hesita tion, a nd the confusion concealed by
the successes that allow this epoch to be identified with progress, but this
wea kness, hesita tion, and confusion are descri bed in a way that affirms
trust: the adventure continues; that is, the incoherence is temporary and
" epochal."
   Whitehead 's great thesis in Science and the Modern World is that sci
ence ca n play an important role in the epochal change called for by the
adventure of ideas. This is why, in the same book, the goal may be to
j ustify, agai nst the philosophers, the scientists' faith i n an order of nature,
and, against the scientists, to place the history of modern science under
the ba nner of what he ca lls " the fal l acy of misplaced concreteness." A
concrete cha racter has been " misplaced," that is, conferred upon abstrac
tions whose success is that of modern physics. Yet Whitehead d iagnoses
that this very success is henceforth impeded by its own a bstractions. The
physici sts' matter ca n no longer be understood on the basis of the motion
of masses susceptible of "simple local ization" (an i nstant without thick
ness, a poi nt without extension ) .
  A t mry epoch the assumptions o f a science are giving way, when they
exhibit symptoms of the epicyclic state from which astronomy was res
cued in the sixteenth century. Physical science is now exhibiting such
symptoms ( SMW, 1 35 ) .
   The reference t o astronomy saved from the epicycles designates the
history that runs from Copernicus to Kepler, more than sixty years later.
And it was Kepler who took what may have been the most difficult step,
rejecting the epicycles to which all scientists before him, including Coper
nicus, had recourse to make mathematical description and observation
converge. Kepler dared to demand the secrets of pla netary motion from
observational data themselves .
   Far more than Copernicus or Galileo, Kepler enters the lineage of those
powerless visionaries about whom Whitehead wrote that they have ulti
mately guided the world . It is i mpossible to know to what extent White
head compared quantum physics, whose birth he witnessed and which,
from his viewpoint, " exhibits" epicyclic phenomena, to such pre-Keplerian
systems as that of Copernicus, who maintained the postulate of circular
motion, or that of Tycho Brahe, who tried both to keep the earth at the
1 2 8   F R O M   T H E   P H I LOSO PHY   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




center and to make the planets rotate a round a sun that itself rotated
a round the ea rth. Yet the parallel, that is, the anticipation of a " new
Kepler," can hold ( it was proposed by Arthur Koestler, who explicitly
took his inspiration from Whitehead i n The Sleepwalkers), and it is all the
more interesting i n that Kepler affirmed a new fa ith i n the order of nature.
Not a faith in the power of the facts " in themselves," brute and obstinate,
but in the possi bility that a deta iled examination of the facts may lead not
to arbitra riness, but to ha rmony : the living ideal of aesthetic ha rmony. For
it is precisely this faith that Whitehead was to associate with the notion he
placed at the center of Science and the Modern World: the notion of
orgamsm.
    However, the parallel must be drawn cautiously, for we must distinguish
Kepler's " faith" from his theory as astronomers have inherited it. The
mathematical construction of planetary ellipses responds to a quite deter
minate field of data, those of astronomy, which this construction enables
us not on ly to reproduce but to organize in an intel ligible and economical
way. Correlatively, the " new Kepler," who Whitehead possibly anticipated,
would be a working physicist, not a visionary inspired by her fa ith in
nature's harmony. With regard to the organism, in contrast, it is better to
speak not of a scientific concept but of a " doctrine," " thought," or " phi
losophy." For Whitehead, the organism, "as the complete expression of
what takes place," is a "generic" notion, which means that it cannot desig
nate a privi leged field of ideas. The questions that will be articulated
around the notion of organism must concern all those who are interested
in a particular aspect of the order of nature, but they must not ta ke the
place of their specific questions. The success of the " philosophy of organ
ism" wou ld be to have each of them situate its own specificity in a positive
way, and not, like the " materia list theory," mutilate their questions.
    One might of course think that the biological connotation of the term
chosen by Whitehead entails a privilege, but the privilege i n question is
strategic: it has to do with the particular situation of the life sciences. For
Whitehea d, they offer the i nteresting pa rticularity of having been handi
capped, rather than rendered fruitful, by what he ca lls " scientific materi
alism," that is, the explanation of all change in terms of cha nges i n "ex
terna l " relations between beings that do not change in themselves. This
handicap has even become a pure and si mple contradiction with the
modern doctrine of biologica l evolution, which shou ld be enough to i m
pose the a bandonment of " scientific materialism."
   The aboriginal stuff, or material, from which a materialistic philosophy
starts is incapable of evolution [ . . . 1 Evolution, on the materialistic
theory, is reduced to being another word for the description of the changes
                                                        A   N E W   E PO C H ?   1 2 9




in the external relations between portions of matter [ . . . 1 There can
merely be change, purposeless and unprogressive. But the whole point of
the modern doctrine is the evolution of the complex organisms from ante
cedent states of less complex organisms. The doctrine thus cries aloud for
a conception of the organism as fundamental for nature ( SMW, 1 07).
     As I have already emphasized, t h e contemporary leading l ights o f
Darwinian theory glorify this theory for ensuring t h e compati bility be
tween the " complexity of l iving beings " and a " material ist," or more ex
actly " physica list" theory, which limits itself to defining such complexity
as highly improbable, with reference to the omnipotence of selective sort
ing. Whitehead did not have to dea l with the poverty of contemporary
propositions, but he knew that in a ny case selective explanation was
doomed to substitute one and the same monotonous, "epicyclic " answer
( i n this case, "adaptionist " ) for the multiple questions that arise for those
who study living beings . Hence the crying need for another sta rting point.
Yet this starting point must not constitute a di rect answer to the crying
need: Whitehead is no " v italist" in the sense that he would claim to know
"what is life," or what the notions of goal and of progress mean for living
bei ngs. What is demanded of the thought of the organism will not be an
explanation of life but a characterization of the order of nature itsel f.
     The first appearance of a reference to the organism in Science and the
Modern World does not, moreover, concern biology but physics itsel f,
and more precisely quantum theory as it had been organized around the
model of the a tom due to Niels Bohr. This model seems to indicate that
the electron-there it is again-does not have a continuous motion but is
lia ble to occupy a series of discrete positions i n space during successive
durations in time. It is as though the permanence of the electron must be
understood not as the permanence of something that remains " the same,"
but as the permanence of a self-repeating pattern. Indeed , this interpreta
tion would make it perfectly normal that the description of a continuous
motion, presupposing a continuous succession of instants, is not appro
pria te for the electrons that orbit around the nucleus in the quantum
atom . The electron " does not exist" i n a given moment. What exists
" takes the time" required by a vi bration or a succession of contrasts. And
it is when he descri bes what wou ld be an " organised system of vibratory
strea ming of energy " that Whitehead suddenly speaks, without the least
wa rning, of a "vi bratory orga nism," only to concl ude a bruptly, in a mode
that is as hyperbol ic as it is out of place ( officially, the chapter deals with
mathematics in the history of thought) .
  The field is now open for the introduction of some new doctrine of
organism which may take the place of the materialism with which, since
1 3 0   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   OF   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




the seventeenth century, science has saddled philosophy [ . . . I Such a
displacement of scientific materialism, if it ever takes place, cannot fail to
have important consequences in every field of thought ( SMW, 3 6 ) .
   We need hardly point out that quantum mechanics has by n o means
taken the road Whitehead hoped for. For him, the description of the quan
tum atom could only announce a new rea lism, since science owes it to
itself to try to elucidate the order of nature, a rea l ism that would aban
don the vision of a world described as a continuous succession of i nstan
taneous material configurations. The quantum theory of Heisenberg,
Born, Dirac, and von Neumann was to preserve continuity and let go of
realism. As far as I know, Whitehead never commented on this turn taken
by physics. Yet everything indicates that he would have maintained his
judgment of 1 925 concerning the epicyclic symptoms exhibited by physics.
   It is importa nt to emphasize once again that Whitehead does not envis
age any " theory " enabl ing the definition of both the ( quantic) vi bratory
organism and of the living organ ism . His proposition has no ambition to
provide a un ifying point of view, as was successively proposed by the no
tions of energy, system, or information. The organism does not designate
a possi ble obj ect of knowledge, it does not constitute an answer a round
which the sciences would converge, but it is rather, as we shall see, what
should oblige us to th ink a bout the d ivergence of their questions as a re
flection of the " l i ving values" that constitute the order of natu re. And the
living value, here, is none other than the affirmation that refuses to be
separated from its own shadow, simultaneously affirming what it has
succeeded in producing and the ideal without wh ich this success would
not have been possible. As such, the thought of the organism is obviously
itself a l iving value, inseparable from the project of articulating, in a fi
nally coherent way, what the modern era has opposed i n the mode of
contradiction. In the voca bulary of The Concept of Nature, the organism
is what will prevent nature from bifurcating and will articulate what
modern thought opposes: the free subject, assigning itself goals that affirm
the supremacy of final ca uses, and the indifferent objective world, which
affirms the supremacy of physical causes. It is thus not a unifying vision
of the world that is proposed with the organism, but what Whitehead
designates as a new mode of abstraction, capable of reconciling science
and philosophy.
   You cannot think without abstractions; accordingly, it is of the utmost
importance to be vigilant in critically revising your modes of abstraction.
It is here that philosophy finds its niche as essential to the healthy prog
ress of society. It is the critic of abstractions. A civilisation which cannot
burst through its current abstractions is doomed to sterility after a very
                                                        A   N E W   E P O C H ?   1 3 1




limited period of progress. A n active school of philosophy is quite as
important for the locomotion of ideas, as is an active school of railway
engineers for the locomotion of fuel (SMW, 59).
   The definition o f " fuel " is obviously inseparable from that o f the tech
niques that define motors, gea rs, and infrastructures. Coa l, gas, and elec
tricity only became resources thanks to the ceaselessly renewed i nvention
of what a ra ilway is. The huffing and puffing of a locomotive, the heroic
ages of the ra ilroad workers, can be ca lled the victims of progress, but
they testify to the inventiveness of ra ilway engineers. According to White
head, our modes of abstraction have not benefitted from such creative
and critical efforts, and ideas have become unable to catalyze a " hea lthy
progress of society." We do not know when Whitehead bega n to conceive
of the notion of orga nism in relation to the question of the order of na
ture. What seems to me certa in is that the question of " social progress,"
that is, a lso of the diagnosis given of " progress " as defined by the modern
world, is considera bly ea rlier. The new mode of a bstraction Whitehead
na mes orga nism must therefore be approached twice. What it proposes
to set in motion the ideas concerning nature, to be sure, but the proposed
mode of setting in motion is insepa ra ble from the possi ble setting in
motion of many other things as wel l . To prolong Whitehead's analogy, a
ra ilway engineer is acti ve in solving problems invol ving motion and fuel ,
but he a lso dreams o f a l l that can also b e set i n motion thanks to this
sol ution: not only travelers, mercha ndise, minerals, and soldiers, but also
ways of living, ways of communication, modes of distri bution of the pos
sible and the impossi ble . . .
   It is, however, hard to describe at the sa me time the technical conception
of a new system of combustion and the dreams of those who conceive it,
who themselves make the difference between what depends on them and
what they must leave up to others. Likewise, when it comes to thinking of
the organism with Whitehead, the question will be that of the order of
nature. What is more, it will take us along on a metaphysical adventure in
which the actors of the modern world, which Whitehead dreams of seeing
transformed, will no longer have a distinct voice in the chapter. In Science
and the Modern World, Whitehead has absolutely no concern for this kind
of difference, but " thinking with Whitehea d " does not mean authorizing
oneself all the liberties that Whitehead took with his readers. Th is is why,
before approaching the question of the organism as such, I have chosen
to bring Whitehead's "dreams" to life, that is, to give a l l its importa nce to
his reading of the modern world . The question of science is of course part
of this reading, and the new type of movement Whitehead wishes to con
fer upon scientific ideas is the intended contri bution of Science and the
1 3 2   FROM T H E   P H I LOSO P H Y   O F   NATU R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




Modern World to the new epoch that is to be brought about. But what we
must leave behind is even broader, since it includes all the "superficial ar
rangements " to which we have become accustomed. In particular-this is
where I shall begin, and this is what is most surprising-the habit of salut
ing as a progress religion's loss of authority, that is, the loss of religion as a
living source of va lue.
   That Gali leo set out to attack the authority of the Church as far as the
" positive" truth of the world is concerned is pa rt of the classical history
of the progress that leads up to us. To be sure, Galileo was a Christian,
but progress, as it is narrated, holds that he partici pates i n the history of
the differentiation between persona l faith and the public authority of
rel igion, a history that (in European countries, at least) ends up with the
contemporary sel f-evidence that religion must be confined to a strictly per
sonal conviction, merely a particular version of the moral law i nscribed i n
each person's heart, without a n y incidence on the "public" world. Ga l i leo
did not, of course, demand, against Revelation, the possibi l i ty that each
person should determine in all freedom how the world works: rather, he
preached the exclusive authority of science in this regard . But this public
a uthority of science is also taken as part of progress as it is na rrated .
Galileo therefore participates in progress. He disqua lified rel igion where
we know henceforth that it was interfering in what was not its business,
in what should concern only science.
   Whi tehead refuses to define this " privatization of rel igion" as progress,
that is, to define the public authority of rel igion, by a retroacti ve judg
ment, as "a retrograde movement of progress," as what was to be elimi
nated. To tell the story of the modern world, for Whitehead, is also to tell
the story of a degeneration. " Modern " rel igion boasts of being a testimony
in the hea rt of the bel iever, without legitimate incidence on public life. In
fact, it has been reduced to a kind of supplement of soul, embell ishing a
comforta ble life.
   [ . . . J For over two centuries religion has been on the defensive, and on
a weak defensive. The period has been one of unprecedented intellectual
progress. In this way a series of novel situations have been produced for
thought. Each such occasion has found the religious leaders unprepared.
Something, which has been proclaimed to be vital, has finally, after strug
gle, distress and anathema, been modified and otherwise interpreted. The
next generation of religious apologists then congratulates the religious
world on the deeper insight which has been gained. The result of the con
tinued repetition of this undignified retreat, during many generations, has
at last almost entirely destroyed the intellectual authority of religious think
ers (SMW, 1 8 8 ) .
                                                       A   N E W   E P O C H ?   1 3 3




  It may a muse free thinkers that the succession of Catholic popes since
Pa ul VI, instead of accepting the need to proceed to the retrea t that
everybody j udges necessary and has, a t any ra te, come much too late
as fa r as the marriage of priests, contraception, or abortion are con
cerned , hang on to these prohibitions aga i nst all comers. We think that
what they do not concede, some successor will sooner or later yiel d . And
no doubt they ha ve foreseen it too, for they too belong to the history
marked by the degeneration of rel igion, the und ignified retreat from the
positions it defined as vita l . They undergo the epoch as i f it poses no
other alternatives than defeat or resistance to cha nge.
  Religion will not regain its old power until it can face change in the
same spirit as does science ( SMW, 1 8 9 ) .
   The author o f these lines does not define himself as a Christian, nor
even as a believer. He will soon fi nd himself constra i ned to i nvolve God
in the conceptual construction of the order of nature, but he will never be
tempted by any confusion between this necessity and a j ustification of re
ligion as such, much less of any specific religion. The question of the fu
ture of rel igion is thus, for Whitehead, completely distinct from the meta
physical question of the order of creation, and the place of human beings
in this creation . Whatever the doctrine may be of what God asks of hu
man beings, this doctrine's destiny depends on the living values of which
it constitutes an affirmation.
   The power of G od is the worship He inspires ( SMW, 1 92 ) .
   The term " worship " is one o f those that Francophones can envy the
English language, for it unites when French fragments through such words
as " cuite," " adoration," and " veneration." For Whitehead , worship fi rst
signi fies " surrender to the claim for assimilation," a claim whose motive
force, he writes, is mutual love. The crucial point is that this definition op
erates in immanence. " That which " demands assimilation has no d istinct
identity. Of course, Whitehead spea ks of a force, but this force, which he
calls mutual love, is not the force of God 's love, a God who might demand
our surrender. This love belongs to the very experience of worship, and the
effect called surrender is not explai ned by a ca use, but characterized by a
style. To evoke God's power does not i mply, in Whitehead, the preliminary
affirmation of His existence, for both the God of a religion and the wor
ship that is framed by this religion derive, for Whitehead, from a funda
menta l experience of humanity: rel igious vision. A vision of which no re
ligion ca n be the privileged expression, al though each one develops and
collapses, from epoch to epoch, according to whether its doctrine, its rites,
its commands, or its definitions do or do not evoke this vision, revi ve it, or
inhibit it, giving it or failing to give it an adequate expression.
1 3 4   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   Religion is the reaction of human nature to its search for God. The pre
sentation of God under the aspect of power awakens every modern in
stinct of critical reaction. This is fatal; for religion collapses unless its main
positions command immediacy of assent. In this respect the old phraseol
ogy is at variance with the psychology of modern civilisations (SMW, 1 9 1 ) .
   The modern critica l spi rit could indeed be ca l led " rel igious " since it,
like what it denounces, is a reaction to a proposition dea ling with God .
The problem is that its axis, " to bel ieve or not to bel ieve " in God , testifies
in its way to the " weakening" of modern thought, and gives rather in
adequate expression to the rel igious search to which it owes its passion.
The q uestion " Does God rea lly exist? " is crucial only if God is concei ved
as demand ing and forbidding, that is, if the statements that include Him
claim to benefit from the authority to which the term " rea lly" always al
ludes, whether this authority refers to pol itica l power, to reason, or to the
truth of a revelation.
   In other words, Whitehead is an agnostic, in the sense that the question
" Does God rea lly exist ? " has, for him, no va lid answer outside of a reli
gious practice . Yet his agnosticism does not commun icate with a si mple
"anthropology of the religious feeling," whose a uthor would contem
plate as if from nowhere, submitting to a neutra l, objective, and in short
scientific gaze a human feature from which he himsel f would be rather
mysteriously free. His agnosticism is positively constructivist, that is, a lso
pragmatic, for the way rel igion is descri bed commits the person who de
scri bes it, i mpl ies a wager on wha t ca n " make a religion hold," on what
the rel igious feeling might indeed be capa ble of. For Whitehead, the wa
ger does seem to bear tod ay upon a rel igion'S ability to accept and affi rm
that the power of God it invokes can indeed be understood as the way
this religion defines the kind of power it claims. God is the name for the
efficacy upon human bei ngs of the rel igious vision that they nouri sh, cul
tivate, and constitute as an ingredient of their life.
   The twofold possibil ity of nourishing this constructivist conception of
the religious vision, and of the rel igions that give it an expression, which
is always "epocha l," and of trusting the ability of those of his readers who
ad here to a rel igion to accept this conception , must be understood as a
testimony to the time. More precisely, it would be a testimony to the ep
ochal change that Whitehead anticipates and tries to carry out. A construc
tivism squared : by provid ing a constructivist version of religion, White
head does not stop with the operation of demystification with which the
statement " rel igion is a construction " is i mmediately associated, but he
fights for the future of this construction, for the statements that will one
day inspire a new immediate assent and provide rel igious vision with the
                                                        A   N E W   E P O C H ?   1 3 5




words and practices capa ble of stabil izing their collective importance,
i rreducible to a question of psychological comfort.
    Religion has emerged into human experience mixed with the cru dest
fancies of barbaric imagination. Gradually, slowly, steadily the vision re
curs in history under nobler form and with clearer expression. It is the one
element in human experience which persistently shows an upward trend. It
fades and then recurs. But when it renews its force, it recurs with an added
richness and purity of content. The fact of the religious vision, and its his
tory of persistent expansion, is our one ground for optimism. Apart from
it, human life is a flash of occasional enjoyments lighting up a mass of pain
and misery, a bagatelle of transient experience (SMW, 1 92 ) .
  It is thus without incoherence, but, as h e writes, " in all diffidence;" that
Whitehea d ventures, with regard to the vision that nourishes all religion,
the words that make him a witness to what he believes his epoch is ca
pable of.
   Religion is the vision of something which stands beyond, behind, and
within, the passing flux of immediate things: something which is real, and
yet waiting to be realised: something which is a remote possibility, and
yet the greatest of present facts; something that gives meaning to all that
passes, and yet eludes apprehension; something whose possession is the
final good, and yet beyond all reach; something which is the ultimate
ideal, and the hopeless quest ( SMW, 1 9 1 -1 92 ) .
   When h e was writing Science and the Modern World, Whitehead did
not yet know that this " something" would soon be situated a t the very
heart of a mode of a bstraction ai ming to " set in motion " an idea that he
had not yet constituted as a resource, that of a " cosmos." The thought of
the organism proposed in this book, for its part, has no direct incidence
on the religious vision . It designates the question of the order of nature,
not of what may be situated beyond it. The incidence is thus merely indi
rect, but it is clear: what Whitehead is undertaking, like a rai lway engineer,
is to critically ( re)set in motion ideas that are not themselves religious but
which, beyond their contradictions, have settled i nto an agreement that
defines as progress the denial of religion as an expression of l i ving values.
   Yet there would be nothing overly catastrophic in the privatization of
moral worlds, God speaking in the intimacy of each person's heart, if
other names than that of God had come to sta bil ize what matters to
human l i fe beyond itself.
   Whitehead does not cite Max Weber, who had proposed to associate
the rise of capitalism with the anguished question of sal vation with
which Protestants found themselves confronted, a question addressed to
each individual alone and undecidahle by defin ition. If he had done so,
1 3 6       FROM   T H E   P H I L O S O P H Y   O F   NATURE   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




he would certainly not have been moved by the somber grandeur of hab
its of thought that make the accumulation of capital an end i n itsel f, but
would have read in it the best testi mony to the barbarous i magination,
featuri ng a despotic God and a nature that has bifurcated . The world is
reduced to a scene bereft of mean ing in itself, i n which the only thing that
matters, the individua l's sa lvation, is won or lost. But Whitehead pre
ferred to frame the question in a d ifferent way. The question that worries
him, as always, is that of a bstraction, and more precisely the lack of resis
tance characteristic of the modern epoch to the i ntolerant rule of abstrac
tions that declare everything that esca pes them fri volous, i nsignificant,
or senti menta l . We must take seriously the fact that the disasters of the
modern world, its ugliness a nd its brutality, are part of what is ca lled
" progress " ; what has been done was done in the name of progress. We
must think of the widely shared and plausible cha racter of this reference
to progress as an " epochal fact."
   In other word s, Whitehead ra ises the problem sta rting out from those
who have " sung a long" with i ndustrial development, while reserving the
right to deplore its excesses. In particular, he wonders why so many re
ma rka ble people-a nd he cites some of his col leagues-have been able to
accept and even approve, define as the price and even as the precondi
tion of progress the " rational ization " that reduces workers to " mere
ha nds, drawn from the pool of labour," and nature to a set of exploit
able resources .
   [ . I Self-respect, and the making the most of your own individual
        .   .



opportunities, together constituted the efficient morality of the leaders
among the industrialists of that period. The western world is now suffer
ing from the limited moral outlook of the three previous generations [ . . . I
A striking example of this state of mind is to be seen in London where
the marvelous beauty of the estuary of the Thames, as it curves through
the city, is wantonly defaced by the Charing Cross railway bridge, con
structed apart from any reference to aesthetic values (SMW, 1 96 ) .
   Here, Whitehead cou ld b e considered a precursor o f ecology. For him,
the ugliness of the Cha ring Cross ra ilway bridge testifies to a catastrophic
divorce, not from " purely aesthetic" values but from va lues that are aes
thetic in the sense that they testify to the reverence of human beings to
wa rd their envi ronment, a nd therefore to the intrinsic value they recog
nize in their envi ronment. He might also be con sidered a Ma rxist without
knowing it, for the domination of a bstraction is what is presupposed and
rea l ized by the process of commod ification, when all concrete produc
tion is reduced to its exchange va lue in a regime of generalized equiva
lence, and when the l i vi ng l a hor of h u ma n heings is eva l u a ted as " I a hor
                                                         A   N E W   E P O C H ?   1 3 7




force." Yet there would be a risk of misunderstand ing in both cases, be
cause, for Whitehead, one should not attack one i ntolerant a bstraction by
another intolerant abstraction. When they turn the capital ist redefinition
of thi ngs and of social relations, or its contempt for the environment, into
the privileged key for a reading of the modern epoch, both the mil itant
revolutiona ries and the protectors of nature rely on an abstraction that is
in danger of being intolerant. Indeed, whoever says " key " says " mode of
reading that is blind to its own selectivity," for the key designates its lock
as the door's only relevant element. And if they rely on such an abstrac
tion, Whitehead would no doubt have insisted, however wel l-founded
their i nterventions and however relevant thei r denunciations, thei r moral
horizon risks being j ust as limited as that of their adversa ries.
   For Whitehead, the tale the modern world obl iges us to tell is thus, in
the first place, of how an affirmation of reason, of a vigorous and virile
reason chasing away superstition, but a lso of a short-sighted reason lack
ing in-depth vision, was able to contribute effectively to the liberation of
minds in the eighteenth century, but became fatal in the nineteenth century.
What he calls the " history of thought " is a history that is above all collec
tive and anonymous, which must be stated in terms of " habits of thought,"
that is, of the organizations that stabilize those habits as well, providing
them with a protected envi ronment in which they can be perpetuated even
when their destructive consequences a re obvious. As we shall see in what
follows, whoever speaks of a " stable habit implyi ng a protected environ
ment" refers to the general notions a rticulated by the " philosophy of the
organism." This means, in return, that the latter is indeed an a bstract, not a
salvific doctrine. Abstraction is necessary for setti ng resources in motion,
but it does not dictate the direction this motion must take. In the present
case, it does not define what must be done, because it is just as appropriate
for the description of what has happened to us. Yet it obliges us to think of
what has happened to us i n a way that is not the fatality or routine refra i n
about the normal price t o p a y for progress.
   In fact, what those visionaries of the origi ns-Gali leo, Newton,
Leibniz--could sca rcely have dared to hope for has i ndeed become a daily
routine in our universities. And this routine has also betrayed the trust
that bore them, the trust in a global order to be deciphered in the deta il of
facts. Nevertheless, the certa inties, value j udgments, and bl i ndnesses of
thei r uni versity hei rs do not a uthorize a ny a posteriori requisition against
these visiona ries. Nor do they reflect a n " i deology " i n the sense that it
could be separated from the active, i nventive thought on which it would
be parasitica l . They reflect what happened to thought itsel f, the wea k
ness with which it pays for the particular strength i t has acqui red , i n the
1 3 8   FROM T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




protected envi ronments in which it has developed . The problem is not
that the " vision " of the origins has become a ha bit, but that it has be
come a " professional habit." According to Whitehea d, the greatest dis
covery of the modern epoch has been the " method of training profession
als." This is what accounts for both its formida ble strength and its
eminent wea kness : the organization of the problems and responsibilities
of public life, as wel l as of school and university tra ining, have been
placed under the banner of " professiona lization."
   Each profession makes progress, but it is progress in its own groove.
Now to be mentally in a groove is to live in contemplating a given set of
abstractions. The groove prevents straying across country, and the ab
straction abstracts from something to which no further attention is paid
[ . . . 1 The remainder of life is treated superficially, with the imperfect
categories of thought derived from one profession ( SMW, 1 97 ) .
   Professional ization h a s spread t o all practices, including that of scien
tists. Whitehead makes it responsible, moreover, for a certain stagnation
of science in the course of the last twenty yea rs of the nineteenth century,
   [ . . . l one of the dullest stages of thought since the time of the First
Crusade ( SMW, 1 0 1 ) .
   Whitehead does not deny that the professional ization o f science may
be associated with the rapid progress of what have become " scientific
disci plines." But this is no reason to find a justification of professiona liza
tion. Wherever it exi sts, this progress comes in the first instance from the
fact that research, even if it did not have new ideas as motive forces,
could benefit from technological development. As Whitehead emphasizes,
this situation is pa rticula rly clea r in physics: whereas from a technical
viewpoint, Gali leo could have performed his experiments in front of the
fa mily of King Minos, an experi ment l i ke that of M ichelson, which re
sulted in the relativistic questioning of space-ti me, could not have taken
place before the moment it was carried out. The possibility of envisaging
a measure of the speed of l ight as compared to the ether testifies not so
much to the inventive strength of a science that would have escaped pro
fessiona lization as if by miracle, as to the d i rect symbiosis with technical
innovation from which this science benefits.
   The eighteenth century opened with the quiet confidence that at last
nonsense had been gotten rid of. To-day we are at the opposite pole of
thought. Heaven knows what seeming nonsense may not tomorrow be
demonstrated truth. We have recaptured some of the tone of the early nine
teenth century, only on a higher imaginative level. The reason why we are
on a higher imaginative level is not because we have finer imagination,
but because we have better instruments (SMW, 1 1 4 ) .
                                                        A   N E W   E P O C H ?   1 3 9




     If professionalization does not prevent us from speaking of a certa in
progress of science, it has, however, been cata strophic from the viewpoint
of the way so-ca l led modern society has been thought and transformed .
For Whitehead, the bui lders of the Cha ring Cross bridge were genuine
professiona ls, proud of not allowing any senti menta l considerations such
as harmony or bea uty to enter into their calculations. Likewise, those
who today manage what are ca lled the " human resources " of corporations
are proud to have the strength to abstract from the immediate, concrete
consequences of their management in the na me of the pitiless necessities
of globa l competition .
     We should not be surprised, therefore, if the last chapter of Science and
the Modern World, entitled " Requisites for Social Progress," deals mainly
with the question of education. In fact, this question had a l ready occupied
pa rt of Whitehead 's life, when he left Cambridge for London. From 1 9 1 0
to 1 924, Whitehead abandoned h i s " gown " and devoted hi mself to " the
town." He took on heavy academic and administrative responsibilities, and
he was also an active participant in movements for educationa l reform .
     Of course, the way Whitehead ra ises the problem of education is not at
a l l that of a professiona l pedagogue. His gu iding idea is that children a re
lively and interested, and that the first problem in ed ucation is to nourish
interest without killing life. What Whitehead ca lls education does not,
therefore, in the first instance designate a rel iable tra nsmission of infor
mation, or a training in skills that could be evaluated, nor, moreover, the
opposite slogan, the respect of differences and the autonomy of the " learner."
In fact, education mobil izes all the themes that wil l oblige him to think as
a philosopher: coherence, interest, importance, life, values, emotions, spe
cialization, abstraction, and above all trust. All themes of which the thought
of the organism wi l l propose an initia l a rticulation . . .
     With the question of the organism, we thus come to the genuine epi
center of Whitehead's thought, at the point of articulation of the diagno
sis he gave of the modern epoch and the phi losophy of the organism he
undertook to construct. If Whitehead, following Wi l l ia m Ja mes, became
so interested in the creator's trust and the power of habit, it is perhaps
also because the ed ucator must affirm them both j ust as much. Ed ucators
must trust the creative character of what they are charged with transmit
ting, and, a lthough they a re concerned with the di fference between good
and bad habits, they cannot denounce habit as such. They will never turn
it into the manifesta tion of a regretta ble tendency of the human mind,
or a form of voluntary servitude. It was, moreover, on this point that
Whitehead expl icitly refused to follow Bergson, who proposed to identify
the fascination with abstracti on with a feature of human intell igence as
1 4 0   F R O M T H E   PH I LOS O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




such, or a trap into which i ntelligence falls almost necessarily. Whitehead
was not fighting against habits, nor did he call for a future i n which every
one would be a visiona ry. In the possibility of a transformation of ha bits,
he had the kind of trust that the craft of an educator presupposes and
reqUIres.
   For Whitehead, thinking a bout what social progress requi res designates
ed ucation as a crucial site, in which an epoch j udges itself on the basis
of the way it fashions those who wi ll prolong its choices, strengths, and
weaknesses. Education can create the habit of appreciating concrete facts,
complete facts. It can also create the opposite habit, as is the case with the
education that produces professiona ls, the habit of yield i ng in the face
of what is unaccepta ble, of adhering to what is i ncred ible. Because for
Whitehead, the link is obviously di rect between the blind way in which
thinkers who stuck to secure a nd definite habits of thought, that is, pro
fessiona ls, have subscri bed to the concrete unacceptable consequences
of industrial development, and the way in which other thinkers, just as
" serious," have prolonged , in a routine way, the incred ible theses that
made nature bifurca te and red uced rea lity to the agitation of stupid, in
sensate matter.
   When you understand all about the sun and all about the atmosphere
and all about the rotation of the earth, you may still miss the radiance of
the sunset. There is no substitute for the direct perception of the concrete
achievement of a thing in its actuality. We want concrete fact with a high
light thrown on what is relevant to its preciousness. What I mean is art
and aesthetic education [ . . . 1 "art " in the general sense that I require is
any selection by which the concrete facts are so arranged as to elicit at
tention to particular values which are realisable by them. For example,
the mere disposing of the human body and the eyesight so as to get a
good view of the sunset is a simple form of artistic selection. The habit of
art is the habit of enjoying vivid values. But, in this sense, art concerns
more than sunsets. A factory, with its machinery, its community of opera
tives, its social service to the general population, its dependence upon
organising and designing genius, its potentialities as a source of wealth to
the holders of its stock is an organism exhibiting a variety of vivid values.
What we want to train is the habit of apprehending such an organism in
its completeness ( SMW, 1 99-200 ) .
   The " organism" has made its appea rance, unexpected ly, in the context
of a factory, its workers, i ts stockholders, its executi ves, and its envi ron
ment, indicating the end of the diagnostic iti nerary and the moment
when it will fina l l y become necessary to envisage what Whitehead under
stands by an organism. Today, when " ra tiona lization," " competiti veness,"
                                                         A   N E W   E P O C H ?   1 4 1




and " flexi bility " reign , this emergence at the end of an itinerary may raise
a smi le, and this may already have been the case i n his time. The enjoy
ment of vivid va lues does not imply a praise of reality. It ma kes the d iffer
ence, central in The A ims of Education, between " vivid" and " dead "
ideas, the former setting the students' minds in motion, and the latter
being synonyms of indoctrination and passivity.
    Before we concl ude, I offer a tri bute to the person who, yea rs ago, made
this di fference a vivid idea for me when he forced me to set in motion what
I thought I knew well, in this case the equivalence between kinetic energy
and potential energy as ill ustrated by the perfect pendulum. A dead, scho
lastic example, he objected to me, which silences what this equivalence
does not say, but which is attested by the pendulum clockwork mecha
nisms: it is when the pendulum has fully unfolded its motion that it enters
into the twofold contact, with the mechanism of the needles and with a
fa l l i ng weight ( o r a relaxing spri ng) that ma kes it a " ti mekeeper." This
" technica l deta il " matters, whatever the claims of dynamic equi valence !
Thus, an austere treatise on clock making, dealing with " escape mecha
nisms," finally came alive, a passionate and fascinating story of the multi
ple inventions that take advantage of what only a pendulum coming to the
end of its ascent is able to do. An example of the aesthetic education men
tioned by Whitehead: the pendulum clock no longer illustrated a law of
motion without simultaneously nourishing speculation, poetry, and narra
tion. A genuine " ecology " of abstraction, for the abstract law of the pen
dulum can then elicit the attention it is due without denying the rest, in a
way that creates the possi bility of a mutual aesthetic appreciation be
tween specialists of precision and adventurers of genera lization. The ques
tion is no longer of knowing " who is right," but of what each one of them
has " done " with the vivid experience that nourished them a l l .
                                                                   C H A P TER TEN
