From the Concept of Natu re to the Order of Natu re




       f  H E WH I T E H E A D I A N notion o f organism i s not, a s such, scien
                             �          �
          tific, un like the de ni tions t at each speci � l ized branch of knowl
                   .
        . edge mIght        .
                         be inclined  to gIve to what thIs notIon.   comprehends.
It perta ins to the philosophy of the organism to construct the a bstract
concepts that constitute each specialized version of the organism a s
" cases," exhi biting in a more or less pa rtia l w a y what these concepts, for
their pa rt, will designate as a "complete and concrete fact." In this sense,
the common reference to the organism will a lso have to i l luminate the
divergence between the sciences, for this divergence will reflect the way
in which the concern of each a uthorizes it to ta ke i nto account only cer
ta in aspects of the "complete and concrete fact" in order to give them a
determi nable meaning. This means that " scientific rea sons," as demand
ing determination, will sti l l be thei rs a nd wi l l not be j udged in terms of a
more powerful phi losophica l reason to which they must submit.
    In other words, Whitehead does not i ntend to return to the past. The
origi n of modern science was a bove all a hi storical revolt agai nst inflexi
ble med ieva l rationa l i sm . Gali leo played " the stubborn facts" against
reason, a lways returning to the way thi ngs happen aga i nst those who try
to understand why they ha ppen, but the phi losophy of the orga nism wi l l
not seek assi stance from ancient reasons " aga i nst" Gali lean abstraction.
Quite the contrary, its job will be to confirm the trust i n the facts that
ani mates modern science . However, those who have recorded thei r dis
satisfaction, as contemporaries of modern scientific facts and abstrac
tions, must be l istened to. In so doing, they have, each in their own way,
exhibited aspects of the experience for which these a bstractions, and the
     FROM   T H E   C O N C E PT   O F   N AT U R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   O F   N AT U R E   1 4 3




facts they privi lege, did not account in a satisfactory way. Likewise, the
fact that the " reasons " a ppropriate in physics and chemistry a re an ob
stacle to the development of biology or psychology can and must be
taken seriously.
   It is important to emphasize that the obstacle in question is, in fact,
less " conceptual " than social, as is attested by the i nterminable debates
over the mind-body problem . Given that what we ca ll " body " can be rep
resented in these debates in terms of " state of the centra l nervous sys
tem," deciphera ble in principle as one physico-chemica l system among
others, while what we ca l l " m i nd " is reduced to so-ca l led question of the
" qua l ia " -perceiving a speci fic frequency of electromagnetic rad iation as
" red "-implies first of all that everyone seems to be able to grasp with
impunity what is designated by " body" and " mind " i n order to caricature
them in terms that repeat the bifu rcation of nature over and over again.
   Whitehead's procedure shou ld be approached while keeping this as
pect of the situation in mind: trust in ideas, to be sure, but a bove all in
the possibi lity of a transformation of habits. From generation to genera
tion, body and mind have found " defenders," protesti ng aga inst scientific
caricatures, but their a rguments have been impotent aga i nst the habits of
i mpunity of the scientists, who shrug them off with reactions of the type
" Yes, I know, but nevertheless " : nevertheless, you can't stop the progress
of science, and what does not seem to us to be possi ble today will be so
tomorrow.
   This is why Whitehea d will not base himself on d issatisfactions and
obstacles, but will place them in the service of a stra tegy addressing imagi
nation, the only eventua l producer of a transformation in habits. The goal
is neither to prove nor to refute, but to transform what was i ntended to
be a proof that there is room for d issa tisfaction, or a refutation based on
an obstacle reputed to be insurmounta ble, into contri butions to the " j ob
specifications" that his conception of the order of nature w i l l have to
fulfill.
   To spea k of a "job speci fica tions " is to avoid spea king either of " req
u isites " or of "concepts." Requisites were appropriate for the approach
of The Concept of Nature, beca use they were im manent to the problem
Whitehead had decided to raise in that book. Here, it is the epoch that
raises its ( nonphilosophica l ) problems, and the requisites wi l l have to wait
for the completion of the inquiry resulting in the " job speci fications," for
these requisites wil l reflect the way Whitehead defines, through the obl iga
tions imposed by these job specifications, what is required by the order of
nature. As far as conceptual construction is concerned, it will begin with
the transformation of what has been col lected and a ffirmed into requisites
1 4 4   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




immanent to the properly philosophical problem that is henceforth raised,
and it will have to satisfy the demands of logica l rationa lity and harmony
presupposed by faith in the order of nature. The notion of organism is
thus situated at the interface between an empirical type of inquiry whose
terra in would be the history of ideas, protestations, and denunciations,
and a conceptual construction, whose starting point will be the requisites
extracted from the terrain by the inqui ry.
   It is already clear that the conceptual construction obliged by the no
tion of organism wi l l have to aim at what was excluded by the approach
of The Concept of Nature: since we are no longer dea ling here with na
ture in the sense in which we experience it, but with that nature for which
we suppose an order, the point wi ll be to construct reasons; and therefore,
also to determine the obl igations to which our reasons must submit.
   We have to search whether nature does not in its very being show itself
as self-explanatory. By this I mean, that the sheer statement, of what things
are, may contain elements explanatory of why things are. Such elements
may be expected to refer to depths beyond anything which we can grasp
with a clear apprehension. In a sense, all explanation must end in an ulti
mate arbitrariness. My demand is, that the ultimate arbitrariness of matter
of fact from which our formulation starts should disclose the same gen
eral principles of reality, which we dimly discern as stretching away into
regions beyond our explicit powers of discernment ( SMW, 92-93 ) .
   Where scientific material ism postulates loca lized entities a s the ultimate
reference for all explanation, the phi losophy of the organism will ask that
the concepts to be constructed exhibit the way nature "explains itself."
This demand formulated by Whitehead is a mod ified version of "all in the
same boat, to sink or swim together," but it announces the need for a new
position for the category of the ulti mate. Since the problem wi l l hence
forth be the ulti mate of our explanations, what is presupposed by all our
explanations, we may take arbitra riness as a name for this ultimate, but
here the arbitrariness does not correspond to a li mit, imposing a renuncia
tion: it is defined by a demand. Whitehead demands that the ultimate ar
bitrariness must be similarly concluded with regard to every explanation,
even those concern ing the states of things that are most familiar. And he
demands, correlatively, that no aspect of reality should designate this arbi
trariness in a privileged way.
   As in The Concept of Nature, the designation of something u ltimate
thus goes hand in hand with conceptual construction, and they point to
the same strategy of resistance to the lures of specialized thought. The con
cepts to be constructed presuppose, and enable us to resist, the facile so
lution to which all specialized thought yields: someth ing ul timate often
     FROM   T H E   CONC EPT   O F   N AT U R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   O F   N AT U R E   1 4 5




intervenes at the point when their clear categories, corresponding to
what they privi lege, cease to operate . This is the case when scienti sts
a ffirm that they can explain the how of things, but invoke the unknow
able character of chance, or of God 's wi l l , when their why is concerned .
But also when critical thinkers demonstrate that a l l our knowledge has
as its object phenomena not thi ngs as they exist in themselves, only to
collide, as with an enigma, with the fact that when astronomers pointed
their telescopes in the direction in which their calculations ind icated the
possible existence of an unknown planet, they did indeed find it. Or again,
when theoreticians of the mind-body problem declare that the ultimate
mystery is constituted by the emergence of qualia. The way in which a
difficulty, which fol lows from the framing of a problem, is avoided by
means of submission to the unknowable is j ust as unacceptable for White
head as the theory of " psychic add itions " : it corresponds to " rational i ty's
great refusa l to insist on its rights."
    Concepts will thus ensure that rationality can a ffi rm its rights, all its
rights, but not the right to an ultimate and sel f-sufficient explanation.
The very idea of such an explanation cannot seduce a mathematician:
every explanation has its premises, and every premise designates the i rre
duci ble responsibility of whoever demands the explanation, this explana
tion and no other. The premises a re part of the work. The right claimed
by conceptual work is the right of not turning what is ulti mate into a
limit of thought, where it is a special ized thought that meets its l i mits.
Li ke everything we a re aware of in perception, therefore, all our special
ized explanations will be " placed in the sa me boat " : what we a re directly
aware of wi l l have to refer to the same ultimate arbitrari ness as the
" depth " of reality that we cannot clearly grasp.
    First, however, it is time to write down the job specifications, that is, to
carry out empirical inquiry. Or, more precisely, the inquiry that wi ll trans
form all those whom it addresses into empirical witnesses, bringing to ex
istence one or another aspect of the concrete and complete facts of which
the organism will have to take charge. Obviously, what wi ll be retained is
not always what these witnesses thought they were producing-far from
it. Whitehead accords no importance to the intentions of the witnesses he
provides for hi mself or the vocation they conferred upon their proposi
tions. Whether they wanted to or not, they testify, and their testi mony
concerns the order of nature.
    The most extraord inary example in this matter i s certainly the one I
have a l ready cited: the treatment undergone by the thought of Bishop
Berkeley. Whitehead is not conce rned with Berkeley's doctrine, or his
usual historica l inheritance by Hume, then Kant. He intends to go back
1 4 6   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




to w hat is, for him, Berkeley's key problem, the cri tique of the mode of
abstraction that confers a misplaced concreteness upon simple loca liza
tion . In so doing, he obviously goes back to the problem ra ised in The
Concept of Nature as wel l . Berkeley asks why we confuse what we
perceive " here " with rea l things that we suppose to exist at a distance,
" there." But the point is no longer to fight agai nst the bifurcation of
nature, to construct the concept of nature required by what we are
aware of: this castle, this cloud, this planet, that decla re themselves to be
" there." For what is at issue now is the order of nature, and experience
will have to exhibit the way it participates in this order.
   Whitehead therefore registers Berkeley's testimony among his job
speci fications, as a protest against red ucing the concrete fact of percep
tive experience to the a bstraction of a space in which thi ngs " in them
selves " are situated, a " reality" to which we could refer while forgetting
the perceiving mind . He wi l l therefore affirm, with Berkeley, that what
constitutes the rea lization of natura l entities, castle, cloud, or planet, is
the fact of being perceived, but . . . on the condition of carrying out one
small mod ifica tion. The point is simply to avoid passing, as Berkeley did,
from the idea that natura l entities are " rea lized " in the unity of a percep
tion to the idea that they owe their rea lity to that perception. And to
avoid this, it suffices to " a d d " to Berkeley's testimony that what is rea l
ized is nothing other than the unity of the mind itsel f, or
   [ . . . I that the realisation is a gathering of things into the unity of a
prehension; and that what is thereby realised is the prehension, and not
the things. This unity of a prehension defines itself as a here and now, and
the things so gathered into the grasped unity have essential reference to
other places and other times. For Berkeley's mind, I substitute a process
of prehensive unification ( SMW, 6 9 ) .
  I n The Concept of Nature, the perceptive event, associated with " cor
poreal life," provided a l l experience with its " here," and perception with
its viewpoint. Whitehead had emphasized that what we are aware of ex
hibits itself as " provi ding a foothold " for mind : that is, the event decla res
nature's connection with the ultimate metaphysica l rea l ity, where " m ind "
and " nature" cannot be opposed . With Berkeley'S doctrine, we jump feet
first into the risk, emphasized in The Concept of Nature, of making mind
intervene in a way that blows up the entire powder keg. This is what
Berkeley did, si nce his name is henceforth l i nked to the extraordinary
questions associated with " solipsism," or the doubt that anything exists
independently of " my" perception ( or of yours . . . ). Yet with the " minor
mod ification " proposed by Whitehead, an entirely different kind of
" lea p" is announced, j ust as adventurous but with a quite di fferent orien-
     FROM   T H E   C O N C E PT   O F   N AT U R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   OF   N AT U R E   1 4 7




tation. It is not a matter of a rguing over " what is more rea l ? " experience
or that to which it testifies, this castle, these clouds . . . The point is to
ta ke experience, and what it testifies to a bout what is other than it, a bout
other places and other times, as a mode of articulation to which the meta
physical language to be constructed will have to grant meaning.
   The key term is, of course, " prehension ." Prehension is a " ta k ing into
account," and this neologism indicates that Whitehead intends to free
this term from a l l subjective or intellectua l connotations, as well as from
everything such a connotation implies. The statement "I take into account"
presupposes the possibility of d istinguishing the subject and the account
carried out by this subj ect. If 1 take i nto account the possibil ity that it
may rain at the moment 1 step outside, and stop to get my coat, 1 do not
by any means have the impression that 1 a m producing myself in this
operation. Prehension, in contrast, should make the operation and the
production of rea l ity coincide. What prehends real izes itself i n the pro
cess of prehensive unification, my hesitation " here," my coat " there," the
threaten ing sky up above, and so on.
   Prehension is thus a primary term, as was perception for Berkeley. It
does not req uire explanation but must enable the exhi bition of the com
mon feature of all situations i n which something ma kes a d ifference for
something else, i nclud ing the least " psychological " ones. For instance, the
earth's trajectory " takes account" of the sun. The mathematica l function
with which celestial mechanics associates this trajectory testifies to a re
markably stable mode of prehension, referring to the sun qua endowed
with a mass and situated at a determinate distance. The identification of
the sun 's d ista nce and mass as variables of the earth's acceleration at each
instant thus expl icates, in an a bstract way, this aspect of the " prehensive
unification " that we ca l l acceleration .
   Perception is simply the cognition of prehensive unification; or more
shortly, perception is cognition of prehension. The actual world is a mani
fold of prehensions: and a "prehension " is a "prehensive occasion," and a
prehensive occasion is the most concrete finite entity, conceived as what it
is in itself and for itself, and not as from its aspect in the essence of an
other such occasion (SMW, 71 ) .
   The breathless succession o f utterances gives this passage the character
of a veritable eruption of metaphysics, of the description of what is " ac
tual," existing in and for itself, and Whitehead's readers might think they
have to do with a med itation on the thinkers of the seventeenth century.
Whitehead is not doing history of phi losophy, however. He treats Berke
ley, and soon Leibniz and Spinoza, as a mathematician treats his col
leagues. Like Berkeley, Leibniz, a nd Spi noza, he attempts the pa radigmatic
1 4 8   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   OF   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




enunciatory adventure: the inauguration of terms that will bring to exis
tence both the thinker and the thought, terms which, in this case, must
carry out the transition from the question of the concept of nature to that
of the order of nature. To a ttempt this adventure, however, he, like all
mathematicians, must d istinguish, in the work that precedes him, between
what can be respected and what will have to be general ized in another
way. In this case, what is to be respected is the experience that has made
the thinker and the thought exist, but what can and must be generalized
designates the conclusions that Berkeley drew from them. This does not
mean that these conclusions are wrong, but that they reflect a freedom
and a risk that can, and must, be appreciated in a mode that is primarily
that of contrast, experimentation of agreements and d ivergences.
   The things which are grasped into a realised unity, here and now, are
not the castle, cloud, and the planet simply in themselves; but they are
the castle, the cloud, and the planet from the standpoint, in space and
time, of the prehensive unification. In other words, it is the perspective
of the castle over there from the standpoint of the unification here. It is,
therefore, aspects of the castle, the cloud, and the planet which are grasped
into unity here. You will remember that the idea of perspectives is quite
familiar in philosophy. It was introduced by Leibniz, in the notion of the
monad mirroring perspectives of the universe. I am using the same no
tion, only I am toning down his monads into the unified events in space
and time. In some ways, there is greater analogy with Spinoza 's modes;
that is why I use the terms mode and modal. In the analogy with Spi
noza, his one substance is for me the one underlying activity of realisa
tion individualising itself in an interlocked plurality of modes. Thus,
concrete fact is process. Its primary analysis is into underlying activity
of prehension, and into realised prehensive events. Each event is an indi
vidual matter of fact issuing from an individualisation of the substrate
activity. But individualisation does not mean substantial independence
(SMW, 69-70 ) .
   I t is hard, and n o doubt futile, to know whether Whitehead thought he
possessed the essential pa rt of the sol ution at the time he wrote these
lines. The proponents of a systematic reading, affirming the unity of his
work from Science and the Modern World to Adventures of Ideas, can
affirm that everything is a l ready here, summarized in brief form. Like the
Lei bnizian monad , the individual prehensive event may lay claim to the
features that Whitehead j udges essential to any rea l ism: " memory of
the past, i mmed iacy of realisa tion, and indication of thi ngs to come"
(SMW, 73 ) . Indeed, the event, as Whitehead characterizes it here, not
on ly reflects in itself the modes of unification of its contempora ries, but
     FROM   T H E   C O N C E P T   O F   NATUR E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   O F   N AT U R E   1 4 9




also those of its predecessors, and finally those aspects that the present
has determined with regard to the future. Yet one can j ust as well speak
of " wishful thinking " or " betting on a comet." For the notion of a sub
strate activity that is individual ized is a black box, a placeholder for a
sol ution. Let us say, more positively, that it a l ready designates what is
refused, the substantia l independence that corresponded to a world of
individuals, a nd that it introd uces a n initial " specification" to be fulfilled,
an initial constra int to be satisfied . The fact that an individual i s thought
of a s an individual ization impl ies that the question of the relations be
tween individuals (conceived as substantia lly independent) is a bad ly
framed question, in that it presupposes the possibil ity of conceiving of
isolated, localized individuals. The wel l-formulated question must deal
with the " how" of relations, not their existence. Yet these a re still mere
words, promising to be sure, but which have not undergone a ny of the
tests capable of determining what they commit us to.
   In fact, Whitehead is quite clea r a bout the operation he has a ttempted .
   In this sketch of an analysis more concrete than that of the scientific
scheme of thought, I have started from our own psychological field, as
it stands for our cognition. I take it for what it claims to be: the self
knowledge of our bodily event. I mean the total event, and not the inspec
tion of the details of the body. This self-knowledge discloses a prehensive
unification of modal presences of entities beyond itself. I generalise by the
use of the principle that this total bodily event is on the same level as all
other events, except for an unusual complexity and stability of inherent
pattern (SMW, 73 ) .
   The " psychological fiel d " of which Whitehead speaks refers, in a fai rly
transparent way, to the analyses of William James, and particularly to his
a rticle "Does 'Consciousness' Exist ? " to whose ambition Whitehead sub
scri bes (SMW, 1 43 ), as we have a l ready seen: James closes the philo
sophical epoch inaugura ted by Descartes .
   Whitehead, one might say, " starts out" from what is, for James, the riski
est speculation: consciousness does not exist, it is a fictitious unit; thoughts,
however, a re fully real, and are made of the same " stuff " as things. And
with the term " self-consciousness," Whitehead also accepts james's propo
sition that consciousness "stands for " a " function," a function that thoughts
" perform " and which is cal led " k nowing." With the expression " self
knowledge of our bodily event," the question of consciousness as a " func
tion " is thus raised . And the cautionary note is already struck: conscious
ness is not to be red uced to an "epiphenomenon," as is clai med by those
who, as they inspect the " details" of neuronal functioning, undertake to
"explain" it. The " tota l " bodily event is by no means the body as the object
I S O   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




of scientific defini tion, but rather the unknown element of the problem
James proposed, and which will have to be solved .
    In Process and Reality, Whitehead wi ll implicitly present himself as the
one who "comes after Wi lliam James." Implicitly, because it is precisely
insofar as Science and the Modern World had turned William James i nto
the inaugurator of a new philosophical epoch that a much more general
remark by Whitehead, concerning the rhythm proper to the history of
philosophy, assumes all its meaning.
    Every ph ilosophical school in the course of its history requires two
presiding philosophers. One of them, under the infl uence of the main doc
tri nes of the school, should survey experience with some adequacy, but
i nconsistently. The other philosopher should reduce the doctrines of the
school to a rigid consistency; he will thereby effect a reductio ad absur
dum. No school of thought has performed its full service to philosophy
until these men have appeared ( PR, 5 7 ) .
    Insofa r as Whitehead always insisted o n presenting himself as a part of
the history of phi losophy, rather than as its culmination, it is not prohib
ited to maintain that, as soon as he began to write Science and the Mod
ern World, he considered himself to be trying to confer his " rigid coher
ence " upon the philosophy of William James, and more precisely on his
position with regard to consciousness. There is nothing negative a bout
this, coming from a mathematician: the point is to go " right to the end " of
a proposition, to render its presuppositions and consequences expl icit, to
reconstruct everything on its basis, at the risk that this undertaking may
render percepti ble ( to others ) a potential a bsurdity of the system. And, by
so doing, the service that will have been rendered to phi losophy will be
the dissatisfaction inspired, a motive for a new philosophical creation.
    In this case, before going to the end of the proposition that turns con
sciousness into a function, its meaning must be constructed. What White
head must avoid is fairly clear: his entire construction would col lapse if
he accepted a consciousness that would be the subject of statements con
cerning experience, a consciousness that, as the master of its ship, could
free ly choose to a d d ress one or a nother a spect of its own experience .
Consciousness cannot be a pure activity, capa ble, as the case may be, of
asking whether it might not, after all, be responsible for all that it per
ceives. Yet that does not make it a " function " in the scientific sense, that
is, expl ica ble as the sum of the " details" brought to light by the scientific
inspection of the body. For Whitehead, consciousness in James's sense
obl iges us to think of the " total bod ily event," and, as he continues with
rigid coherence, it obliges us to think of every event in the sense in which
it exists " for itsel f." The prod uction of a standpoint enabling us to speak
     F R O M   T H E   C O N C E P T   O F   N AT U R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   O F   N AT U R E   1 5 1




of " self-consciousness " is not the privilege of the " psychologica l field ."
The only pri vilege of this field is to constitute the site where the twofold
question "What is a function ? " and " What is a n event ? " will find its most
demanding terms.
   James's philosophy could be, and generally was, confused with a phi
losophy of an opportunistic entrepreneur, for whom the pretences of con
sciousness are illusory, for whom the truth of an idea is identical with
what it earns, with its cash val ue. No one would dare to disqual ify Pro
cess and Reality in this way, where the demand that a l l that exists may be
said to be both " cause of itself" and " function " was to find its ful l expla
nation. Quite the contrary, what characterizes Whitehead's great work is
the i ncongruous effort demanded of the reader, to whom a set of concepts
is proposed, none of which declares its cash val ue, and none of which,
moreover, has a ny meaning independently of all the others. Whereas
James's thought could be taken apart and simplified, Whitehea d 's writing
" red uces " this supple and vulnerable thought " to a rigid coherence " ; that
is, it actively prod uces a strange inseparabil ity between the experience
demanded by reading a nd the experience proposed by concepts.
   We have not reached that stage yet. Here, the point was to emphasize
the commitment constituted by Whitehead's allusion to the psycho
philosophy of Willia m James. If the psychologica l field is ever to be a rel i
able starting point for a general ization that may eventually surmount the
" territorial division between science a nd philosophy" ( SMW, 1 45 ) , it is to
the extent that it obl iges us to risk a l l that is presupposed by our descrip
tions centered either around the " subject" or the "object," either a round
what is " active" (explanatory) or a round what is " passive" ( explicable).
At this stage, however, the division in question is far from having been
actually surmounted . Whitehead is a nnouncing an ambition that he stil l
lacks t h e means t o satisfy, for the problem as he frames it is situated in the
strict prolongation of his position in The Concept of Nature. Nor is he
unaware of this, since he takes care, on the contrary, to specify the conti
nuity of his thought, to a rticulate the new notion of prehension with the
old notion of an object making ingression.
   I will say that a sense-object has ingression into space-time. The cogni
tive perception of a sense-object is the awareness of the prehensive unifica
tion (into a standpoint A, including the sense-object in question) of various
modes of various sense-objects [ . . . I I am merely describing what we do
perceive: we are aware of green as being one element in a prehensive unifi
cation of sense-objects; each sense-object, and among them green, having
its particular mode, which is expressible as location elsewhere. There are
various types of modal location. For example, sound is voluminous: it fills
l S 2   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




a hall, and so sometimes does diffused colour. But the modal location of
a colour may be that of being the remote boundary of a volume, as for
example the colours on the walls of a room ( SMW, 70-7 1 ) .
   S o far, then, Whitehead has l imited himsel f t o repeati ng what w e al
ready knew: ingression is a relation that has various modes. But he has
done so in such a way that observation is no longer connected with expe
rience, but with " rea lity," or the process of realization. The multipl icity of
modes of i ngression will have to be understood on the basis of the new
questions of rea liza tion a nd individual ization. We no longer have experi
ence of an event, but our sensible experience is a typical case of an event.
   We are only at the beginning of the itinerary associated with the phi
losophy of the organism, for the point here is no longer to think of per
ception, but to confirm fa ith in the order of nature. A castle, a cloud, a
green leaf have in common the fact of posing the q uestion of perception,
but insofar as they are united by this common feature, they are silent with
regard to the way we perceive and feel, that is, also with regard to what is
attested by what we perceive and feel . Here, Whitehead a bandons those
seventeenth-century thin kers who discussed the relation between percep
tion and the spatio-temporal world . Their testimony does not suffice, for
it is l iable to treat a castle, a cloud, and the face of a loved one indi ffer
ently. It does not do j ustice to what I have already introd uced as the ques
tion of " presence."
   Whitehead now turns to the Romantic poets of the early British nine
teenth century, toward those who " reacted " to scientific a bstractions by
celebrating a nature to which these abstractions fail to do justice.
   "We murder to dissect," accord ing to Wordsworth's accusation. White
head cites this ind ignation, this fury, and he chooses to understand it as a
testi mony not to the violence of the assassin, or to the pain of the victim,
but to the inadeq uacy of the " materialist" scientific approach, as wel l as
of the empiricist approach that was contemporary with it. The phi loso
phy of the organism is first and foremost an epistemology.
   It is important to ask, what Wordsworth found in nature that failed to
receive expression in science. I ask this question in the interest of science
itself; for one main position in these lectures is a protest against the idea
that the abstractions of science are irreformable and unalterable. Now it
is emphatically not the case that Wordsworth hands over inorganic mat
ter to the mercy of science, and concentrates on the faith that in the living
organism there is some element that science cannot analyse [ . . . I It is
the brooding presence of the hills which haunts him. His theme is nature
in solido, that is to say, he dwells on that mysterious presence of sur
rounding things, which imposes itself on any separate element that we set
up as an individual for its own sake (SMW, 8 3 ) .
     FROM   T H E   C O N C E PT   OF   N AT U R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   OF   N AT U R E   1 5 3




  When [ go for a wa lk, it is no longer a matter of saying of a hill, "Say,
there it is again," as was the case with Cleopatra's Needle. The hill, brood
ing and ancient, has a weight; it is a "presence" and not simply " there " for
me, who perceives it " here." The experience of its presence i mposes itself
in such a way that [ belong to it much more than it belongs to me: this is
what a science focused on separability cannot express.
   Nor, however, can it express what was celebrated by Shelley, who, unli ke
Wordsworth, loved science. For Shelley's poetry celebrates nature that is in
a state of flux, of perpetual change, and it testifies not to presence, but to a
" change that cannot die," an incessant shimmering, an elusive rustling.
 Shelley thinks of nature as changing, dissolving, transforming as it
were at a fairy's touch ( SMW, 8 6 ) .
  The contrast between brooding, a ncient presence and the shimmering
of colors and sounds does not depend on the difference in the tempera
ment of the two poets facing the " same" landscape. This would silence
experience in favor of bargain-basement psychology. If a d ifference in
temperaments does come into play, it is in the different sensitivity with
regard to two " facts," both of which must a ppear a mong the job specifi
cations. One of them testifies to what Whitehead will cal l " endurance,"
which i ncludes change, the other to what he will cal l "eternal i ty."
   The mountain endures. But when after ages it has been worn away, it
has gone. If a replica arises, it is yet a new mountain. A colour is eternal.
It haunts time like a spirit. It comes and it goes. But when it comes, it is
the same colour. It neither survives nor does it live. It appears when it
is wanted. The mountain has to time and space a different relation from
that which colour has ( SMW, 8 6-8 7 ) .
   " A colour i s eternal." Color a lready played a highly peculiar role in The
Concept of Nature, as it is the paradigmatic hostage of the bifurcation of
nature in the same way as qualia a re today in the sempiternal controversies
organized around the mind-body problem. Whitehead does not limit him
self to confirming the answer he had given in The Concept of Nature: color
is a sense-object, and all objects make ingression. Here, color appears en
dowed with an adjective, eternal, that topples us into a new world of ques
tions. The sense-object is no longer defined on the basis of the empiricist
question; what ra ises problems is no longer the relation between the set
of sense data [ can perceive and this " stone " to which [ attribute them . The
bifurcation of nature between primary and secondary qualities yields to
the question to which the poets obl ige us, the difference between modes of
experience of the brooding mountain, always there, and of color, without
age or memory, which appears when it is " cal led."
   The adjective " eterna l " has a rugged, and highly controversial, future
ahead of it. When he was finishing writing Science and the Modern
l S 4   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




 World, Whitehead conferred a decisive role upon " eternal objects," a role
that would not cease to be redefined i n subsequent times, on the occasion
of each technical tra nsformation of his thought. What is important, a t
t h i s point, is t o eliminate a ny possibil ity of confusion. For the moment,
the adjective " eterna l " is connected with a contrast. One may baptize
what endures with a proper name-each human being, of course, but
also a dog, a mouse, or even a mountain, and Cleopatra 's Need le-but
proper names a re not appropriate either for colors or sounds, or for the
geometrica l objects Whitehead a lso associates with the mode of experi
ence designated by the adjective " eternal ." When I say " it is blue," but
also " it is a circle," I a m not naming a blue obj ect, or a circular one, but
I testi fy to the ingression into my experience of an " eternal object."
    Whitehead is not mad enough to calmly a nnounce that " red " as we per
ceive it existed before the biological invention of the visual organs. This is
why he speaks of " eternality," a neologism that enables him to avoid " eter
nity." " Eterna l i ty " designates a dimension of the concrete, compl ete fact
that must belong to the job specifications. The testi mony of the poets
must be heard, but it does not say how it should be heard, what req ui
sites correspond to it.
    In the present case, the contrast between colors a nd mountains first
calls into question the construction proposed by The Concept of Nature.
The wonderful world of colors, the mystery of presence, the somber rumi
nation of the mountain testify to the fact that, by the mere fact that it does
not share the passage of nature, the object defined in The Concept of Na
ture is no longer adequate for thinking of the order of nature. Color was
a sense-object, and the mountain a perceptual object, taken in a hierarchy
that made it explicit that the mounta in a lways has a color, whereas we
can have the experience of a color independently of what it colors: the
famous Cambridge blue. The poets contributed a testimony that ra ises a
very di fferent question, no doubt because thei r experience is not focused
on the urgency of havi ng to decide whether that yellowish shadow is or is
not a tiger. And, in so doing, they also forced the experience Whitehead
assimilated under the word " recognition " to diverge: "it's the same color"
and "that's my coat" testify to experiences whose difference can no longer
be referred to a hierarchy.
    "There it is again " was appropriate for Cleopatra's Needle and a bird
song, because the main contrast took place between events that passed
without return and obj ects l iable to be recognized, both required by what
we are aware of. What is happening, however, is no longer the event, but
what is unification, gathering, in a twofold sense, passive and active. The
event not only discloses itsel f as related to other events: it realizes this re
lation in and for itsel f. It happens and passes, of course, hut we must first
     F R O M   T H E   C O N C E PT   O F   N AT U R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   O F   N AT U R E   1 5 5




say that, like the here " and " now of The Concept of Nature, its duration
is that of an individualization, of the " hold ing together " of the gathering
it constitutes. Correlatively, the part is no longer merely included in the
whole, and the totality of events " l inked " to a particular event is no longer
merely " signified " by this event. The whole ruminates in every part, and
the various parts are henceforth " presence."
    As far as color is concerned, it is no longer there "again " but "once
again," always the same but a lways new, for it is not worn out, does not
l ive, does not end ure. Eternal not because it is always there-it would
never be anything but an indefinite endura nce-but because experience
testifies to color in the sense that it is what it is, without reference to a
process within time. Color is eternal in the precise sense that it requires
that endura nce a nd change do not define in an exhaustive way what is
required in the order of nature. Red testifies to something that, in nature,
does not emerge from this order l i ke a l l that endures and changes. Red
appears " when it is cal led," a lthough the sensation of red requires the
endurance proper to the eye and the brain. In order to express this non
emergence, this appearance that does not testify to a process but rather
to a call, Whitehead will henceforth reserve the term " ingression." Red
does not emerge from the order to which the eye and the bra i n testify, but
rather the eye and the bra in must be understood on the basis of the pos
sibil ity of the ingression to which the sensation " red " testifies. The fact of
their existence testifies " for" the eternal object felt as red .
    Both sensible objects and intelligible obj ects are "called," or ga thered
together, by the notions of eternal object and ingression . Yet this asso
ciation designates our human experience, not a pa rticular connection
between sensible and intell igible, such as a particular legitimacy attrib
uted to sense experience and to formal reasoning. Eternal objects are not
there to found geometrical reasoning, or the ind isputable sensation " blue."
They a re req uired by the contrast exhi bited in a privileged way by the
experiences that make us spea k of sensible objects and intelligible objects.
In the event constituted by my experience of the famous blue coat, blue
qual ifies another event which, for its part, endures: that more or less
worn-out coat. The cloth may undergo wear and tear, but a color, for its
part, will always be " that" color, whatever detergent commercials may
claim to the contrary. Consider this circle clumsily d rawn in the sand,
perhaps to illustrate a process of reasoning. The wind is erasing its con
tours, but the "circle" that qual ified my experience of the contour will
not disappear with the wind .
    Whoever considers that Whitehead is proposing eternal objects as a
solution to the problem raised by geometrical forms and colors will rightly
conclude that he has fa llen into a trap identified by Gil les Deleuze: that
1 S 6   FROM T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




of the " decalque" ( traci ng ) , or the concept " made to explai n," in this case
made to found the contrast, to which experience testifies, between color
and mounta i n . And it i s criticism that Whitehead wou ld be the first to
accept, since it would mea n confusing job speci fication a nd concept. If
experience is what ra ises problems, the way the problem is constructed
belongs to the formulation of the requisites, tha t is, to the characteriza
tion of a n orga nism as a complete, concrete fact, a nd it is in response to
this formulation that eternal objects will, as the case may be, recei ve their
concept.
   For the moment, eternal objects merely oblige us to resist the idea that
sensation or intellection emerge from the brain. [n Process and Reality,
these objects will be defined as " pure potentials for the specific determina
tion of fact " ( PR, 22 ) , and Whitehead will then have completed the con
ceptual construction that transforms the experience of color into a "case."
As indicated by the adjectives " sensi ble " and " i ntelligi ble," red or circle
will then refer to our experience, not to direct access to a " pure" potential.
   Let us return, now, to the mountain that " endures." Unlike eternal ob
jects, which offer the temptation of a brutal continuity between the sense
objects of The Concept of Nature and the speculative scheme of Process
and Reality, endurance constitutes a theme that is obviously new. The event
had been that which passes. If an order of nature exists, it is because the
event, henceforth understood as a unifying grasp, can also hold fast and
endure through an envi ronment that never ceases to change. And the po
et's emotion when faced by the mil lennial mountain must be heard. En
dura nce is not only a fact: it is an accomplishment a nd an achievement. It
requi res that the order of nature i ntegrate what we are accustomed to
thinking as paradigmatica lly human, that is, value.
    " Value" is the word I use for the intrinsic reality of an event. Value is an
element which permeates through and through the poetic view of nature.
We have only to transfer to the very texture of realisation in itself that
value which we recognise so readily in terms of human life [ . . . 1 realisa
tion therefore is in itself the attainment of value. But there is no such thing
as mere value. Value is the outcome of limitation. The definite finite entity
is the selected mode which is the shaping of attainment; apart from such
shaping into individual matter of fact there is no attainment. The mere
fusion of all there is would be the nonentity of indefiniteness. The salva
tion of reality is its obstinate, irreducible, matter-of-fact entities, which are
limited to be no other than themselves. Neither science, nor art, nor cre
ative action can tear itself away from obstinate, irreducible, limited facts.
The endurance of things has its significance in the self-retention of that
which imposes itself as a definite attainment for its own sake. That which
     FROM   T H E   C O N C E PT   O F   N AT U R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   O F   N AT U R E   1 5 7




endures is limited, obstructive, intolerant, infecting its environment with
its own aspects. But it is not self-sufficient. The aspects of all things enter
into its very nature. It is only itself as drawing together into its own limita
tion the larger whole in which it finds itself ( SMW 93-94 ) .
   We a re a t a crucial point here, and the tone has changed . For value i s
what i s required by the divergence between the experiences of Berkeley,
Spinoza, Lei bniz, Shelley, or Wordsworth . Value i s required by an author
capable of using the same term, whether in reference to a n electron, a
living organism, or an i ndustrial firm. The organism has now come into
contact with its requisites.
   There is not the slightest al lusion in Whitehead's text to subjects who
would " have values" in terms of which they would evaluate, or to which
they would conform. To follow Whitehead, then, we must obviously free
the term "value" from any psychological connotation, as wel l as from any
appeal to any kind of transcendence. Yet this demand is not gratuitous: it
announces that what we call " va l ue" will be put to the test i n a highly in
teresting way. The obstinate preservation of a value, whatever happens,
may be a heroic virtue: there can be no question of denying this. With
typical British humor, Whitehead limits h i mself to giving a generic defini
tion. If we, as h umans, can claim to be d ifferent, it is not because we nour
ish values. Value belongs to the order of nature: it is what is realized by a l l
that exists, in the sense that w h a t exists succeeds in enduring, succeeds in
maintaining its individual way of gathering together, that is, of making
thi ngs hold together in a determinate way. Val ue indicates a success in and
for itself.
   The habitual economy of scientific explanations is turned upside down,
as is that of subjective motivations. Wha t is maintained without change
is no longer the ensured starting point for understandi ng what changes.
Don't ask me why I am distracted : on the contrary, be a mazed that I a m
able t o complete m y phrase safe a n d sound . Above a l l , do not consider
that it is " I " who a m responsible for this exploit. "My" success, l i ke that
of an a tom, has no justification higher than this fact: the experience of
this phrase to be compl eted has succeeded in hold ing out in an environ
ment that might have had a very di fferent role: " Wait, you've distracted
me: what was I going to say? "
  The explanation of endurance is not an attri bute of the individual who
endures, but depends first of all on a dynamics of infection. A l l that suc
ceeds in enduring has succeeded in infecting its environment in a way
that is compati ble with this endurance.
  " Infection " is the term Whitehead chooses to designate, in a generic
way, what the poets celebrate as " presence." Celebration refers to the fact
1 5 8   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




that it is a poet's experience that is infected by the mountain, gloomy and
ancient. " Infection " must be understood, not without humor, in a neutral
sense, designating the success constituted by all endurance in a changing
world. The interest of this chosen term is that it designates the specific
character of this success. This infectious holding-together is not a fusion
but a valorization, a determi nate shaping, conferring a value-that is, a
role-on what is prehended . The fact tha t the variables of a function, in
the same way as the poet's experience, require a " value" thus ceases to
belong to linguistic contingency. Far from being a mere quantity, the value
of a variable presupposes the stahility of the role that one thing plays for
something else and measures the importance of that role. In addition, the
term " infection " is there to remind us tha t there is nothi ng neutral about
"attributing a role to something." The role you a ttri bute to me drives me
crazy.
   Every entity that realizes itself in i ts mode of prehension of other be
ings also prehends the way in which it itself is prehended by those others,
or the aspect of i tself that is taken into account and valorized by these
others . How will it prehend the prehension of itself that it reflected back
to i t ? Such a re the stakes of the " dynam ics of infection," upon which the
success of end urance depends. Infection designates the way in which the
modes of prehension a re reflected for each other, and success implies a
co-adaptation of values. When a being endures, what has succeeded is a
co-production between this being and " its " environment. This environ
ment is nothing other than the total i ty of bei ngs taken into account and
va lorized in a determinate way, and each of the valorized beings pre
hends the ta king-into-account of which it has been the object, the role
that has been assigned to it, in a way that is not incompatible with the
maintenance of this mode of prehension, or of this role.
  This time, the question of the organism is indeed raised, and it selects
what will count as the concrete, complete facts. Farewell to Cleopatra 's
Needle, and even to the gloomy h i l l : for neither the perceptual object,
nor weighty presence, enable the complete unfol ding of the dynamics of
repercussion and infection. The very notion of " due a ttention " becomes
indeterminate, for the repercussion of a ttention upon that to which one
pays a ttention can no longer be neglected . Henceforth, the favora ble
cases will be those in which the " interaction " must be called an inter
action, that is, the shaping of an attainment that exhibits its dependency
by the way in wh ich each of the interacting terms valorizes the other: for
instance, the complex sexual parade in which a male and a female, from
posture to posture, from a pproach to approach, gradually co-produce
one another, as each one confers upon the other the role and the va lue
     FROM   T H E   C O N C E PT   O F   N AT U R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   O F   N A T U R E   1 5 9




correspond i ng to mating. O r aga i n, the set of cases in which the role as
signed to a being becomes a n i ntegra l part of i ts individualization. For
better or worse, as, for instance, i n the case of the infernal dynamics of
relations of dependency-when the gaze you cast upon me becomes an
ingred ient of my experience of myself, to the poi nt of producing mysel f
i n the way y o u need, o r a t least in the way I sense y o u need, and s o on.
The result is sometimes a h uge misunderstanding, but a remarka bly en
during production of two beings whose respective modes of valorization
ca l l obstinately upon one another.
    The fact that the dynamics of infection can find privi leged examples in
relations of dependency obviously does not mean that such relations be
come the truth of what makes h uman beings hold together. They a re pa rt
of the way things may happen, of the adventures of individualization, i n
the same sense that t h e fact t h a t h u m a n young need a h u m a n environ
ment to become children, and that children dare to become, because they
feel that one trusts they will, beca use their clumsy efforts a re approved
and encouraged . Such facts do not require any particula r psychologica l
explanation, in the sense that its goal would be to j ustify a departure from
a norm of a utonomy; for the idea of a utonomy, for Whitehead, is obso
lete. Relations of dependency can i nstead require fine-grained descriptions
with regard to the way in which the environment, and perhaps particu
larly an environment infected by that norm of a utonomy, pa rticipates in
this selected mode of achievement.
    All va lues presuppose a risk. The generic risk that corresponds to
endurance qua successful infection m ust not be expressed i n terms of a
conflict-between autonomy a nd dependency, for instance-but rather
of "clash." Conflict i mplies the existence of a negation-it is he, and then
not I, or I, and then not he-and can only belong to a rea l ization tha t
gives meaning to the negation, or at least to its germ : to hesitate, to feel
in confl ict with oneself. A clash, for its part, is neutral and i ndeterminate
in its result. It exhibits the fact that an "entity," rea liza tion, individual
ized mode of capture, can only succeed i n holdi ng fast i f the way it " in
fects " its envi ronment does not give rise to repercussions that make it
lose its hold . Clash thus signifies that infection has failed. This is what
happens, for i nsta nce, i f I am ta lking to someone who absta i ns from all
the semiautomatic signs of complicity that indicate that she is l isteni ng.
I begin to sta m mer: how can I keep hold i f the person I a m dea l i ng with
provides no foothold, does not integrate within her own reality the as
pect of hersel f I a m proposi ng h e r-yes she is listening to me-but rea l
                                                      ,



izes herself in a way that is i ncompati ble with what my mode of holdi ng
together and eva l ua ting proposes to her ?
1 6 0   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   People say "our visions of life clashed," but Whitehead has written, " a
clash of doctrine is not a disaster-it is a n opportunity." H i s "trust" delib
erately ignores hatred and anguish, polemical passion, or the feeling of
having been abused . What counts is what happens. A clash can be an ob
stacle and a limit, or it can "evolve " into a dura ble, even symbiotic new
harmony. Or else it can create problems. There is a clash between the de
sire of the person stretched out on the psychoana lyst's couch to get a reac
tion, and the latter's obstinate, irreducible silence, and this silence, this
aspect of the psychoanalyst prehended by the ana lysand, infects the expe
rience that prehends it and ta kes it i nto account. Unless, of course, the
a na lysand succeeds in " prehend i ng" certa in other aspects, tenuous a nd
involuntary: the rhythm of the psychoana lyst's breathing, his muscular
tension . . . In which case the clash is between the psychoana lyst's doc
trine a nd a mode of success wh ich, for him, presents an obstacle to the
analytical task.
   The term " infection " is thus technical, that is, neutral with regard to
the di fferences we attribute to what end ures. In Adventures of Ideas,
Whitehead will use it in particular to characterize the role played by
Christia n ethics, associated with the completely impractica ble ideal pro
posed by the life and preaching of Jesus of Ga li lee.
   A criterion of evaluation had now been created, expressed in concrete
illustrations that resisted all perversion. This criterion is a gauge allowing
us to estimate the defects of human society. As long as the Galilean im
ages are merely the dreams of an unrealised world, they must continue to
propagate the infection of a worried mind (AI, 1 7) .
   Whenever Whitehead uses the term " infection," his point i s t o deny
that so mething has " i n itself" a power over something else. The only
power of the Ga lilean idea l was the obstinacy of concrete illustrations,
vectors of contrast, and the worry inspired by this contrast.
   The reader wi l l have intuited that Whitehead is no critic of power as
such: a nature in which nothing succeeded in infecti ng anything else would
not be a nature, a nd the possi bility of maintaining a ny kind of nosta lgia
toward a " powerless " society impl ies i n itsel f an incalculable number of
"social achievements." From this viewpoint, Whitehead is rather close
albeit in a whole other tone, since his goa l is not to unveil human illu
sions-to the thesis of Michel Foucault, accord ing to which power is not
primarily repressive but inciting, inspiring interests, questions, and knowl
edge. This, indeed, is how infection in Whitehead's sense could be defined :
not by the imposition of a role, but by the i ncitement, reflected in multiple
and varied ways, to ta ke up and prolong that role. In the generic sense,
nothing imposes anything, for there is no a uthority that has, by itself, the
     F R O M   T H E   C O NCEPT   O F   N AT U R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   O F   N AT U R E   1 6 1




power to impose. All " social power," unless i t is purely and simply repres
sive (a rare and unstable case), designates first and foremost a dynamics of
infection .
   To a l l ude here to Michel Foucault is to give myself the opportun i ty to
emphasize the exten t to which Whi tehead is liable, and wi l l become in
creasingly more lia ble, to disorient a reader for whom denouncing power
is the very duty of phi losophical thought if it is to serve h uman emanci
pation, including an emancipation that would have as its prerequisite the
destruction of the human, all-too-human subject. Foucault h imself never
conformed to this obliga tory figure. He a ffirmed tha t he merely " d e
scribed," without reference to a transcendence that would a uthorize de
nunciation, and he has, moreover, been reproached with fai ling to " found "
in reason that in the name of which he set forth his merciless diagnosis,
that i n the name of which the struggles that should fol low from such di
agnoses would proceed . To " think with Whitehead" exposes us to a
rather different test, for not only does Whitehead not denounce, but he
also does not a ttach himself specifically to a description of power as
such. The twin poles of power that Foucault has taught us to distinguish
repressive and incita tory power-would not have surprised him, for they
both belong to the defin ition of the dynamics of infection . Yet what inter
ests him, what i nterests an ed ucator, what will become a requisite for his
conceptual construction , is not the analysis of the formations of power,
but that of the link between power and adventure.
   Let us take a somewha t speculative example. Some a nthropologists
have ventured the hypothesis that before h uman beings were spea king
or thinking, they were " dancing " ; that is, they were singularized by the
power that sound exercised over their experience qua rhythmic. More
precisely, by the power their experience conferred upon the rhythmic
sound tha t infects it. The hypothesis of such a power, which would define
us well before we define i t, or specialize i t before we construct its multiple
consequences, before we exacerbate it or repress i t, would no doubt have
interested Whitehead, however adven turous i t may be. As we shall see in
what follows, he was to associate language and consciousness with doubt,
with trial by consequences, but he would have found it interesting that
this novelty should have intervened in a history already marked by an
other novelty: by the power already con ferred upon rhythm to infect hu
man experience and to produce a dancing group ( or one marching in step )
with individuals.
   Dance, it is sometimes said, makes the dancer: a good testimony to the
power eventually associated with rhythm. Yet we must i mmediately add
that there does not exist any "dance in genera l " to which this power may
1 6 2   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




be attri buted, which would allow us to do without the multiple adven
tures that presuppose this power, but which this power does not explain.
And we must a lso add that from " free" i mprovisation to faithful execu
tion, from the singular act from which " a " dance emerges to codified body
stances, the question is not one of freedom from power. All testify to the
power associated with sound and rhythm by human experience, yet all do
not testify to it in the same way. They do not all correspond to the same
definition of the role, although, in any case, the dancer is " enrolled."
    This example announces what i s already engaged with the notions of
value, endu rance, and infection: a quite peculiar politics of explanation,
articulating thi ngs that seemed to be made to oppose eac h other. The
paleoanthropological hypothesis according to which a "cerebra l innova
tion" was associated with those hominids from which humans a re sup
posed to have i ssued , conferring upon rhythm the power to i nfect experi
ence, is exemplary from the viewpoint of the position in which it places
those who formulate it. On the one hand, of course, it expresses the futi l
i ty of the temptation to define freedom " against" power, yet on the other
hand i t expresses the futility of the attempt to return to a determination
" beyond " multiplicities, toward what would be common to all humans.
For a " new fact," such a s this hypothetical "cerebral i nnovation," if it
ever took place, would certainly perta in to something "in common," but
i t would be something " common" that would be necessarily silent with
regard to the divergent meanings mobilized by human practices with re
gard to it. Whatever the work of future neurophysiologists may be, their
results will in fact be added to the long series of what, on this hypothesis,
has a l ready been created to convoke, capture, cana lize, manipulate,
socialize, and comment on a power that has no identity other than the
series of roles that are constructed along with it. Somewhat in the same
way that the force of gravity, as soon as we leave the domain of bod ies
defined as " heavy," has no other identity than the series of roles conferred
upon it by far from equil i brium physico-chemical systems, by birds, by
dancers, by mounta in-cl imbers, and so on.
    Even when, in Adventure of Ideas, the subject is human societies,
Whitehead will refuse to oppose power and freed om, but w i l l choose
to place on stage two contrasting versions of power-persuasion and
force-and will identi fy commerce as what marks the genui ne " p rogress "
of civilizations. Persuasion and commerce wi ll refer to that other human
i nnovation, the i nfectious power proper to " ideas," recalling the fact that
one may speak both of the commerce of ideas and of the commerce of
things. Of course, the persuasive character of an i dea guara ntees nothing:
a loathsome idea can infect the mind, as powerfully rhythmic music can
     FROM   T H E   C O N C E PT   O F   NATU R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   O F   NATU R E   1 6 3




lead human bei ngs into battle. Nevertheless, for Whitehead, the reference
to the power of persuasion, in contrast to despotic power, is what is
required by the very definition of what we cal l " ideas." And no " decon
struction," debunking the inciting infection where the i l l usion of free and
transparent rational production prevai led, can abstract from the fact that
it presupposes, requires, and prolongs the power associated with ideas,
while descri bing i t otherwise. Foucault's i ncisive laughter, the confusion
he sowed i n so many well-thinking minds, presupposes and mobilizes
this power just as much as the knowledge-power he describes.
   Infection i n the Whiteheadian sense is neutral with regard to values, in
the usual meaning we give to the term " va l ue ." O n the other hand, it
has the rather peculiar effect of communicating di rectly with the possibil
ity that what is holding together may cease to hold together. An obsti
nate, i ntolerant value succeeds in infecting i ts envi ronment, but this suc
cess is never a right, and i t has as i ts correlate the fact consti tuted by the
community of events that enables the organism to " maintain its hold."
   Whether this permission is expressed in terms of more or less precarious
tolerance, of a risky wager, of experimentation or of confirmation, and
even of dependency, it always designates the success of a " trust." The image
of mountain-climbers is radicalized; they exist-that is, they endure-o nly
insofa r as the patience of what they define as a " hold" is confirmed . The
question raised by professionals, for its part, is generalized: the obstinate
maintenance of their rut, the possibility of making judgments denoting the
absence of any " aesthetic appreciation" with regard to what escapes this
rut, presupposes the " patience" of their environment. If a general burst of
laughter were to greet such j udgments, professionals would learn prudence
very quickly, and might even allow themselves to be infected by the differ
ence between the questions with regard to which their j udgment holds and
those that make them lose their foothold.
   The fact that endurance is a factual success without any higher guar
antee may be expressed as fo l lows : may those who a re no longer a fraid
that the sky might fa l l on thei r heads be all the more a ttentive to the
eventual impatience of what they depend on. Thus, i t is not without in
terest today that the new figure of Gaia i ndicates that i t is becoming ur
gent to create a contrast between the earth valorized as a set of resources
and the earth taken into account as a set of i nterdependent processes,
capable of assemblages that are very different from the ones on which we
depend. In order to distinguish the endurance of Gaia-and of the multi
tude of bacteria l populations tha t play an active role i n i ts assembl ages
from the precariousness of our modes of existence and of those of other
large mammals, some speak of a Gaia 's " shrug of the shoulders" capable
1 6 4   FRO M   T H E   P H I LOSO PH Y   O F   N ATU R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




of making us lose our foothold: " Gaia is ticklish, we depend on her pa
tience, let us bewa re her i mpatience." The contempora ry period is ex
ploring the difficu l ty of a transforma tion of what are ca lled "values " in a
sense that corresponds well to the Whiteheadian use of the term : a partic
ular way of shaping our a tta inments, presupposing the stability wagered
upon by this way, while explaining itself in terms of habits.
   In contempora ry terms, we will say that end urance, va l ue, clash, obsti
nacy, conflict, harmony, dependency, patience and i mpatience, and so on
place the notion of organism under the banner of an etho-ecology: the
approach that tries to connect the ethos, or the way, constitutive of a liv
ing being, that such a being takes its environment into account, and the
oikos, or the vaster tota lity to which it belongs, and more precisely the
many links, niches, and col lectivities produced by the ethos that mutua lly
imply one another, and on which each depends in one way or another. An
orga nism does not expla in itself qua having succeeded in conquering a
stable identity, bearing its titles of legiti macy, but it explains itself in and
on the basis of the patience on which it depends, a patience presupposed
by the va l ue of which it is the achievement. The orga nism ex hibits a
"trust," and this " trust " is etho-ecologica l, simultaneously a way of shap
ing that is always individual, l i mited , and obsti nate, and a wager on an
envi ronment that confirms and nourishes it.
                                                          C H A P T ER E L E V EN
