Scientifi c Objects and the Test of the Organism




      r O R WH I T E H E A D , a l l that endures succeeds in enduring, every
      r success designates inseparably both individual obj ects and their
         environment-that is, the concrete, complete fact to which the
notion of organism corresponds-and every science of nature, insofar as
it deciphers a real ity in terms of the interplay of i ndividual actors, con
cerns organisms. It is this third affirmation that we shall now put to the
test. Can the notion of organism communicate with a new value for the
d ivergent multiplicity of scientific undertakings, with shaping their suc
cesses in a manner that affirms, in a coherent way, the order of natu re
that each explores, according to its own means ?
   Whitehead appeals in particular to the possibility of a physics that
would accept that its a toms, i ts molecules, and its electrons are organisms.
And he tries to infect the usual narration of the development of science in
the nineteenth century with this possibility. Thus, the same paragraph will
witness the coexistence of scientists we a re in the habit of separating:
Bichat, Miiller, Schleiden, and Schwann, associated with the cellular the
ory in biology; Pasteur and his micro-organisms; but also Dalton, who
introduced atoms into chemistry. All of them conferred a new type of
meaning upon the " individual." Of course, the idea of the atom goes back
to Democritus or to Lucretius, but for Whitehead, who emphasizes the
contemporaneity of physical atoms with the cells of microorganisms, the
point is to accentuate their novelty, to open them up to a future in which
they would no longer participate in the rhetorica l success of " scientific
materialism."
   United in this way, physics, chemistry, and biology not only cease to
share in a hiera rchical vision in which molecules a re made out of a toms,
1 6 6   FRO M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




cells out of molecules, and out of cells . . . and so on, they break with
every " world vision " in genera l . For it is by characterizing the respective
practices of these sciences that the etho-ecology proper to their respective
" atoms " can be approached .
     Add a proliferating virus to your culture of microorganisms, boi l your
cellular culture, mix your molecules of oxygen with hyd rogen and add a
spark , heat your gas to the tempera ture of plasma, bombard your alumi
num a toms using a radioactive source: in each case, what you study
spotl ights the contrast between " keeping hol d " and " losing hold," which
designate the organism from the viewpoint of its endurance and the
l i mits of its endurance. The scientific practices Whitehead intends to unite
have all abandoned in fact-that is, in practice-the idea of an atom, an
element, or a part as self-subsistent individuals and principles of explana
tion of i nterpretation for everything else. They all derive their success
from the fact that they have been able to characterize their " atoms " in a
practical way, qua something " holding together," whose endurance must
be evaluated on the basis of the trials this hold resists or fails to resist.
    We shall not be surprised i f Whitehead privi leges his favorite example,
the electron and the electromagnetic field that is inseparable from it. In
The Concept of Nature, the electron as a scientific object was interpreted
as the systematic correlation of the mod ifications of all events, insofar as
these mod ifications express i ts ingression. Yet every event is now itself
understood as a unifying grasp of a set of aspects of its environment.
Henceforth, then, the possibil ity of identifying the electron as a charge
fi rst reflects the endu rance of the mode of grasping that specifies i t, the
fact that this grasp succeeds in holding fast. The inseparability of the elec
tron and its field thus becomes exemplary for Whitehead 's thesis: the
electron is what it is because of the way it prehends its environment, and
its environment i s what it is because of the way i n which this prehension
infects it. In this case, physical laws describe a mode of pattern under its
twofold complementary aspect, implying the endurance of the electron
and the patience of the environment. Their object is the way in which the
electronic grasp mod ifies the environment, and in which this mod i fica
tion mod ifies this grasp itself.
    Nevertheless, the assimilation of the electron to an organism is not a
simple redescription of what physics a l ready knows.
  The concrete enduring entities are organisms, so that the plan of the
whole influences the very characters of the various subordinate organisms
which enter into it. In the case of an animal, the mental states enter into
the plan of the total organism and thus modify the plans of the successive
subordinate organisms until the ultimate smallest organisms, such as elec-
          S C I E N T I F I C   O BJ E CTS   A N D   T H E   TEST   O F   T H E   O R G A N I S M   1 6 7




trons, are reached. Thus an electron within a living body is different from
an electron outside it, by reason of the plan of the body. The electron
blindly runs either within or without the body; but it runs within the body
in accordance with its character within the body; that is to say, in accor
dance with the general plan of the body, and this plan indicates the mental
state (SMW, 79 ) .
   Physicists t o whom this text is presented usually develop a frankly
phobic reaction: for them, the electron's behavior is a function only of
physica l varia bles, the living body is a physical environment l i ke any
other, and therefore the electron rema ins " the same" inside or outside the
body. Whitehea d agrees with this to some extent: even within a living
body, the electron runs blind ly, b l ind to the stakes of i ts beha vior for
the body. Yet only to some extent, for no environment is " l ike another,"
and the experimenta l environment from which our description of the
electron's behavior derives is not, in a ny case, comparable with any other.
   The question turns not upon a decidable experimenta l question but
upon the way the experiment as a n achievement is descri bed . For the
physicist, experimentation succeeds i n addressi ng the electron i n genera l,
but in a particular way, in which it is capa ble of testi fying rel iably to its
behavior, tha t is, of ena bling the identification of the varia bles that deter
mine this behavior. For Whitehead, such an achievement corresponds to
creating a pa rticular environment for the electron, and the experimenta l
electron will be the electron that has solidarity with this environment.
Qua ntum mechanics confirmed this, i n its own way, when it forbade the
attribution of properties to quantum entities independently of the experi
menta l appa ratus ena bling the testimony that gives mea ning to these
properties. Yet old habits die hard, and physicists have so far preferred
to see i n this prohi bition a dramatic limit upon objective k nowledge,
which ra ises problems for rea lism, rather than a perfectly positive testi
mony dea ling with " q uantum orga nisms."
   For Whitehead, even loca l ization, the possi bility of being situated in
space and time, is rel ative to endurance. This implies that space-time it
self, far from bei ng the common framework for events, constitutes an a b
straction . The possibi lity of situating bodies with regard to one another in
terms of distances or temporal interva ls is not prima ry, but corresponds
to the pattern of the environment that interacts with the etho-ecology of
those enduri ng entities whose behavior can be characterized i n terms of
va ria bles of space and time.
   When he wrote Science and the Modern World, Whitehead had, of
course, already ela borated the theory of space-time he envisaged as an
alternative to Einstei n's. Whereas Einstein proposed a unique space-time
1 6 8   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




whose loca l properties of spatial curvature a re affected by the (massive)
bodies situa ted within it, Whitehead, between 1 920 and 1 923, constructed
a theory of multiple space-times, a theory that never, in fact, really inter
ested the community of specialists. When he presents it in chapter VII,
moreover, Whitehead freely admits the legitimacy of this reaction: his the
ory is mathematica lly much more complicated tha n Ei nstein's because it is
more genera l . Indeed, it relegates to the " empirical case" ma ny of the
properties that Einstein's genera l relativity defines a priori as belonging to
the space-time metrics.
    In particula r, Ei nstein's theory allows the deduction of one a nd only
one law of gra vitation, and ca n therefore be presented as a genera l ization
of Newtonian space-time, a genera lization that is pa rticularly satisfying
beca use it rea lizes the dream of a purely geometrica l behavior of heavy
bod ies, reflecting the metric properties of space-time. Whitehead 's theory,
for its part, starts out from the refusa l of such a geometrization. It affirms
that every body defines its own spatio-temporal stra ti fication, its own
discrimina tion of what space and time a re. A body's spatio-tempora l be
havior in relation to other bod ies thus becomes relative to the articula
tion between the spatio-tempora l stratifications tha t each defi nes on its
own account. Conseq uently, the universa l releva nce of the law of gravita
tion can no longer be either deduced or j ustified . It reflects one possibility
a mong others, and the limits of its validity for our universe must be de
ci ded experi mentally.
    The version Whitehead proposes of the genera l theory of relativity thus
unfolds a universe of possibilities, among which there appears, as a very
particula r ca se, the si tua tion descri bed by Ei nstei n on the strength of
Newtonian universa l i ty. Physicists have j udged it a s a useless compl ica
tion, but sometimes I find mysel f daydrea ming that, in view of the prob
lems contemporary physics encounters when faced by the unification of
the gravitational force with the other i nteractions, this complication might
wel l open up interesting perspectives. In a ny case, i t meant placing phys
ics at risk, on the grounds of imperatives of intel ligibil ity that i ndeed an
nounce the theory of the organism. The metrical properties associated
with space-time should not be defined a priori, but should cha racterize
the pattern of the environment that is insepara ble from enduring bodies
qua enduring. Endura nce should be the primary fact, presupposed by all
physica l descriptions.
  The pattern is spatially now; and this temporal determination consti
tutes its relation to each partial event. For it is reproduced in this tempo
ral succession of these spatial parts of its own life. I mean that this partic
ular rule of temporal order allows the pattern to be reproduced in each
          S C I E N T I F I C   O BJ E CTS   A N D   T H E   TEST   O F   T H E   O R G A N I S M   1 69




temporal slice of its history. So to speak, each enduring object discovers
in nature and requires from nature a principle discriminating space from
time ( SMW, 1 1 9 ) .
    Whitehead later ca lled this most general fact, t o which physics as well
as biology or perceptive consciousness bear witness, the " extensive con
tinuum " : each in its own way bespea ks the solidarity we observe, a nd on
which we depend, in the midst of the multipl icity of events.
    Above all, the extensive conti nuum must not be confused with a "com
mon place " existi ng prior to events, nor, more genera l l y, with an expla
nation of their sol idarity: it will instead have to expl a i n itself once this
sol idarity has been gra nted its concepts . It is neither a reason, nor, m uch
less, an a priori condition. It consti tutes the most a bstract characteriza
tion of the way events a re situating themselves with rega rd to one an
other, of the relational complex that a rticulates with one another all the
possible viewpoi nts of each with rega rd to others, quite apart from the
way each one produces the concrete meaning, for it, of that from which
it is insepa ra ble. With rega rd to this a bstraction, Einstein's space-time,
endowed with a metrics intended to explain the motion of bodies, is al
ready the expression of a specific mode of solidarity, presupposing masses
and motion, that is, a speci fied mode of endura nce.
    Are Whitehea d 's propositions capa ble of finding the sl ightest echo
within physics ? The question remains open, but the very fact of ra ising it
is importa nt. For together with this question it is also the question of the
" world visions " inspired by physics that is raised .
    The fact that physical laws, by mea ns of such " visions," including those
that introduce the quantum void or virtual particles today, have not
ceased to encourage the error of " misplaced concreteness," to introduce a
reality doomed to make nature bifurcate, is by no means an accusation. It
is simply the direct conseq uence of the kind of success tha t singularizes it,
and is announced by the notion of physical "law " : the situations that will
be privileged are those in which the a bstraction that sepa rates an organ
ism from its envi ronment-that is, that defines the endura nce of the for
mer and the patience of the latter in terms of right, not of fact-will be
operational and fruitful . Another way of describing this success is the re
duction of all change to an explanation in terms of what Whitehead ca lls
" external relations " : the beha vior attributed to each enduring entity is not
relative to the way it rea lizes itself through the unification of i ts prehen
sions, but is a function of varia bles designating other entities qua respon
si ble for the cha nges it undergoes.
    If physicists presuppose endurance and patience, chemists, for their part,
are pri marily interested in the contrast between pa tience a nd impatience,
1 7 0   F R O M T H E   P H I LOSOPHY   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




that is, i n the conditions of the chemica l tra nsformations by which mol
ecules gain or lose their abil ity to hold and endure. Modern chemistry
has learned to cha racterize the ethology of molecules, or the way they
hold together; more recently, it has also learned some aspects of their ecol
ogy, or the k ind of pattern this holding-together imposes upon the envi
ronment. Yet here we run into a difficulty, in which the philosophy of the
orga nism is put directly to the test. I f the interests of physicists and chem
ists diverge, how can we explain the fact tha t they agree in describing
" the same atoms" or " the sa me molecules " ?
   Something is certa inly put to the test. It remains to be determined, how
ever, who puts whom to the test. It would be tempting, here, to evoke the
complications of high-energy physics. Physicists who study the proton
observe tha t thi s particle, on whose identity the identification of the vari
ety of atomic nuclei rel ied, is a " soup." They even go so fa r-a nd this, for
a physicist, is a terrible condemnation-as to speak of a "chemistry of the
proton " ! Yet it is not appropriate for the philosophy of the orga nism to
derive an a rgument from the perplexities of a science, for the point is not
to take one's rivals down a peg, at the risk of beating an undignified re
treat once these rivals succeed in deci phering the la byrinth in which they
seemed to be hopelessly lost.
  It is in their full maturity, and not in the process of their constitution,
that concepts and functions necessarily cross one another, each being cre
ated only by its own means [ . . . J ( Q Ph, 1 52 ) .
    This statement by Gilles Deleuze and Fel ix Guattari has made more than
one phi losopher shudder, but it ta kes on an immediate meaning for the
philosophy of the orga nism. No more tha n scientists should separa te
themselves and thei r achievements from their own shadow, should any
one take hold of those scientists' shadows independently of what they
have achieved or the function they have succeeded in constructing, re
flecting the way the varia bles that inseparably characterize a type of or
ganism and its environment hold together. We must therefore turn to the
exploit consti tuted, for twentieth-century physics, by the possi bil ity of
a ffirming that molecules remain " the same " throughout a l l the roles they
play in physica l explana tions, whether these molecules belong to a gas, a
liquid, a solid, or a situation of phase transition, and even the chemistry
in which they enter into reaction.
    To separate this exploit from its shadow, to make it rhyme with the
" uni fied vision " of a world whose funda menta l laws a re deciphered by
the physicists, is not to pay homage to physics, but rather to insult it. For
i t mea ns relegating an achievement to an imagery that makes short shrift
of the physicists' sophisticated, imaginati ve work. Here, in fact, what is
           S C I E N T I F I C   OBJECTS   A N D   T H E   TEST   O F   T H E   O R G A N I S M   1 7 1




called " explanation" has nothing to do wi th a deduction . To succeed i n
explaining h a s meant t o succeed in redefini ng, i n each case, what " mole
cules in interaction" mea ns: tha t is, the way these interactions must be
cha racterized in order for theoretica l description to converge with experi
menta l observation. The grea tness of physics derives from the fact that
the physicist's goa l has been in each case to learn how to define molecules
and the i r role, tha t is, how they " i nfect" their neighbors and a re " i n
fected " by them. And the exploit of twentieth-century physics is to have
succeeded in prod uci ng a ( more or less) coherent a rticulation of the defi
nitions, different i n each case, of i ts actors, i ncl uding actors tha t a re ca
pable of entering i nto chemical reactions. It is i ndeed possible to a ffirm
that it is " the same " a toms that enter i nto the characteriza tion of va rious
chemica l reactions, but that the role "a sa me" a tom plays depends upon
the reaction, that is, upon the environment to which this reaction corre
sponds. Some atoms, however, pa rticularly those of carbon or iron, have
thus become verita ble chameleons, unfol ding many different properties
according to their environments.
   In fact, physics today has a l ready begun to explore the limits of this
achievement. This is not a q uestion of reflexivity or of epistemology, but
of pursuing the adventure a nd surprises reserved by i ts achievements. I
am thinking in particular of those physicists who no longer study " ma tter"
but " ma terial s," which a re no longer defined by " q ua l i ties " tha t oppose
them to a homogeneous ma tter but by the fact that things ha ppen to
them . Correlati vely, they a re no longer characterized in terms of proper
ties, flexi bility, fragil ity, or va rious a nd d iverse textures, as the questions
now concern verbs denoting actions and passions . Wha t ma kes glue
stick, mayonna ise set, soap foa m, or steel bend and then suddenly brea k ?
Corresponding t o such questions, there is now a multiple wea lth o f mod
els that negotiate how to co-define the relevant actors, their modes of
coupling, the sca les of description tha t enable us to approach the trans
formations, whether progressive or bruta l, of observable properties.
   How ca n one express the contrast between a rema rkably stable whirl
pool that can be engendered by a turbulent flux when it comes to strike
an obstacle, and the clear, distinct sound produced by a solid when
struc k ? In both ca ses, a giga ntic number of pa rticles pa rticipate in wha t
is to be explained, be it whirlpool or sound . When the subject is sound,
however, the multiplicity can be forgotten, since a few pa ra meters suffice
to characterize the sol id's vi bra nt elasticity. When it comes describing the
whirlpool, in contrast, one m ust yield to the obvious: the description of a
liquid flux colliding violently with an obstacle does not deliver the whirl
pool's secret unless i t takes into account how whirlpools form on every
1 7 2   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M ETA P H Y S I C S




scale, playing a role that cannot be smoothed over in terms of average
va lues . As far as the " behavior" of a material is concerned , its ductil i ty, its
fragility, it will be the fault lines, their modes of propagation, their en
counters with heterogeneous media, their entanglements with each other
that will tell why it bends or breaks.
   In the guise of what is called the "mesoscopic," situated " between "
microscopic descriptions, whose actors are supposed to be definable in
dependently of their environment, and macroscopic descriptions of the
observable properties of the whole, physicists have thus discovered the
need for an a rt of negotiating the in- between, the modes of existence of
bei ngs that should not be confused with mere intermediaries translating
the microscopic into the macroscopic. They are genui ne actors, interact
ing with one a nother in genuine intrigues, which we must learn to nar
rate if the intell igibility of observable properties is to be produced . Whereas
sociologists may have been tempted to take the crystal as a model and to
define society in terms of a finite number of varia bles, materials physi
cists know, when they dea l with a piece of steel that consists only of iron,
carbon, and a few impurities, that they a re addressi ng a " pattern " whose
singul arity must be explored each time, and whose relevant constituents
must be negotiated and characterized on each occasion. They thus pro
long an exploration carried out for millennia by those who have learned
the art of forging steel of ever-different properties.
   Here, the goa l is not to adduce physics as an example for sociologists,
for the adventures of steel, in the last analysis, occupy only a few hundred
pages in a treatise on meta ll urgy, and the fact that they could have been
characterized by metallurgists as " properties " referring to well-defined
processes of fa brication is enough to reca ll the pragmatic d ivergence be
tween the two domains. The point is to celebrate a history whose success
must, first and foremost, be descri bed as relevance. The a rticulation,
henceforth enta ngled, between questions that had-a l beit for only a
century at most--clearly separated what concerns physicians and what
concerns chemists, may confirm the wager that the philosophy of the
organism makes on the order of nature: " there are organisms everywhere,"
and each kind of organism is in itself, and without any beyond, an active,
enduring production of what the scientist deciphers . But it confirms, first,
that scientists, despite their simpl i fying slogans, are indeed those for
whom nature is a source of innovation: by ta king a closer look, one finds
more in it.
   However, it belongs to another science, biology, to unfold the tota lity
of what the orga nism obliges us to think. Living beings have the privilege
of exhi biting endurance qua achievement, in the midst of a risky envi ron-
          S C I E N T I F I C   OBJECTS   A N D   T H E   TEST   O F   T H E   O RGA N I S M   1 7 3




ment. Indeed, although beings and their interactions, as characterized
both by physics and by chemistry, may wel l have come to exhi bit the in
sepa ra ble character of the definition of an entity and that of its envi ron
ment, the val ues to which they give mea ning remai n those of varia bles.
Biologists, for their part, address the enduri ng organism insofar as its sta
bility is at stake for this organism itself, insofa r as it matters.
    Biologists do not so much explain the living being as celebrate the liv
ing being's achievement: this might be the proposition that emerges from
the phil osophy of the orga nism, and this proposition can shed l ight on
the contrast between " biologica l function " and " physico-mathematical
function," a contrast that gave rise to the vitalist temptation to oppose
the " how," which supposedly suffices for physics a nd c hemistry, to the
" why," whose relevance is i mposed by the living being.
    In fact, every time biologists identify the intricate, multi ple roles of the
various components of a cell, a tissue, an organ, or a body, they are sub
ject to the temptation of explaining the tota l ity in terms of goal-directed
organization. They deal with the organism qua exhibiting, in an obvious
way, its dependence upon a selective taking-together: certa in entities are
taken into considera tion and not others, and in this way to the exclusion
of other ways, while the overa l l regi me wagers on such an environment
and loses its hold if the confidence implied by this wager is betrayed . Also,
when biologi sts a re confronted by a pathology, they see the relative sim
pl icity of functional relations-this is responsible for that-disa ppear in
favor of an a lmost indescribable multiplicity of relations: the safe hold of
reasonings gets lost at the sa me time as the biological function. In other
words, descriptions of a " normal " l i vi ng bei ng did not expl a i n its func
tional sta bility, but depended on it. And when, once they become bio
physici sts, our biologists study the va rious components of a living being
sepa rately in the context of an experimental environment, they discover
how hard it is to make an isolated component have the type of behavior
that characterizes it in the midst of a living organism. If the difference
between an electron within a body and an electron in the la boratory is
hard to determi ne, the three-dimensional folding that confers its " func
tiona l " properties upon the protein offers problems whose frightful sub
tlety is being discovered by contemporary science: the " functiona l " pro
tein needs its living environment.
    The term " organism " thus rightly indicates a privilege of living beings.
In biology, the question " how ? " exhi bits itself as inseparable not from the
why (pourquoi) but from the what-for (pour quoi): it is insepara ble both
from the world for (pour) which a living being's functioning has meaning
and from the wager for this world, and not another, that this functioning
1 74   FROM   T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




affirms. In other words, the privilege of a living bei ng is to exhibit each
biologica l function as risking itsel f " with regard to " the outsi de world,
and " for" an external worl d .
   Quite obviously, in the case of a l iving being, the p roblem of the
" whole" and the " part," of the body and " its " parts is also ra ised, and
raised in terms of functional interdependence. Both the whole and each
part need the success of the other parts for their own success and for the
endurance of their mode of " functional " behavior.
    The question of the whole and the parts is an ancient one, which
haunts biology. Is the whole anyth i ng other than " s u m " of its parts ? Is
it " more," or is it not " less," in the sense tha t, in one way or another, it
" binds" its parts, subjecting them to its own interests and thus depriving
them of certain possibilities of behavior ? Such questions also belong to
the history of phi losophy. Even Leibniz, who sought to understand a re
ality conceived in terms of monads, each of which deployed for itself its
own viewpoint, wa s obl iged at the end of his l i fe to introduce the stra nge
notion of a vinculum. As a nonsubstantial link, knot, or yoke, the vincu
lum answers the need for describing the crowd of monads that make up
an individual body qua collected, or " subjected," varia bles of a function,
although each one nevertheless conserves its autonomy. It was this kind
of question that plunged embryology in the first half of the twentieth
century i nto a crisis, before the tri umph of molecular biology defined the
entire field as " fal low," destined to be el ucidated some day in genetic terms.
Embryologists had discovered the failure of any attempt to explain the
progressive di fferentiation of the embryo in terms of " a bstract" mecha
nisms, identi fiable independently of the total ity in which they participate.
They had to admit that in embryology no ca use has within itself the
power to ca use or the power to produce a specific effect independently of
a specific envi ronment. At the limit, all ca uses designate the developing
embryo as such as " the ca use " responsible for their effect.
   For Whitehead, the pa rts do not constitute the whole without the
whole infecting the parts. In other words, the identity, or the enduring
pattern, of the whole and the parts are strictly contemporary. This is Why
the same term, " i nfection," can be used both to designate the rela tions
between the whole and the parts, and to describe the relations of a living
orga nism with its environment. If the body exists for its pa rts, it is be
cause its parts a re infected by such-and-such an obstinate aspect of what
we ca ll the body, but which, for them, is a portion of thei r environment;
if the pa rts exist for each other and for the body, it is beca use the respec
tive patterns of each a re highly sensitive to any mod ification of the envi
ronment they constitute for one another.
           S C I E N T I F I C   O BJ E CTS   A N D   T H E   TEST   O F   T H E   ORG A N I S M   1 7 5




  Thus the body is a portion of the environment for the part, and the
part is a portion of the environment for the body; [the d ifference between
the case of the body and its parts, and that of the living being a nd its ex
terna l environment is] only they are peculiarly sensitive, each to modifi
cations of the other ( SMW, 1 49 ) .
   Some ten years later, i n Modes o f Thought, Whitehead was t o say the
same thing in a more poetic form:
   In fact, the world beyond is so intimately entwined in our own natures
that unconsciously we identify our more vivid perspectives of it with our
selves. For example, our bodies lie beyond our own individual existence.
And yet they are part of it. We think of ourselves as so intimately en
twined in bodily life that a man is a complex unity-body and mind. But
the body is part of the external world, continuous with it. In fact, it is just
as much part of nature as anything else there-a river, or a mountain, or
a cloud. Also, if we are fussily exact, we cannot define where a body be
gins and where external nature ends ( MT, 2 1 ) .
   The body is not made u p o f a l l i ts parts, a nd its parts a re not pa rt o f
the body. The parts have vested i nterests i n each other a nd i n the body,
in the sense that these a re the proximate environment required by their
success. The only genuine totality is the event itself, each event rea l izing
for itself the combination of its prehensions, the account of wha t it takes
into account. Each pa rt is grasped by the whole as an aspect of its own
pa ttern, a variable of its functioning. And this aspect of itself, obstinately
exhibited by the whole and by the other parts, i nfects the environment of
each part, which thus exhibits itself as a part. For as long as it lasts.
   To refer to a familiar situation, let us take the pa rticular exa mple of
the " whole" constituted by a hospita l, and of the " parts " constituted by
doctors and patients. Doctors and pa tients enter and leave the hospita l .
Outside the hospital, the doctor is a normally courteous exemplar o f hu
ma nity. In the hospital, having become a " part" of the hospital, he sweeps
in, followed by a cohort of assistants, ta lks about the patient, to whom he
scarcely says a word, and often lea ves before he can be asked the slightest
question. Nevertheless, stil l qua pa rt, he is extremely sensitive, not, to be
sure, to the suffering patient, but to the selected " aspects " of the patient
that a re addressed to his sk i l l . As far as the patient is concerned, once she
becomes a part, she accepts to be treated in this way, and accepts to anx
iously await the verdict the doctor will issue on the basis of data whose
mea ning she, as a patient, is not supposed to share.
   The endura nce of the pattern named " hospital," as we know it, depends,
of course, on the patience of the environment: if, for instance, users did
not accept to be defined as " pa tients " as soon as they enter the hospita l,
1 76   FROM   T H E   P H I LOSOPHY   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




that is, to renou nce most of their rights, the " whole" and the other parts
would lose thei r hold . As long as the hospital as we know it succeeds in
infecting both patients and doctors, it will succeed in enduring.
     Let us return to the biologists, who, for their part, a re not confronted
with a " social fact" but with a multiplicity of " natura l " hi stories. Whereas
the history of an a tom or a molecule remains largely hidden to us, that of
a living individual, of a population, of various popu lations in interaction,
and of species, together constitutes the terrain on the basis of which the
most complete and concrete testimony we have available on the subject
of nature may be heard .
     Among these histories, the Darwi nian ones were radically innovative,
as they brought with them a new mode of a ppreciating living beings,
pl aced under the banner of a long, slow process, and of celebrating the
" l iving value " associated with obstinate sma ll causes that end up produc
ing major effects . Today, the interpreters of Gaia a re the heirs of this ap
preciation. In contrast, today as in Whitehead 's time, most of those who
profess a llegiance to Darwin have produced a biased, abstract version of
him, focused on competi tion . For Whitehead, this is the direct conse
quence of the concrete, misplaced character of the a bstraction according
to which an organism is what it is independently of its environment. I f
the identity of a living being h a d been recognized as a " living value" in
separable from its envi ronment, the notion of a " favorable environment"
wou ld have been recognized as something crucially a t stake in evolution .
But an abstract role was conferred upon the environment, and the only
responsibility assigned to it was that of selective sorting, where this term
presupposes the possibility of defining independently the criterion of
sorti ng and that which is sorted .
   The given ness of the environment dominates everything. A ccordingly,
the last words of science appeared to be the Struggle for Existence, and
Natural Selection. Darwin's own writings are for all time a model of re
fusal to go beyond the direct evidence, and of careful retention of every
possible hypothesis. But those virtues were not so conspicuous in his fol
lowers, and still less in his camp-followers. The imagination of European
sociologists and publicists was stained by exclusive attention to this as
pect of conflicting interests. The idea prevailed that there was a peculiar
strong-minded realism in discarding ethical considerations in the deter
mination of the conduct of commercial and national interests. The other
side of the evolutionary machinery, the neglected side, is expressed by the
word creativeness . The organisms can create their own environment. For
this purpose, the single organism is almost helpless. The adequate forces
require societies of cooperating organisms. But with such cooperation
          S C I E N T I F I C   OBJECTS   A N D   T H E   TEST   O F   T H E   O RG A N I S M   1 7 7




and in proportion to the effort put forward, the environment has a p las
ticity which alters the whole ethical aspect of evolution [ . . . 1 roma ntic
ruthlessness is no nearer to real politics, than is romantic self-abnegation
( SMW, 1 1 1 - 1 1 2 ) .
    Whitehead 's proposition d i d not make history i n biology, although it
did nourish the thought of one its most remarkable scholars, the embry
ologist Conrad Waddington. Unti l his death in 1 975, Waddington was " a
biologist o n the watch." H e did not l i m i t himself t o analyzing the question
begging " errors of misplaced concreteness " that lead to red ucing Darwin
ian evol ution to a genetic sorting process. He sought out and tried to
gather together a l l those biologists, physicists, mathematicians, and phi
losophers who were lia ble to contribute to a " theoretica l biology," or a
formal ization that would enable biologists to resist the many pseudo
di lemmas that harass the way living beings are thought: innate/acquired,
genetically determined/relative to the environment, individuaVgroup, and
so on.
    Nevertheless, quite apart from the question of his own infl uence, White
head was right to trust l i ving beings and the interest they inspire. Ab
straction has never encountered the same adhesion in biology as it has in
physics, and the dissatisfaction it inspires has not ceased to give rise to
new interpreters. Thus, the sociobiologica l abstraction, which constitutes
natural selection as the only thing responsible for the "values " attached
to the organism-i f poets feel the beauty of the glow of the sunset, it is
because celebrating it has enabled hominids to seduce females, and has
therefore given them an advantage with regard to their less eloquent
colleagues-can certainly be presented as a triumph of scientific rational
ity. Yet this professional j udgment, continuing as it does a long the path of
an a bstraction whose only value is the reduction of all values to selective
va l ue, is the vector of more controversies than consensus i n biology.
    Whereas in physics, the idea of a law of nature does not give rise to
any particular impatience, it pertains to the life sciences to produce wit
nesses against the a bstraction ca l led " materialist." This is the case i n ge
netics, when Barba ra McClintock, busy a nd precise, nevertheless affirms
the i mportance of " l istening to what corn has say." It is the case in em
bryology, when Albert Dalcq is moved by the fact that the embryo'S re
sponse to his experimental questions has " a l l the surprise and charm one
can find in the answer of an intelligent i nterlocutor." Also in evolutionary
biology, when Stephen Gould opposes to the nasty ugl iness of all-terrain
selectivism the j oy of a biology that would learn how to understand how,
when it comes to l i ving beings, " the world outside passes through a
bounda ry i nto organic vitality withi n ." And in ethology, when meticulous
1 78   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




study is joined to a link of respect, or even love, or else a mazement, or
aga in j u bilation: all that is impl ied, along with astonishment, by the term
" wonder." Each time, the sense of a presence that cannot be appropri
ated, an invitation to becoming, finds its witnesses, a rticulated without
contrad iction with the most meticulous investigative approach.
    And theorists themselves try to respond to what is dema nded by l iving
beings in terms of forma l descriptions, whether it be autopoiesis with
Fra ncesco Varela , or the great undertaking of Rene Thorn that sought to
cha racterize the type of mathematization that is releva nt to living beings.
And perhaps a bove all, the a l l iance between forma l and dynamic model s
of etho-ecological co-construction Stuart Kauffmann is now trying to
forge in his Investigations. As Whitehead had foreseen, each of them tes
tifies, each in his own way, to l iving bei ngs, implying and ca lling for a
new conception of the order of nature. All a re infected by the discovery,
cha racteristic of the life sciences, that chains of cause to effect are never
prolonged very far, and that, at each step, one must be ready for a muta
tion of the mode of description, a bifurcation of what is a t stake, the in
trusion of a new actor pointing to (without causing it) a radica l tra nsfor
mation of the distri bution of rol es and significations.
    Although the philosophy of the organism designates biology as its
privileged field, its ambition is not l imited to biology. We should recall
that it was from objective perception, "I see a castle there," that White
head drew the correlative notions of event and prehension. Yet percep
tion is henceforth a dangerous abstraction from the point of view of the
orga nism, as are the notions of perspective, reflection, a nd viewpoint,
which belonged to the contributions proposed by classical philosophy
for the job specification. These notions will have to be generalized , in
order to exhibit the fea tures that now designate the organism: endurance
as what is at sta ke, risky success, and the insepa ra bility of what endures
from its environment. In other words, they will have to be reformulated
in a way that renders explicit what they require, and will have to un
dergo the same tra nsformation as the " presence " celebrated by the poets,
which has become a " dynamics of infection."
    Perception and the spatio-tempora l definition of the physica l object
were the two sources of " facts " privileged by The Concept of Nature,
corresponding to this book's a mbition: to resist the bifurcation of nature,
whose j ustifications, consequences, and the possibilities of getti ng a round
it were explored, in one way or another, by the great classica l philoso
phers. Henceforth, in contrast, the starting point constituted by the defi
nition of the electron and the field associated with it no longer communi
cates directly with the q uestion of the order of na ture, for it presupposes
          S C I E N T I F I C   OBJECTS   A N D   T H E   TEST   O F   THE   O R G A N I S M   1 7 9




the patient character of the environment constituted for the electron by
the field . The electron's functional behavior, the stable definition of the
varia bles that define it, is what is presupposed and confirmed by the ex
perimental staging that enables it to be made explicit, but from the point
of view of the order of nature this is not a generality, but only what is
dema nded by physics . In other words, the fact that physics succeeds in
describing a world of sta ble entities in functiona l interaction speaks less
of the order of nature in the generic sense than of those aspects of the
order of nature that p hysics will recognize as its own, once experimenta
tion has a llowed their i dentification .
   The question will arise in a similar way with the object of perception.
We recall that, in The Concept of Nature, Cleopatra 's Needle communi
cated with the possibility of saying " there it is again" and required an ob
ject. The object did not explain its recognition, but was required for recog
nition to have a respondent and not to make nature bifurcate. But perceptive
experience, precisely because it exhibits this dimension of recognition in a
dominant way, communicates with the abstraction of a staging that is
neutral with regard to values, and makes us forget that concrete experi
ence can very seldom be reduced to the observation that Cleopatra's
Needle is indeed stil l there in its place. In other words, the fact that per
ceptive experience privi leges permanent objects, defined as sta ble active
conditions for the perceptions we have of them-I see the Needle, and I
also know that you, who are on the other side of the square, see it too, but
from another perspective-does not constitute a relia ble general i ty from
the viewpoint of the philosophy of the organism. It does not exhibit the
risky character of the uni fication it presupposes. The notion of perspec
tive, and more precisely the stable differentiation implied by the notion of
perspective between the object and its spatial environment ( space as the
place of all the perspectives from which Cleopatra's Needle ca n be seen ),
speaks not of the order of nature but of that particular aspect of the order
of nature that is called perception .
   In Modes of Thought, Wh itehead will explicitly question the concept
of perspective he had accepted when the a bstract question was to de
scribe how we ca n perceive, " here," the Needle, castle, or cloud that are
l ocated " there ." Perspectivism, that is, the i dentification of prehension
with a form of " reflection," the event reflecting all other events from its
viewpoint and being reflected from their viewpoint by all events, places
the emphasis on a possible symmetry, an impartiality that conceals the
concrete fact that what we perceive interests us and matters to us.
  We may well ask whether the doctrine of perspective is not an endeav
our to reduce the concept of importance to mere matter-of-fact devoid of
1 8 0   FROM   T H E   PH I L O S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




intrinsic interest. Of course such reduction is impossible. But it is true to
say that perspective is the dead abstraction of mere fact from the living
importance of things felt. The concrete truth is the variation of interest;
the abstraction is the universe in perspective ( MT, 1 1 ) .
   The reflective mirror, whose various orientations exhibit the different
ways of placing the same scene in perspective, communicates with the
abstract ideal of neutral ity with regard to values. It is the person who ori
ents the mirror who decides what the mi rror will reflect. The value of the
mirror qua mirror is precisely to authorize the abstraction of its own role.
If this role is to be taken into account, it will be insofar as it departs from
the ideal: such a defect, such an irregularity, deforms the image. The no
tion of perspective thus has the weakness of its vulnerability to being re
duced to a simple "effect" of the landscape. Unless, as Leibniz proposed,
one ma kes the landscape an effect of the perspective. In both cases, how
ever, what is missed is the risky affirmation of the person who perceives
" for" a world . The point then is not dependence; what is affirmed is the
way one is oneself the invention of the world on which one depends.
   It might have been anticipated, however, that the link between perspec
tive and importa nce would communicate not with " variation of interest"
but with the question of value, as proposed by poets and imposed by bi
ology. It seems that the phi losophy of the organism ought to end up with
a mea ning of the term " perspective " tha t resonates in the a ffirmation " to
each his own perspective," obstinate, selective, affirmative, intolerant. To
hell, then, with the common world that col lects perspectives, and with
Leibnizian harmony, which turns this common world into a well
constructed i l l usion. Whitehead seemed destined to move from classic
perspectivism, a Cleopatra 's Need le perceived from d i fferent viewpoints,
to a perspectivism of a Nietzschea n or at least postmodern type . Yet
Whitehead did not make this move. His thought was to bifurcate in a
wholly other direction, without the least explanation.
   Here, " thinking with Whitehead" obliges us to take the li berty of a di
agnosis. What prevented Whitehea d from carrying out the obvious gen
eral ization that would have led him to a psychology based on the biased
and pa rtial cha racter of perceptions, thus putting an end to the explora
tion of the facts that exhibit the order of nature ?
   To attempt this diagnosis, I propose to tackle the problem from the
other end . What would Whitehead have wound up with if he had trans
ferred to psychology the notions of endura nce and value, whose releva nce
is exhibited by biology ? A rather formidable result: the pra ise of the pro
fessional. Indeed , what better exa mple could there be of an orga nism than
the professional described by Whitehead, he who boasts of the selective
          S C I E N T I F I C   OBJ ECTS   A N D   T H E   TEST   O F   T H E   O R G A N I S M   1 8 1




seriousness of his thought, that is, of its limitations ? What better example
of obstinately affirmed value than the professionals' trust in the well
foundedness of the rut they are following, of the routine mode of grasping
that they are prolonging? What better example of endurance than a pro
fessiona l judgment, maintaining the separation between what should be
taken into account and mere anecdote, whereas the anecdote in question
may signify the despa ir of thousands of persons ? What better example of
successful infection than the creation of such professionals from " norma l "
beginners: those first-year students who will have to lea rn the differentia
tion between the " good " questions, those that will turn them into " true
professionals," and the others, which inspire " impatience " of their teachers
in the form of an explicit reprimand, or an inept answer, or a little smile
that is mocki ng, condescending, or pitying ? And what better example of
the " patience " of the environment than the fact that this differentiation
has been ta ken up: the good questions are objective, scientific, or rationa l,
while everythi ng else, even if it is what is most importa nt, belongs to " val
ues," to subjectivity, to sentimentality, to culture . . . ?
   In other words, Whitehead's proposition, centered on the orga nism and
on " va lue" as the outcome of limitation, is certa inly not bereft of rele
va nce with regard to psychological science, which, fol lowing Wi lliam
James, he wished to make enter the " order of nature." Yet it risks nourish
ing a psychology that defines as its normal horizon what Whitehead has
precisely questioned . The professional 's rut would be celebrated as para
digmatic success.
   Physicists who describe the motion of a solid body take advantage of
the endurance and the patience cha racteristic of what is cal led " p hysica l
reality." The possibility of making a mathematical function correspond to
the motion of a pla net, for instance, presupposes and reflects the fact that
this motion testi fies to a determi nate mode of prehension that seems to
have endured since the solar system has existed . Biologists, for their part,
know that the way a l iving being " holds on" reflects a risky and successful
sorting of what affects it, and thei r own description depends on this suc
cess. Biologists are " captivated " in both senses of the term: the success of
their description depends on a success that precedes it, and has deter
mi ned the terms of that description. For them, to understand means to
" follow" this sorting process, but also to " appreciate " how the body dis
tributes mea nings, how the parts refer to the whole that infects them. In
contrast, the psychologist's description, if it were simi larly " captivated,"
would risk either edifying redunda ncy or cynicism. Thus, psychologists
captivated by the professionals' quiet success would be led to celebrate the
firm, self-assured way they " sort" what they have to deal with, relega ti ng
1 8 2   FROM T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




to the status of an anecdote all that anyone other than they might find
importa nt or worrisome. Starting out from this hypothesis, they could
esta blish a cynical portrait of what it is to be human, beyond all illusions
of l ucidity. And they could also identify how the norms common to our
societies infect everyone, such that the "development of the sense of mo
ral ity " in the adolescent, for insta nce, would pertain purely and simply to
the fabrication of a being that does not inspire impatience on the part of
its social milieu.
   This perspectivism might sati sfy a professional psychologist, but it
wou ld neglect one small deta il, or j udge it purely anecdota l : by fol low
ing the biologist's example in this way, the psychologist does not re
semble a biologist at a l l . A living being's lim itations celebrate its success,
whereas whoever might undertake to descri be me on the ba sis of my
lim itations would insult me. In contra st, whoever nourishes my " d is
quiet" (inquihude)-a Leibnizian term that is to be understood without
the slightest doloristic connotation-nourishes me: not in terms of a
phobia of all l imitation, but of an appetite for experimentation, for the
consequences of variation of interest, for the exploration that plunges
what I thought was given into the rea l m of the possible.
   " It can cease to hold." For biologists or doctors, th is means in the first
insta nce the risk of illness or death . Yet whoever is interested in human
experience must take this question as a primary term. This, moreover, is
what the familiar stories do, such as the one of the king whose prestige
infected his envi ronment to such an extent that no one, prior to the
impertinent child, had dared to say, " But he has no clothes ! " O r those
games that exhibit the abil ity of infectious dynamics to desta bil ize
the relation to the " norma l " world : " I 've got you, you've got me by the
chinny-ch in-ch in, the fi rst to laugh . . . " I I rrepressi ble la ughter reflects
the impossi bil ity of " sta ying serious" in an environment infected by re
ciprocal modes of prehension focused on only these aspects, a sparkling
glance, pursed l ips, frowns, that can both inspire and foretell laughter.
   In The Concept of Nature, the relation of cogredience, the " and " in the
" here and now " of all experience, exhibited the precariousness of the fact
of " holding on " : the specious present that Whitehead in herited from Wi l
liam James end ures and succeeds in making those variations that do not
make it slip into the past of a new present hold together, but it is fleeti ng



I In the French game of "}e te tiens . tu me tiens par fa harhichette," two children

hold each other's chin as they stare into each other's eyes. The first to laugh loses.
-Trans.
          S C I E NT I F I C   O BJ E C T S   A N D   T H E   TEST   O F   TH E   O R G A N I S M   1 8 3




at first. Once it has gone, it is gone, and the very a ttempt to hold it back
makes it slip away, unless we have to dea l not with a deli berate effort but
with the result of spiri tual techniq ues whose result is precisely the di
vorce between vol unta ry effort and accompl ishment.
   Since it is fleeting, William James's specious present thus forces us to
conceive of the problematic c haracter of holding-together, which may be
concealed both by biological success a nd by objective perception desig
nating an object-that castle, tha t cloud-that will stil l be there when I
open my eyes again. Yet lived continuity, as James has described it, a suc
cession of presents that appropriate their past, ta king up once again what
precedes them and assigning a val ue to it by ma king it a variable of their
own function, not only designa tes an enrichment of the job specifications,
leading to a new formulation of what is required by the philosophy of the
organism. It a lso ra ises the problem of the communication between the
" order of nature " and the metaphysical question, implying what we cal l
" mind," or rather " soul," in the sense that the soul designates that which
psychology should have to address if it is to address the experience of
disquiet.
   If it is not to make nature bifurcate immediately, the mode of holding
together of lived conti nuity must be conceived as inseparable from the or
der of nature. If not, the soul would risk being identified with a feature that
is fundamenta lly a lien to this order: freedom, to be precise. In one way or
another, this order itself will have be situated, and with it the notion of
organism. Just as chemistry exhibits what physics accomplishes in abstrac
tion, a nd biology exhibits what chemistry succeeds in a bstracting, the
question now arises of what psychology should exhibit so that the abstrac
tion on which biologica l order depends may be situated and identified .
   Accord ing to my diagnosis, we can foresee that when Whitehead takes
up the question of the " specious present," the question should be decided
of how the endurance of the organism may be a rticulated with " the dis
quiet of the soul ." And the specious present will indeed appea r in Science
and the Modern World in a decisive place, tha t is, as an introduction to
three paragraphs that constitute, according to Lewis Ford, an insertion
added by Whitehead after April 1 925.
   The total temporal duration of such an event bearing an enduring pat
tern, constitutes its specious present. Within this specious present the
event realises itself as a totality, and also in so doing realises itself as
grouping together a number of aspects of its own temporal parts. One
and the same pattern is realised in the total event, and is exhibited by each
of these various p arts through an aspect of each part grasped into the to
getherness of the total event ( SMW, 1 04-1 0 5 ) .
1 8 4   F RO M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   OF   N AT U R E T O   META P H Y S I C S




   We seem to be on familiar ground here, a l l the more fa miliar in tha t
Whitehead was dea l ing with end ura nce in the preceding paragraph, and
the obstinacy with which " the same thing for itsel f" is there in front of
you, however you may analyze it from the tempora l flux of its parts . One
might therefore think tha t that he is prolonging this same question by
specifying how the whole realizes itself by gatheri ng together its parts, each
according to the aspect that contributes to its own pattern. One might even
suspect the role that psychological experience must have played in the
philosophy of the orga nism. Whitehead no doubt intended to make it the
terra in of conceptual construction that was to provide " rigid coherence "
to William James's " adequate" exploration . For the psychologica l field,
interpreted as " self-knowledge of our tota l bodily event," is indeed wha t
imposes a fully deployed conceptua l construction, si nce it impl ies, as a
concrete fact, what biology certa inly does not a llow to be ignored, but
from which the biologist may be tempted to ma ke a bstraction: the " for
itself" cha racter of the event.
   Yet it was in fact another author who had taken his pen, accord ing to
Lewis Ford, who has dubbed what begins in this way the insertion of the
" triple envisagement." Wha t is being introd uced is a notion to which nei
ther physics, nor perceptive experience, nor the biologica l organism, nor
the poets chosen by Whitehead, nor even Wi lliam James has borne wit
ness: that of the " possibilities of val ue," whose envisaging is a primordial
aspect of " eterna l activi ty." It is the birth of this other a uthor, henceforth
a metaphysician, that must be described before we pursue the reading
of this insertion, one of the most obscure texts in Science and the Modern
World.
   Let us note, however, that at the moment when this other Whitehead
underta kes to turn the economy of his own thought inside out, to pl unge
into the risks of metaphysics, whereas he had previously tried to conceive of
the order of nature, that is, the enduring success of beings, it is a term deriv
ing directly from William James, " specious present," that came to his pen.
                                                            C H A P TER TWE L V E
