The Event from Its Own Standpoi nt?




       f
      "'
          H E PATH I have fol lowed leads to the question o f the " psycho
          logical field " associated with the thought of Wil liam James, and
          the fact that I have introduced the term " soul " ind icates the
stakes I propose to associate with it. To descri be the soul is problematic
in terms of a theory that relates value and endurance; such a theory rather
means insulting the soul . The concepts ca l led for by our fa ith in an order
of nature do not suffice, for they do not enable us to resist the bl ind version
of this fa ith proposed by professionals. If unity is to be real ized where
subject and object are opposed , we m ust rise back up from the success
exhibited and celebrated by orga nisms toward what is possible-which
these organisms succeed in excluding. The concepts to be constructed can
not take advantage of the modes of intel ligibility proposed by the " order
of nature," but must risk the test of the metaphysica l question in its full
state of deployment.
   This line of reasoning is entirely due to my imagination, to the way I am
trying to accompany Whitehead 's thought. Se non e vero . . . Yet other
paths may be envisaged, which al low us to understand what happened to
Whitehead in April 1 92 5 . Let us therefore fol low another, complemen
tary path. Let us consider human experience, the " psychological field "
defined as " a bodily event considered from its own sta ndpoint," as they
force upon us questions that remain unsolved . In fact, the conceptual con
struction to which the thought of the organism obliges us has only j ust
found its own locus and risks . For to the question " What is an event? "
only concepts enable us to respond in a generic way, independently of the
limitations that allow an organism to be characterized .
1 8 6   FROM   T H E   P H I L O S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




  As Whitehead often repeats, the order of nature has as its subject " that
which endures" : that is, not the event, but the pattern realized by the event,
which, in the case of success, is repeated from event to event. The point
will therefore be to construct the distinction between this pattern and the
event itself, which is " prehension," the unifying grasp of the aspects pre
hended accord ing to a determinate mode. This is where the reference to
the " bodily event" is crucia l .
   I t is important to discriminate the bodily pattern, which endures, from
the bodily event, which is pervaded by the enduring pattern, and from the
parts of the bodily event. The parts of the bodily event are themselves
pervaded by their own enduring patterns, which form elements in the
bodily pattern. The parts of the body are really portions of the environ
ment of the total bodily event, but so related that their mutual aspects,
each in the other, are peculiarly effective in modifying the patterns of
either [ . . . I we can now see the relation of psychology to physiology and
to physics. The private psychological field is merely the event considered
from its own standpoint. The unity of this field is the unity of the event.
But it is the event as one entity, and not the event as a sum of parts
(SMW, 1 4 9- 1 50 ) .
   To conceive the event a s one entity thus mea ns, a t the sa me time, to try
to construct the k ind of " rigid coherence " appropriate for the innovative
thesis of Wi lliam James. For there can obviously be no question of con
sciousness "qua function " being consciousness " reduced to a function."
This is why thinking of the event " for itsel f" is crucially at stake. What
interests " psycho-phi losophy " must be both d i stingu ished from, and
placed in rela tion to, the enduring patterns cha racterized by the so-ca l led
objective sciences, and on which these sciences depend , from physics to
physiology. The " terri torial division" between science and philosophy
must not be " surmounted " by explanation, but the very possibility of ex
plana tion must have the status of a consequence from the perspective of
a thought based on the event.
   When Whitehead wrote the lines just cited, he seems to have thought he
had constructed the terms of its solution . The event rea lizes and unifies,
and it unifies " for itself," by producing its own standpoint. In other words,
the rea lity of an event must be understood on the basis of " internal " rela
tions alone. An event is not what it is because of other events, but because
of the grasp it rea lizes of those other events, the way in which it " pre
hends" them, and the aspects under which it takes them into account as it
produces itsel f. An event itself, as such, thus never has the power to define
what its action will be, or its effect, or its influence on something else. The
aspect of itself that will be ta ken into account, and thus contribute to the
                           T H E   E V E N T   F R O M   ITS   OWN   S TA N D P O I N T ?   1 8 7




explanation of the account, did not, as such, preexist this taking-into
account. Action, effect, influence: all these terms that seem to designate
"external " relations, in which a transformation is explicable by something
external, are relative to endurance. They designate the type of ta king-into
account, the role, or the " va lorization " that an event's mode of pattern
obstinately confers upon what is prehended . Of course, the transformation
can " be explained " as a function of something external, but here the fact is
disconnected from the " principle." What explains did not have the power
to explain " i n principle " : it obtained this power in fact. Yet this fact is rela
tive to the endurance of the pattern, to the mode of tak ing into account,
insofar as it has succeeded in enduring.
    In other words, we should not celebrate the sun as a source of life, but
the endurance of a mode of pattern that ma kes the properties of sola r
l ight exist for the plant, these properties that henceforth infect us as well,
since the mode of pattern proper to our experientia l apparatus has pro
duced its sta ble signification, which can be articulated in terms of a func
tion. As a dynamics of successful infection req u i red by the order of
nature, the endurance of modes of pattern that refer to one another does
not a l low us to descri be the way an event is prehension " for itself," even
as it participates in a world from which it is i nsepa ra ble.
    As far as the taking-into-account as such is concerned, it ra ises a prop
erly conceptual q uestion. Indeed, the mode of tak ing-into-account, the
aspect in which the various a spects " enter " into the constitution of an
event-that is, j ust as much, the way this event testi fies to the presence of
other events beyond itself-must be so cha racterized as to enable the af
firmation that an event " explains itsel f" with regard to others. And this
affi rmation must in no way be liable to confusion with the i dea that one
event is expla ined by others. To construct the concepts to which the event
obliges us, it is therefore crucial to avoid all recourse to terms that imply
a sta ble mode of valorization-this has th e value of a cause for that--or
that intervene in descriptions conditiona l upon the endurance of pattern.
All these terms refer to the event as " pervaded " by a pattern, and define
va l ue as the outcome of the corresponding limitation. The point is to con
ceive of the event " from its own standpoint," as a " determinant," without
any allusion to the q uestions of endurance, motion, or emergence.
    It is here that the " eternal objects " will reappea r, in a problem that is
henceforth conceptua l . Whitehead 's "first metaphysical solution " consisted
i n bringing to conceptua l power the testimony of " eternality " that col
ors and geometrical forms had led him to inscri be in his job specifica
tion . And this is easy to understand, for the point is to conceptualize the
ta ki ng-i nto-account i n a way that cannot be confused with an emergence,
1 8 8   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




for what emerges i s always an enduring being, never a taking-into
account. Eternal objects, however, were required precisely by that a spect
of what we perceive tha t does not emerge from the flux of things. The
fact that colors " come and go" requires that eternal objects make ingres
sion . One might say that their i ngression " ma kes an event," even though
they themselves a re not events. And this is precisely what interests White
head. The determination of each mode of ta king i nto account requires an
eterna l obj ect, because no mode of determi na tion can be descri bed as
"emerging" from what is taken into account.
   Wherever such objects have ingression into the general flux, they inter
pret events, each to the other. They are here in the perceiver; but, as per
ceived by him, they convey for him something of the total flux which is
beyond h imself ( SMW, 1 5 1 ) .
   Color, always a specific color, or geometrica l forms, a circle or a
square, a re no longer privi leged as such, but beca use they exhibit the
" twofold role," that is, the relationa l character, that Wh i tehead hence
forth a ttributes to " eterna l objects " : green is what I perceive as belong
ing to that lea f, the circle is what I conceive as proposed by that wheel .
We must i nsist on this point, for j ust as perceptive experience risks fa
voring the error of " misplaced concreteness " beca use of the privilege it
confers on the rela tiona l contrast between the " here " of the percipient
event and the loca lizable " there " of what is perceived, sen sible and in
tel ligible obj ects run the risk of dangerously centering the conception
of eterna l objects a round " what" we, who a re here, perceive there. But
what i s genera lized is by no means the experience of sensi ble or i ntel
lectual certainty, the wel l -determined character of a " form " with the
power of dictating how it must be perceived, the circle qua i l lustra ted by
all round objects, this green by the leaves of that tree. If eterna l objects
intervene in the thought of the event, it is in a generic mode, equa l ly
relevant for a l l perception. An eternal object is henceforth that which
has ingression in the mode of " how " an event ta kes another event into
account, that which a llows prehension to be sa i d to be the prehension of
something else.
  We must start with the event as the ultimate unit of natural occurrence.
An event has to do with all that there is, and in particular with all other
events. The interfusion of events is effected by the aspects of those eternal
objects, such as colours, sounds, scents, geometrical characters, which are
required for nature and are not emergent from it. Such an eternal object
will be an ingredient of one event under the guise, or aspect, of qualifying
another event. There is a reciprocity of aspects, and there are patterns of
aspects. Each event corresponds to two such patterns: namely, the pat-
                          T H E   E V E N T   F R O M   ITS   OWN   STA N D PO I N T ?   1 8 9




tern of aspects of other events which it grasps into its own unity, and the
pattern of its aspects which other events severally grasp into their unities
(SMW, 1 0 3 ) .
   Eternal objects thus ensure the distinction between the two types of
pattern, that of the unification of the event " for itself," and that of its as
pects tha t a re grasped by other events. This is a crucial distinction, since it
must enable us to speak of consciousness as a function, without affirming
that consciousness " is merely a function," or is the mere result of some
thing other than itself. More generica lly, it is the q uestion of individual iza
tion that is at stake. If the " how" of the taking-into-account " did not make
an event," the individual might be deduced from its community. Eternal
objects thus give resonance to the d ifference between what Whitehead
rejects: a "simple fusion " that gives no meaning to individuality, and what
he aims at: a specific mode of tak ing into account, in this way and not
otherwise. An event does not have the power to determine how it will be
prehended, but it must be prehended, and it must be prehended " sever
ally," in a determinate mode each time. Prehension and ingression thus
cannot be defined separa tely. Prehension without ingression would be re
duced to some determinate relation of cause to effect. As fa r as the ingres
sion of an eternal object is concerned, if it were conceivable independently
of prehension-always that prehension-whose " how" is to be determined,
it would confer upon eternal objects a power of explanation that would
relegate the concrete fact, the event that determines itself to be this event
and no other, to the rea lm of appearances. We would then fal l into what
Whitehead defines as the paradigmatic philosophical error: trying to ex
plain a particular fact on the basis of universals.
  Philosophy is explanatory of abstraction, and not of concreteness
(PR, 2 0 ) .
   It remains to b e seen how these two registers, with rega rd t o which the
event is to be understood, are a rticulated, that is, the mode of unified
grasp tha t is real ized on the occasion of each individua l ization, and the
contribution of each individual to other individualizations.
   The answer to this question would have been the " solution," the crown
ing achievement of the construction of the concepts that gives its intelli
gi bility to the order of nature. But the actual Whiteheadian solution, the
one Whitehead was to propose in Process and Reality, is not the answer
to this q uestion . For in Process and Reality, the event wi l l simply have
d isappeared, or, more exactly, will have lost its primordial conceptual
status . Here, then, we have reached the critica l point, the point at which,
for Whitehead, there occu rred what I have called an " adj unction," and
we a re also at the threshold of an adventure which, in a pproxi mately
1 9 0   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   NATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




four years, would ma ke him the most unique speculative thinker of the
twentieth century. We are in April 1 925.
   We do not know what path Whitehead followed; no doubt he followed
severa l simultaneously. What we do know, from the notes ta ken in his
classes by one of his auditors, Wi lliam Ernest Hocking, is that on April 7
he announced that he was in a " state of confusion." In front of students,
who were no doubt somewhat confused also, he affirmed that science
today needs an "atomic" theory of time. While he was at it, he affirmed
the need for questioning a fea ture he had previously associated in a stable
way with the event, that is, the relation of inclusion . We must, he insists,
distinguish between inclusion, or the extension of events including other
events, and tempora li ty, which is associated with the " d i rection of time."
Whitehead then refers to Hegel : extension is an a bstraction that demands
that one go beyond it. A fourth and fifth point follow, which directly associ
ate the question of the event with two new themes that will become vital in
Process and Reality: the " potential" and " becoming."
  4. The temporalization of extension, via realization of the potential.
The individualization of each event [is brought) into a peculiar together
ness. The future, qua relevant to reality, is merely for something which is
real. A n event as present is real for itself. It is this becoming real which is
temporalization.
  5. But here we bump up against the atomic view of things, also their
subjective view. The subjective view has got to be expressed within the
objective view. It is there-the psychological field. You have got to ex
press the subject as one element in the universe [as there is) nothing apart
from that universe ( EWM, 2 8 1 -2 8 2 ) .
   The " confusion " Whitehead displays thus h a s as one o f its ingredients
a vi brant connection between " atomism " and " subjective vision," where
the latter designates the " private psychologica l field " of which Wi lliam
James is, for Whitehead, the privi leged witness. Yet although Whitehead
thought of himself as James's successor, it is here that the answer to the
question " how to succeed ? " is being played out. For the "subject" is now
that element of the universe on the basis of which we ca n a sk the ques
tion " what is an element of the universe ? " That to which we are obliged
by " subjective vision " must therefore be ta ken fully into account. Tempo
ralization is not the unfolding in the course of time of rea l elements as a
function of real elements, it is " rea l becomi ng," and as such requires that
the uni verse also be characterized as " potentiality."
   On Apri l 4, Whitehead had already pointed out the following new
theme, a mong other considerations:
  Potentiality is so called in contrast to actuality. But a contrast implies a
positive element ( EWM, 2 8 0 ) .
                          T H E   E V E N T   FR O M   ITS   OWN   S TA N D P O I N T ?   1 9 1




   I have presented two paths leading to what happened to Whitehead at
the beginning of this month of April 1 925, and there is no way or reason
to choose between these two paths. Whitehead's question may have been
both to conceptua l ize the event and to construe the fact that there is no
psychology without " disquiet," without " hesita tion," without the sense
that the future hesitates in the present. A future that this gesture, this word,
this detachment engage in a way that may be stil l indeterminate, but from
which there is no possible turning back . If del iberation and the hesitation
deployed in ca lculations belong to the workings of consciousness, the pos
sibility of hesitation must, for its pa rt, belong to the " psychological field,"
that is, to the " bodily event," the only even t of which we have experience
" from its own standpoint." With regard to what is required by this possi
bility, the contrast between potential and actua lity, it must be affirmed in a
generic way; otherwise, we would ourselves ultimately be authors of what
we experience when we do not limit ourselves to recognizing Cleopatra's
Needle over and over again. We alone would be responsible for our anguish,
our doubt, and our decisions in a world of " professional " values. And nature
would i mmediately bifurcate, for "trust" would be "purely subjective," an
agitation causing a ripple in the veil of ignorance.
   In order for the philosophy of the orga nism to construe the way the
universe responds to " trust," what is rea l ized must make an i rred ucible
difference. An i rreducible meaning must be given to a " fact" as tha t
which might not ha ve been: that is, also, to what has not been as wel l as
to what might have been. Yet the extensi ve tissue of the events incl uded
in one another implies that every event is a grasping of other events, and
is grasped by other events. It affirms solidarity, but this solidarity risks
ma king i mpossible what Whitehead will never cease, from now on, to de
mand for all that exists : elbow room for sel f-determination.
   At first, Whitehea d may have thought that etern a l objects, whose
ingression ma kes the d ifference between the determination of a stand
point and a standpoint as emergence or reflection, would suffice to affirm
the primordial character of the fact that a grasp has ta ken place in this
way and in no other, to deprive the contin uous tissue of its power of ex
planation. Yet how was he to a rticulate ingression with the interwoven
continuities ? In any case, in April 1 925, Whitehea d carried out a choice,
or had one ca rried out upon him. A decisive power that traversed White
hea d, and turned him into a " semi-divine being," or, more h umbly, " a
speculative philosopher." A n adjunction w a s necessary: the atomic char
acter of duration must be a ffirmed, against the i dea of a tempora l flux
indefinitely divisible down to the fiction of an insta nt without thickness .
   Here, thinking with Whitehea d becomes difficult, for one is tempted to
hurry, and to measure all the consequences of the addition. Yet Whitehead
1 9 2   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




was to proceed i n a completely di fferent way. I n Science and the Modern
 World, he limited hi mself to adding two cha pters and a few i nsertions,
so that, he may have hoped, what had j ust ha ppened to him might pass
almost unnoticed . I n all probability, he put off for the future the task of
exploring (one reca lls the " condensation " Deleuze adapted from Peguy )
some of the consequences of what he had j ust decided . The reader is thus
i n a state of tension: whoever knows what is coming can say " it was al
ready there " ; whoever does not, stops where Whitehead himsel f stops,
that is, at the construction of an articulation between the continuous and
the discrete, at the risk of getti ng lost, as I myself did. My choice is not to
hurry, and even to slow down the pace, so as to learn, with Whitehead,
to what one is committed by a conceptual adventure that accepts being
obligated by its own concepts.
    So fa r, I have emphasized the urgency of a thought of the event, and its
connecti on with the question of experience, the only testimony we have
to an event " from i ts own standpoint" (SMW, 1 50 ) . Yet it was in no such
terms that Whitehead introd uced his "adjunction." It a ppeared in the
form of a few paragraphs, added rather a bruptly to the end of the chap
ter devoted to the physica l theory of relativity. It was thus in connection
with the theory of space-ti me as an extensive continuum that Whitehead
chose to a ffirm for the first time the " atom ic" character of duration,
made up of "atoms," or of " epochs," which a re themselves indivisible.
   Whitehead's choice implies that the construction of concepts has no
privi leged locus. It can sta rt up on the occasion of any question, as long
as the philosopher knows to what obligations it responds. In the present
case, if real ization is to be conceived as the rea lization of a potentiality,
rather than as rea lity in the course of becoming, it cannot be conceived in
terms of continuous space and ti me. It is not enough to say that a rea liza
tion " takes time," or that it " ta kes its time," as if it could be observed and
cha racterized " from outside," with regard to a common continuous time.
The terms of the problem must be reversed . If rea l ization is primary, i f it
cannot be expla i ned but " explains itself," then a l l the notions that enable
us to explain something in terms of something else must be abandoned,
as far as it is concerned . And among them is i ncluded henceforth, first
and foremost, the notion of continui ty.
   Whitehead had a l ready emphasized that the spatio-temporal coordi
nates to which physics attri butes a determining role require the endur
ance of bodies, both those that locate and those that are located . Yet the
point is no longer to think of the order of nature and its relation to en
durance, but to think of rea lization, which is presupposed by a l l end ur
ance but is neutra l with rega rd to it. The concept of rea l ization must
                            T H E   E V E N T   F R O M   ITS   OWN   S TA N D P O I N T ?   1 9 ]




designa te what occurs for and by itsel f. Actua l ity is therefore not situated
" in time " : it situates itself, that is, it prod uces its situation. In short, it is
"epoch-ma king," in the sense in which we use this expression when we
designate an event qua creator of the possibilities of questioning and de
scri bing it.
   In realisation the potentiality becomes actuality. But the potential pat
tern requires a duration [sc. to become actuality]; and the duration must
be exhibited as an epochal whole, by the realisation of the pattern [ . . . I
Temporalisation is realisation. Temporalisation is not another continu
ous process. It is an atomic succession. Thus time is atomic (i.e., epochal),
though what is temporalised is divisible ( SMW, 1 2 6 ) .
    A t this stage, the reader might b e tempted to try to imagine this
"atomic time," and perhaps more successfully than I have been able to.
In any case, this is no intuition of ti me-quite the contra ry. The i mpossi
bil ity of appeal ing to intuition with rega rd to an atomic time goes with
out saying, since we run into the " specious," constructed character of the
intuition of continuity, as analyzed by Wi lliam James. Whitehead 's thesis
does not have the voca tion of leading us to an a uthentic relationship to
lived time, but, here as always, of resisting the power of a bstraction. It is
therefore by using it to measure the power of the abstractions a uthorized
by continuous time, and not by trying to inhabit it for itsel f, that we will
explore the interest of this thesis.
    In this case, as the site of the first insertion indicates, the thesis of atomic
ti me a l lows us to construe the mea ning of what Whi tehead a l ready a f
fi rmed in The Concept of Nature, that na ture knows no such thing as an
instant without thickness. Yet it also enables us to measure i ts i mpact.
    In The Concept of Nature, Whitehead spoke of nature as what we a re
awa re of in perception . He was thus free to associate an instanta neous
quantity with an idealization, and with the path of approxima tion that
carries out this idea lization. The q uestion raised by Science and the Mod
ern World is that of the order of nature, and the confrontation is no longer
merely with the measure of a quantity but with the order attributed to
nature by physico-ma thematica l laws. In this case, the notions that refer
to nature "in an insta nt," particularly those of position, velocity, and ac
celera tion, are no longer derived from what we a re aware of, and can
therefore no longer be defined a s ideal izations . They a re required by the
equations that make motion a function of space and time, whether they
are those of classical dynamics-motion as described by Galileo, Lagrange,
or Hamilton-or those of relativity. The instant without thickness is thus
an integral, and even centra l part of the functional order presupposed
and described by mathematica l physics.
1 9 4   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




    The situation of the first i nsertion, testifying to the atomicity of time,
thus reflects the fact that Whitehead fina lly has the means to specify in
what sense physical laws, and, more genera lly, the extensive continuum,
are indeed an a bstraction. He can finally identi fy, in a positive way, the
sense in which the concrete character conferred upon the notion of loca l
iza tion, i mplying the point and the instant, was misplaced . When this
loca lization is relevant, it does not reflect the fact that the physicist may,
unlike the chemist or the biologist, get " to the bottom of thi ngs," exhi bit
ing nature's exact submission to spatio-temporal laws. What is exhibited
by the a bstraction of loca lization, where such a bstraction is releva nt, is
the possibility of doing without the "atomic " cha racter of real ization. The
notion of function, which is at the center of so-ca lled modern physics, is
thus by no means synonymous with supreme intelligibility. It is recog
nized and saluted as a j udicious approxi mation, an approximation whose
l imits are no doubt pointed out by q uantum mecha nics.
    I sha l l linger a bit over this relation to mathematica l physics, because
for me it designates one of the ways of expressing the importance of
Whitehead 's thought. The conceptua l construction engaged in April 1 925
may indeed be presented as the first philosophica l proposition a llowing
both the celebration of the exploit constituted by " mathematization,"
that is, functiona l ization, that physics since Ga l i leo has ca rried out, and
the liberation of thought from the temptation to a ttribute a meta physical
significance to this exploit. The Gali lean body in motion, endowed with
an initial velocity and subject at each i nstant to gravitation, can indeed
be descri bed by a function, which defi nes i ts accelera tion, that is, in
Whitehea dian terms, its way of " taking account" of the earth's presence
at each instant. And the history of dynamics, for its part, exhibits the
multiple ways in which this ta king-in to-account may be represented . Far
from being the simple description of a motion, a trajectory is a physico
mathematical entity whose definition depends on the choice of varia bles
of which this trajectory wi l l be a function. With general relativity, the
earth's presence no longer makes a difference for an a rrow's trajectory
in terms of " force," or even of "gravitational potential," but through the
structure of space-time itself. Of course, with Whitehead's alternative the
ory, space-times become multiple: the enduring body is no longer plunged
within a structured space-time. Instead, the differentiation of space and
time is one aspect of an enduring pattern. Nevertheless, all these theories
share the same abstraction. In Newtonian physics, the function describes,
at each instant, how a body's acceleration continuously composes, or
" unifies," the tota lity of what Wh i tehead would call the external rela
tions releva nt to this body's behavior. And i f the theory proposed by
                          T H E   EVENT   F R O M   ITS   OWN   STA N D P O I N T ?   1 9 5




Whitehead could have been fully developed, its success would also have
been to explica te the differentiation of space and time under the banner
of continuity, governed by a function . It would not have authorized a
positive contrast between the potential and the actua l, any more than the
functionalization of motion from Gali leo to Einstein.
    In physics, however, it wil l be objected, functions and the equations that
articulate them correspond to a form of potentia l . Rea l motion is there
fore defined aga inst the background of the possible. Moreover, doesn't
the significance of the invention of the " field " in physics consist of the fact
that it places potential at the center of the description ? Of course, but this
potentia l confers no meaning upon hesitation, provides no locus for the
possibility that what is real ized in this way could have been real ized oth
erwise. More precisely, a motion could have occurred otherwise, of course,
but only if the initial conditions of the traj ectory had been different. And
this, it should be noted, is stil l the case in contemporary theories of " dy
na mic chaos," insofar as these theories feature a " sensitivity to i nitia l
conditions " : if the actual state of a chaotic system were determined with
an infinite degree of precision, the solution of the equations would unfold
the actual behavior of that system, insta nt by instant. Readers familiar
with the subject will not fai l to obj ect that this is not the case in qua ntum
field theory, but they will have to admit that in this case it is the notion of
actuality that becomes indetermina te, or attached to the act of detection.
   The strength, and also the l imit, of the notion of function consist in the
fact that it features a behavior qua unification, the a rticulation of distinct
functional varia bles, but without ma king unification a " real " problem.
More precisely, the problem only arises for the physicist, who must rise
back up from observa ble behavior to the function, or must integrate the
functiona l equa tions to deduce the observa ble behavior. The state of
a ffai rs to which the function corresponds, for its part, is defined not in
terms of problems, but of solutions. The function, one might say, trans
forms the behavior it describes i nto a continuous succession of instanta
neous solutions to the problem it enunciates once and for all. As long as
this function enables us to ta ke the pattern as given, that is, without func
tiona lization, it matters little whether it brings into play relations that are
external ( the earth's presence is responsible for . . . ) or internal; no possi
ble meaning can be given to tempora l ization, to the positive contrast be
tween potentiality and actuality.
   Since Leibniz, the notion of function has presided over the symbiosis
between mathematics and the order of nature, and it is this symbiosis that
Whitehead is now interrupting, or, more precisely, restricting to the cases
in which it is in fact releva nt. There is no doubt that Whitehead knew that
1 9 6   FROM   T H E   PH I LOSO P H Y   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




there must, in one way or another, be a break with such a symbiosis. One
may imagine, however, that he did not know how to carry out this break,
how to specify in what sense the functional physico-mathematical order is
abstract, and what it does without. And this difficulty was intensified, or
exhibited, by an ambiguity. Until April 1 925, the two decisive terms repre
sented by pattern and rea lization designated both a process and its end
result, the event that realizes, and what it realizes. They could thus give the
impression that process and product may be confused, which is precisely
what is proposed by functions, as a continuous rea l ization .
    The character of an " epoc h " or a " pa use" must be conferred upon the
" duration of an event," its " specious present." Such is the meaning of the
insertion Whitehead added to his considerations on the theory of relativ
ity. The ambiguity has now been ra ised, and the brea k with the func
tiona l physico-mathematica l order has been consummated .
    It is worth specifying the way Whitehead introduces his "atomic theory
of time " into this insertion. He introduces it in the same mode in Process
and Reality, as an answer to the sa me q uestion. It is as if this question,
that is, the question of the i mpossibility of motion, as demonstrated by
Zeno, were for him attached inseparably to the event of this enunciation.
    Let us take the movement of an arrow, for insta nce, but forget the laws
of dyna mics: we are among the Greeks. For Zeno, the a rrow should
never reach i ts target, beca use traversing the dista nce to this target im
pl ies successively tra versing an infinite number of sub-distances, those
that are obtained by dividing the tota l distance into two, then the first
half into two, then the first q ua rter into two, then . . .
    Since the invention of the mathematics of infinite series, the technique
of " dichotomous " ( i nto two) division has beca me a pedagogical intro
d uction to the idea that the sum of the terms of an infinite series may be
equa l to a finite number: '12 + 1 /4 + I /x + ' / 1 1; + . . . 1 . For mathematicia ns,
                                                               =



" Zeno's pa radox " finds a satisfying sol ution with the notion of infinite
series, since the contradiction between finite and infinite is resolved . The
para dox is thus evoked to make this a rticulation between finite and in
fin ite interesting, to ma ke the contra diction vi bra te before it is solved .
Nevertheless, there is something bothersome, or insufficient, in this situa
tion: it gives the role of a solution to something Zeno knew perfectly well,
for he knew that the distance he broke down into an infinite series of di
chotomous divisions was finite. In other words, the novelty of infinite
series in mathema tics is undeniable, but it concerns the new problems it
a llows to be ra ised, not the eli mination of the original pa radox, which
dealt with the articulation between physical motion and divisibil ity in
the mathematical sense. The paradox can therefore be considered as
sol ved only by those who accept that the conti nuum, in the mathematical
                           T H E   E V E N T   F R O M   ITS   OWN   S TA N D P O I N T ?   1 9 7




sense of what is infinitely divisible, is appropriate to the concrete motion
of the arrow. It is therefore not surprising that Bergson saw both in the
paradox and its alleged solution the illusion of a " spatialized " motion,
divisible in the same sense as the distance traversed .
  Like Bergson, Whitehead refuses the (dis)solution of the paradox, but
for him Zeno's paradox obliges us to conceive, not the continuity of a
concrete motion, but the question of continuity itself.
  [ . . . ] Zeno understated his argument. He should have urged it against
the current notion of time in itself, and not against motion, which in
volves relations between time and space. For, what becomes has duration.
But no duration can become until a smaller duration (part of the former)
has antecedently come into being ( SMW, 1 2 7 ) .
   If the process o f real ization were t o share the d ivisibility o f what is con
tinuously extensive, it could no more take p lace than the arrow's motion
could, according to Zeno, enable it to traverse any distance whatsoever.
One could always descri be any duration as including shorter d urations, or
any real ization as including a series of disti nct realizations, or aga in, any
adoption of a position as incl uding a series of successive positions. And
one would finally arrive at a continuous series that prohibits what is being
realized from being said to be "epoch making," producing a present that
"adopts a position," irreversibly, with regard to the future. No adoption
of a position would finish happening, unfolding in expectations and sub
expectations, and the sole actuality would then be the continuity, indefi
nitely divisible, of change that the function in fact descri bes. Whitehead
repeats this in Process and Reality:
   The extensive continuity of the physical universe has usually been con
strued to mean that there is a continuity of becoming. But if we admit
that "something becomes," it is easy, by employing Zeno's method, to
prove that there can be no continuity of becoming. There is a becoming
of continuity, but no continuity of becoming. The actual occasions are
the creatures which become, and they constitute a continuously extensive
world. In other words, extensiveness becomes, but "becoming " is not it
self extensive. Thus the ultimate metaphysical truth is atomism ( PR, 3 5 ) .
   The two registers o n which the event had t o be expressed-individual
and community, unification " for itself" and " for each of the others "-are
thus relegated to two d isj unct questions: that of what becomes, and that
of the continuity that is brought into existence (constituted ) by becomings
that are themselves "atomic." In other words, that which in 1 927 presented
itself as an adj unction, inducing the addition of two chapters and some
insertions, has become, by 1 929, an ultimate metaphysical truth, forcing
what had seemed to be acquired to be gone over again. It is no longer the
order of nature but becomi ng, and it is no longer the organism but the
1 9 8   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




"actual occasion," that oblige us to think. But we have not reached this
point yet.
   In Science and the Modern World, Whitehead thus l imits himsel f to
making insertions, as if he were merely contributing a few speci fications
that might have gone without saying or that might follow from the doc
trine he had set forth previously. His second insertion, expl icitly introduc
ing the atomicity of time, appears in the chapter devoted to quantum
theory. In the course of this chapter, Whitehead had shown that the endur
ance of the structure with which physicists associate the atom must no
doubt be said to be the reiteration of an elementary pattern understood
as a " v ibration," that is, an undivided succession of contrasts. He can now
insert/conclude that corpuscular, or primate organization indeed requires
the atomicity of time, as he had announced to his students in Apri l :
   Thus realisation proceeds via a succession of epochal durations [ . . . ]
one complete period defines the duration required for the complete pat
tern. Thus the primate is realised atomically in a succession durations
[ . . . I This vibration [which constitutes the primate] is not to be thought
of as the becoming of reality; it is what the primate is in one of its discon
tinuous realisations (SMW, 1 35-1 3 6 ) .
   However, is what is appropriate for a vibratory organism also appro
priate for a living organism ? In fact, Whitehead has not proceeded to
any insertion here, and we can understand why. It is hard to move from
atomic duration to the endurance of entangled patterns implying what
we ca ll " whole " and " parts." One consequence is clear, however: both the
orga nism and the order of nature that the orga nism was to enable us
to think, because they lend themselves to explanation and inspire us to
think of a continuity of becoming, may henceforth be conceived as giving
a partial and biased explanation of themselves. What was " value" hence
forth affirms unilaterally, as its cond ition, the stable elimi nation of diver
gent possibil ities.
   The limits of the notion of organism are in fact similar to those of the
notion of function: both define a being not " for itsel f," but insofar as it
endures. What varies from science to science is the " i nsofar as." A biologi
cal function cannot be assimilated to a physico-mathematical function.
It is not defined in terms of varia bles, but rather in terms of va rieties that
result from sorting operations, thresholds, and d iscriminations, in short,
judgments. Thus, the definition of a sense organ constitutes a j udgment
with regard to what the organ defines as " sensible." This, moreover, is
what constitutes its " value," the risky success that makes it an organ. Even
if Rene Thorn had succeeded in what he defined as his great work, exhib
iting the mode of mathematization adequate to living beings, a mod e that
                          T H E   E V E N T   F R O M   I T S   OWN   S TA N D P O I N T ?   1 9 9




would organize biology as spatio-temporal functions have organized the
way physicists address what is cal led physica l rea l ity, he would not, by
so doing, have "explai ned " living beings in the way physico-mathematical
functions seem to be able to explain physical behaviors. He would sim
ply have rendered explicit the values that the living being carries out qua
orgamsm.
   For some animals, of course, sorti ng processes, thresholds, and dis
criminations appear as "specific," and we do i ndeed have a tendency to
speak of the members of these species as automata . Yet this does not mean
that these animals ca n be defi ned as " sticking " to the definition of the or
ganism, merely that this definition suffices for the relations we have with
them. With others, however, we maintain relations that exhibit and imply
what is generally cal led " learning." The functional identity of an ant seems
to define it relevantly, but rats can learn, and accept taming. And how
could one fai l to celebrate the achievement attested by this kind of learn
ing, including the possibil ity of domestication that is correlative to it,
when we humans ourselves, independently of our " domus," are merely
fai led mammals? We thus return to Whitehead's trust in the possibil ities
of education. This term also designates a " function," except that this func
tion cannot be approached qua enduring pattern, but only as the " becom
ing of a continuity." " Becomi ng conscious " is a functional ization of what
was never an enduring pattern, as is required by the possibility of educa
tion, and as is attested by novels.
   Endurance is the key term for the philosophy of the organism. It allowed
Whitehead to hope for a coherent conception of the order of nature, en
abling in particular the designation of the "misplaced concreteness " that
" material ism " has conferred upon physical abstraction. Yet Pandora's box
has now been opened, for with the atomicity of time it is henceforth the
specious present that becomes the prototype of "what is realizing itself." In
Process and Reality, moreover, it is right in the midst of the discussion of
Zeno's paradox that Wil liam James makes his appearance.
   The authority of William James can be quoted in support of this con
clusion [ the epochal theory of time] . He writes: "Either your experience is
of no content, of no change, or else it is of a perceptible amount of con
tent or change. Your acquaintance with reality literally grows by buds or
drops of perception. Intellectually and on reflection, you can divide these
into components, but as immediately given, they come totally or not at
all" ( PR, 6 8 ) .
   A new idea burgeons, lived continuity i s prolonged, but drop b y drop.
In Process and Reality, the quotation from James allows atom ic duration
to be associated wi th an " act of experience," that is, it also enables the
2 0 0   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




genera lization of the notion of an act of experience to all that exists. We
have not reached that point yet. However, we have reached the disjunction
between what realization obliges us to think and what endurance a llows
us to define. This disjunction will relegate the description of organisms to
the status of particular, special investigations. The " actual occasion " that
is real ized with a proper duration of an atomic nature belongs, for its
pa rt, to metaphysics.
                                                         C H A P TER T H I RTEEN
