Entry i nto Metaphysics




          N THE PRESENT CHAPTER,
      I
                                        and in the immediately succeeding
        chapter, we will forget the peculiar problems of modern science, and
        will put ourselves at the standpoint of a dispassionate consideration
of the nature of things, antecedently to any special investigation into their
details. Such a standpoint is termed "metaphysical " ( SMW, 1 57).
    The way Whitehead introduces the chapter "Abstraction," the first of the
two chapters written after April 1 925, gives a good indication of the fact
that we have left behind the question of the order of nature, as modern sci
ence trusts it and designates its problem. Scientific investigations are al
ways particular in that, as mountain climbers envisage their wall from the
standpoint of the foothold it offers or fails to offer, their questions presup
pose, and reflect in case of success, specific modes of envisagement, associ
ated with the specific way i n which, on each occasion, "it has to work."
Success thus designates real ity by means of its enduring " relief," capable of
patience with regard to footholds, capable of repaying due attention. Now,
however, the subject is the " nature of things " in the most general sense,
that is, without reference to the question of the success or failure of such
and-such a particular mode of envisagement. The metaphysica l standpoint
may be said to be " dispassionate" in that its (passionate ) challenge will be
to construct concepts that will not favor or found any particular approach
but answer to what is required, both by the organism that endures and by
the one that comes undone, both by success and by betrayed trust, both by
electrons and by the person reading this sentence.
    Su bsequently, a nd particularly i n Modes of Thought, it is the term
" i mporta nce " that w i l l be used to express tha t in which an orga nism
2 0 2   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




succeeds, incl uding the success constituted by a mode of succession such
that each new occasion rea l izes the most inti mate conformity with the
past. The term " va l ue," for its part, will pertai n to metaphysics: a l l real
ization is value, the adoption of a position, thus and not otherwise.
   Importance and function are obviously linked: the function as we con
struct it, mathematica lly or by discursive reasoning, takes advantage of a
conformity maintained between the present and its past. It transforms
this conformity as a function of the present, and the future is then exhib
ited as the mere reproduction of the same in d i fferent circumstances.
Whether this function is physico-mathematical , biologica l ( the organ as
a wager on the importance of what affects it), or psychologica l ( the past
provid ing the present with its meanings) matters little. What counts is
that the function exhibits the accomplishment constituted by ma king the
present conti nuous with regard to the past.
   Here we must open a pa renthesis. Some have seen Whitehead's philoso
phy as a " panpsychism," a doctrine that attributes a " psychism" to all that
exists. This usua lly inspi res derision: so you think electrons "think like
we do "? Yet the importance, which I have emphasized, of the role played
for Whitehead by the type of psychology of which William James an
nounces the possibility might reinforce th is misunderstand ing. In a sense,
one might say that the specious present is the prototype of the actual oc
casion, which Whitehead is going to try to conceive as a metaphysician.
Yet this does not mean that Whitehead attributes a " psychology " to the
actua l occasion . If experience in the sense of William Ja mes could serve
as a prototype for the actua l occasion, it is beca use James's description
results from a del i berate project of " depsychologization " of experience in
the usual sense of conscious, intentional experience, authorizing a clear
distinction between the subject and its object. It is insofar as William James
rejected reflective consciousness and its p retensions to invariance, the
privilege of occupying center stage, that he rendered explicit what human
experience requires from metaphysics, and more speci fica lly what it de
mands that metaphysics resist.
   Conversely, it is perhaps psychology, among all the special, particular
investigations, that has the most vita l need of the resources that can be
contri buted by metaphysics in the sense that Whitehead defines it. In fact,
when Ja mes, fol lowed enthusiastica lly by Whitehead, ma kes conscious
ness a " function," prod ucing the specious continuity and the reflexive
sel f-expla nations that constitute us as subjects, continuous "authors " of
our multiple experiences, he knew that phi losophy was " a lso" necessa ry,
because the situa tions in which the possi bility may be experienced of dis
passionately exploring what reflexive consciousness passionately cla ims
                                           E NTRY   I NTO   M E TA P H Y S I C S   2 0 3




raise questions that the " serious," " professiona l " psychologist would re
ject as " philosophica l ." This is why I like to use the word " soul," which,
as the reader will have u nderstood , I by no means intend in a rel igious or
Kantian sense, as something invol ving the question of salvation or that of
d uty. It is with disqu iet or hesitation, with wandering, and even the pos
sibil ity of " l osing one's sou l " that I wou l d l i ke to associate this term.
Those are also the types of experience which, it seems to me , forced
Whitehead to conceive of rea l ity as real ization, on the basis of the con
trast between potentiality and actual ity.
    If the soul forces its question upon psychology, it is clearly not at all
because psychology, despite what its name indicates, has the soul as its
object. As " psychological," experience does not as such i mpose meta
physical questions, which are neutra l with regard to any special order. I t
pertains t o the order of nature, in t h e sense that it is an experience whose
point is to construct a shared knowledge, an experience that m ust there
fore be able to be " named," " described," " discussed," in short, qual ified,
qua psychological . Psychologists, like each of us when we analyze our
selves from a psychological standpoint, never cease fa bricating descrip
tions, interpretations, elucidations, in short, functions. The fact that these
are motives or intentions, rather than ca uses, is secondary: what is cru
cial is that the possibility of descri bing these motives and these intentions
presupposes their importance, in other words, obliges us to take an endur
ance for our axis of description. The " soul," in contrast, is not an object of
description as such. The singularity of psychology, which psychologists
can sometimes hardly bea r, impatiently or with nostalgia for the suc
cesses of their more fortunate scientific col leagues, is that having to deal
with the soul, it has to deal with that which can no longer allow the con
j ugation of endurance and success. A hard chal lenge, si nce it demands
that psychologists rid themselves of the appetite for what might, by its
endurance, be capable of being the " respondent" of its questions.
   I f an all usion to the " soul " may be vital for psychology, it is therefore
not in order to arrive at the truth of a properl y spiritual experience. It is
rather a question of practical " appetite," appetite for what this particular
science has to deal with. Here, meta physical investigation in Whitehead 's
sense is relevant because it accepts the quite particular interpretative
challenge of being neutral with regard to the possibil ities of footholds im
plied by enduring success. It may therefore suggest a form of humor with
regard to the success constituted by a foothold. And psychologists need
this humor, for the image of the mountain climber and her wall does not
work very wel l as far as they are concerned. One must i magine a tickl ish
wall, which offers or gives a foothold not, to be sure, as it wishes, but
2 0 4   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




nevertheless without it being possi ble for psychologists to attri bute their
success with certainty to the relevance of their q uestions. What is more,
this is a wal l that outmaneuvers the very meaning of "climbing," for it is
j ust as capable of submitting as it is of smothering the i nvestigator in its
embrace . Stop gritting your teeth in imitation of the mountain climber,
trying to define what you have to dea l with in terms that authorize you
to j udge it; instead, learn to commit yourself to becomings, even if, to do
so, you must resist all those who demand the possibil ity of judging. I f
metaphysica l neutrality could give psychologists the strength t o accept
what is suggested by their own experience, it will have answered the
most crying need of a science that pays a heavy p rice for its modern defi
nition, i ncl uding its duty to repudiate philosophy.
   The concepts articulated around the actual occasion thus have nothing
to do with a metaphysica l foundation of psychology, nor with a theory
of the soul, unless, of course, it is in the Leibnizian sense in which every
monad (every res vera, as Whitehead will say in Process and Reality) is a
" soul ." As intimately connected with a " dispassionate " (or generic) ap
proach, these concepts would be deficient, badly conceived , i f they could
serve to found one mode of experience against others, to guide one mode
of definition, to privilege one type of facts. Whatever the experience, defi
nition, and facts they highl ight, the point is to rediscover their possibility,
qua immersed within other possibilities of feeling, experiencing, and
thinking, in short, of becoming. In particular, metaphysica l concepts will
have to be neutra l with regard to the distri butions carried out by common
sense between what we know perfectly well and what we cannot believe:
they will have to constrain us to envisage everything that can be attested
by experience, and that can be cultivated in various ways, as a testimony
bearing upon "the nature of things." Experience is no longer " our" experi
ence but the concrete fact, which forces us to metaphysical creation.
   Of real ity as such, we recall that Whitehead , commenting on Berkeley
and the other speculati ve phi losophers whom Kant reduced to silence,
had affirmed that it is " process," and that we must understand the pro
cess in terms of an " underlying activity of prehension " and of " realised
prehensive events " (SMW, 70) . Whitehead seldom returns to his affirma
tions, but limits hi mself to proposing "elaborations" which, without con
tradicting them, sometimes completely replay their meaning. In this case,
it is clear that the underlying activity with rega rd to which there is ind i
vidual ization should henceforth refer to potentia lity, in contrast to which
there is real ization .
   It is right in the midst of the chapter devoted to the nineteenth century,
and to the notion of energy, whose conservation that century celebrated,
                                          E N TRY   I N TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S   2 0 5




that Whitehead chooses to go more deeply into the q uestion of the con
trast between what is " underlying" and what is real ized, or individual
ized; in other words, he chooses to replay the meaning of that contrast
with regard to the new contrast between potentiality and actuality. Whereas
the text was dealing with the articulation between energy defi ned scien
tifically, in a quantitative mode, and the theory of the organism, Wh ite
head inserts the three paragraphs that Lewis Ford called "of the triple
envisagement," to which I have already a l l uded . Suddenly, the subject of
discussion will be "energy " in the sense of "eternal underlying activity,"
of which each ind ividual ization is a real ization.
    One can speak of this energy, or this eterna l activity, only in a bstract
terms, Whitehead specifies i mmed iately, for one must abstract from actu
ality, or what emerges as a real state of affairs. Eternity must therefore be
understood as what is presupposed by real ization qua temporal ization.
In other words, Whitehead is not trying here to construct a complete
definition of actuality, but merely to construe the contrast between pos
sibil ity and actual ity in a way that turns what is possible into " that which
underlies," that is to say, in a way that defines it as an abstraction. What
this abstraction omits, what defines actuality in contrast to potentiality, is
none other than " value." As Whitehead will never cease repeating, only
actua lity has value.
    Unlike Whitehead, who acts as though what he writes is clear, I will try
to approach the strange, obscure, and important text that describes the
"triple envisagement" in the manner of a commitment to still-indeterminate
expectations and consequences, a kind of conceptual wager that presages
a style, rather than a finished conceptua l construction.
   The consideration of the general flux of events leads to this analysis into
an underlying eternal energy in whose nature there stands an envisagement
of the realm of all eternal objects. Such an envisagement is the ground of
the individualised thoughts which emerge as thought-aspects grasped within
the life-history of the subtler and more complex enduring patterns. Also in
the nature of the eternal activity there must stand an envisagement of all
values to be obtained by a real togetherness of eternal objects, as envisaged
in ideal situations. Such ideal situations, apart from any reality, are devoid
of intrinsic value, but are valuable as elements of purpose. The individual
ised prehension into individual events of aspects of these ideal situations
takes the form of individualised thoughts, and as such has intrinsic value.
Thus value arises because there is now a real togetherness of the ideal as
pects, as in thought, with the actual aspects, as in process of occurrence.
Accordingly no value is to be ascribed to the underlying activity as di
vorced from the matter-of-fact events of the real world (SMW, 1 05 ) .
2 0 6   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H YS I C S




   In the next paragraph, Whitehead, who claims to be summarizi ng,
specifies that there are therefore three types of envisagement: what are
envisaged are eternal objects, possibilities of value with regard to the syn
thesis of the eternal objects, and finally the actual matter of fact, " which
must enter into the total situation which is achievable by the addition of
the future." After this rather enigmatic characterization, Whitehead re
peats once again, as if to hammer home his point, that in abstraction from
actuality, that is, the realization of that envisaged matter of fact, eternal
activity is divorced from value.
   It can hardly be said that the way this " triple envisagement" works is
intelligible. Whitehead's writi ng is a work i n progress, precisely in the
midst of the activity of envisagement. It is already possible, however, to
think some particular poi nts of his elaboration along with him, as it is to
specify my wager of reading.
   Clearly, the eternal objects have become a crucia l metaphysical con
cept, the correlate of what Whitehea d calls " envi sagement," and they
annou nce themselves in three d isti nct modalities. The first type of envis
agement implicates " a l l " the eternal objects and their " realm," which
Whitehead also calls " kingdom " or " domain." In the second type of en
visagement, the eternal objects appear as united, together constituti ng
" ideal situations." And in the third, it is the " aspects " of these ideal situ
ations that are the object of an i ndi vidualized prehension, and as such
they participate i n individual events, described as the real togetherness of
ideal aspects with actual aspects. A rather enigmatic analogy is proposed:
on the one hand, between " the real togetherness of idea l aspects " and
thought, and on the other between the individualized prehension of as
pects of the ideal situations and individual ized thoughts.
   Of course, when confronted by this perspective, as gra ndiose as it is
obscure, the possi bil ity of philosophical comparisons rushes to the fore
front: with Spinoza's substance and its individual ized modes, of course, as
Whitehead emphasizes, but also with the Intellect of Plotinus, a rather good
candidate for an envisagement without an envisaging subject. Not to men
tion the obvious comparison with a Platonic " ki ngdom " of Ideas: a threat
ening comparison, since it would define a relation of sovereignty of eter
nal objects with regard to actuality. If Whitehead had put a final poi nt
upon his career as a philosopher after Science and the Modern World, the
need for such comparisons would no doubt impose itsel f, but it so hap
pens that the perspective in question was to disappea r in Process and Re
ality. I therefore choose not to treat the " underlying eternal activity " as a
culmination of Whitehead's thought, which would call for a meeting with
other thinkers, but as a moment in his path .
                                           E N TRY   I NTO   M E TA P H Y S I C S   2 0 7




   Let us begin with what is most simple. As I have already said, value is
henceforth no longer associated with the organism insofa r as it endures,
but with actualization as such . "Val ue," henceforth an i ntegra l part of
meta physics, is indifferent to " importance," which, for its part, will be as
sociated with every pattern that succeeds in enduring, and that may be
privileged, as such, by a specia l i nvestigation. On the other hand, value is
now l inked i nseparably to the notion of envisagement. Envisagement is
the precondition for there to be va lue, but there is no value independent
of the actual " purpose" that will conclude this envisagement " by the addi
tion of the future," i ndependent of the individualization of what will be,
in contrast to what might have been.
   The choice of the term " envisagement " is in itself significant i n this re
gard . In Process and Reality, it is the verb " to envisage " that will appear,
implying the question of " who" is envisaging. We have not reached that
point yet, and " envisagement" translates one aspect of a process without
a subject. But the explanation Whitehead will give for his choice of the
verb is a l ready relevant for his choice of the noun. As he expla ins ( PR,
33-34), to associate eterna l objects with a "vision," or, worse yet, with an
" intuition," suggests a contemplative activity, that is, one bereft of yearn
ing a fter concrete fact. Eternity is not an object of contemplation, beyond
the concrete: the concrete is the only value. Whitehead therefore chooses
the verb " to envisage " as " safer," for this verb suggests an activity desig
nating as its va lue the actua lity to be promoted with rega rd to various
possi bilities, and therefore designates possibil ities as " deficient," as bereft
of value independent of their rea lization.
   Whitehead thus rejects, rather explicitly, any contemplative ideal, such as
the one that, in the post-Platonic trad ition, made intellect, intelligence, and
inte l l igible coincide. The ingression of eternal objects has nothi ng to do
with a participation in a higher, sovereign reality. Instead, it is associated
with a term that evokes a busy, hesitant, perhaps conflictual activity which
all contemplative philosophies, or those which, in one way or another, es
tablish a convergence between salvation, certainty, and coincidence of self
with self, would characterize as the wanderings of a distended, disoriented
soul, deprived of what orients it toward its authentic destiny.
   Perhaps only Leibniz, another mathematician, has adopted a perspective
on experience similar to Whitehead's. In his Philosopher's Confession,
Lei bniz proposes, as the only genera l piece of advice he has to give, to
always ask the question "Dic eur hie " (say why here). The point is to " say,"
not to " know." Leibniz demands that when we have to define a "purpose,"
we not obey general reasons, a conformity indifferent to circumstances, a
blind norm, but that we submit such generalities to the test of the "hie." In
2 0 8   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O PH Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




this case, one may use the verb " to envisage." Leibniz asks that we accept
that the way we define a situation is " purposeful," and that we envisage this
purpose as related to the situation ta ken as a "case," that is, in a mode tha t
is as concrete and as explicitly situated in the here and now as possible.
    Lei bn izian envisagement is a piece of mora l advice: it translates wha t
is " best," since we ca nnot ded uce our choices from any divi ne impera ti ve.
We ha ve no access to the reasons that determined the d ivine choice of
this world as the best one, but we can integrate into our decisions the fact
that it is this world tha t God has chosen. This advice therefore mea ns
"exist for this worl d ." Without promises or guara ntees, it is " better" to
adopt a stance that a ffirms this world, tha t exposes itself to this world,
rather tha n to p rotect oneself by a bstract genera l izations, however noble
they may be.
    Whitehead is no Leibnizian: for him, envisagement tra nslates wha t
must be attributed to the underlying activity itself if actuality is to be val ue.
And this concerns every actuality. It is quite obviously conscious thought,
the experience of hesitation between abstract possibilities, that exhibits
and requires a positive contrast between potentia lity and actua lity, but, as
Whitehead specifies, every occasion, even the most tenuous, fugitive wrin
kle differentiating general energy, has a value qua individua lization of the
eterna l activity, that is, it constitutes an individual purpose.
   Just as envisagement, in the metaphysica l sense, confers no privilege
upon human envisaging experience, "eternal objects " cannot be invoked
to found any kind of privilege of those cognitive activities for which Plato
requi red the Ideas-to judge, to sort, to evaluate in terms of legitimacy, of
fa ithfulness, of resembla nce-nor to appeal to any kind of a dynamics of
elevation or conversion. And therefore, as we now turn towa rd "Abstrac
tion," the first of the two new chapters enti rely written by Whitehead after
April 1 925, we will have to bea r in mind that the eterna l object, or idea lity,
certa inly designa tes what " transcends" actuality, but that transcendence is
thereby stripped of any "eminent value," to which the things of this world
would owe their legitimacy, or of any desirability orienting souls towa rd
their salvation. Tra nscendence, as exhibited by the experience of knowl
edge, is nothing other than what is demanded by immanence, the concrete
fact, so that none of the questions experience asks us may be reduced , de
nied, or d isqualified . Here, Whitehead adopts the approach that will sys
tematica lly preva i l in the construction of concepts in Process and Reality:
all the aspects of our most singular, most routine experiences, must be a ble
to be described as exhibiting that which, from the meta physical sta nd
point, is presupposed by all actua l ization.
   In any occasion of cognition, that which is known is an actual occa
sion of experience, as diversified by reference to a realm of entities which
                                           E N TRY   I NTO   M E TA P H Y S I C S   2 0 9




transcend that immediate occasion in that they have analogous or differ
ent connections with other occasions of experience. For example, a defi
nite shade of red may, in the immediate occasion, be implicated with the
shape of sphericity in some definite way. But that shade of red, and that
spherical shape, exhibit themselves as transcending that occasion, in that
either of them has other relationships to other occasions ( SMW, 1 5 8 ) .
   I t i s thus o n the basis o f " cognitive occasions," that is, of the experi
ences that ma ke us speak, descri be, a nalyze, and reason about experience,
that eternal objects impose themselves, but the privilege of cognitive occa
sions is not metaphysica l. Eterna l objects are not required by knowledge;
above all, they are not synonymous with a " pure" intelligibility tha t finds
the opportunity to manifest itself i n changing rea lity. They are, of course,
required by wha t we are aware of in knowledge, but, unless knowledge is
to be reduced to a phantasmagoria, they must be i mplicated in every real
ization. Even when they intend to ignore it in favor of the reassuring em
pirical statement " that red patch there," description, analysis, or reason
ing irreducibly imply a transcendence, that is, a set of references that
exceed " this" red . I cannot say " red " without, at the same time, implying
that it might have been blue, that it is " something" that is red, that other
things may have the same shade of red, tha t this " same" red may, or
might, be the object of other experiences.
   As I ha ve already emphasized, a color is not, in itself, an eternal object.
It is the experience of color that testifies to the ingression of an eterna l
object. Whitehead will ca ll the type of eternal object whose ingression is
exhibited by sense experience a " sensum." For him, the sensa constitute a
pa rticular class of eternal objects, and this particularity is due to the fact
that sense experience, for i nsta nce that of color, does not necessa rily i mply
the relevance of anything else. Here we find once again the characteriza
tion of the " sense object" in The Concept of Nature: the i ngression of a
sensum does not imply that other eternal objects make i ngression accord
ing to other specified modes.
   As sensation, color makes no specific reference to the trees, the pond, or
the bushes over there; it belongs to the event of experience. And therefore,
once it has gone, it is gone, whereas the landsca pe lasts and end ures. Of
course, one must, like Shel ley, be a " poet of sensation " to celebrate shim
mering and twinkling, the play of shadows and lights, without at the same
time describing trees or a time of day, but in such a case, if the contrast
between what is a nd what might be cannot be genuinely "envisaged ," it is
not beca use it does not exist, but, quite the contrary, beca use it dominates
experience, like a fragi le miracle, without guarantee or explanation. For
Whitehead, red is then accompanied only by the sense of color as possi
ble: " this" red, di fferent from all the others.
1 1 0   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M ETAPH Y S I C S




   If, however, contemplating the yellow of a field of wheat, my experi
ence implies other yellows already seen, or the yellow of Van Gogh's
wheat fields, this experience exhibits the multiple relations that the eter
na l objects maintain with one another. The same holds true when it comes
to the grey of those clouds, the chalky shade of the rocks of that castle, in
short, colors that do indeed belong to the cloud over there, to that castle
up on the hill . Or again, to cite Whitehead's favorite example, the touch
of blue in that pa inti ng, necessa ry for the pa inting to be what it is, that
ma kes it specia l : a sensation once again, but a complex sensation, not
only insepa ra ble from the play of forms and colors, but with a risky com
position that signs " this" pa inting.
   Only the injunction of empiricist censors ca n lead us to violently ignore
the many propositions that are irreduci bly articulated with the perception
of this field, these clouds, or this castle. It is the unlimited character of this
" many " that gives its meaning to the " realm" of " a l l the eternal objects." In
The Concept of Nature, a discerned event was as though linked to other
events defined as discerni ble, with the discernible bei ng, a t the limit, the
whole of nature as it decla res itself in an experience. Here, " realm" means
that an eternal object wi l l not be able to make ingression without all the
eternal objects being thereby mobil ized in one way or another.
   How can one spea k, in a l l genera li ty, of an eternal object? Whitehead
tries out two principles:
   The first principle is that each eternal object is an individual which, in
its own peculiar fashion, is what it is. This particular individuality is the
individual essence of the object, and cannot be described otherwise than
as being itself. Thus the individual essence is merely the essence consid
ered in respect to its uniqueness. Further, the essence of an eternal object
is merely the eternal object considered as adding its own unique contri
bution to each actual occasion. This unique contribution is identical for
all such occasions in respect to the fact that the object in all modes of
ingression is just its identical self. But it varies from one occasion to an
other in respect to the differences of its modes of ingression. Thus the
metaphysical status of an eternal object is that of a possibility for an ac
tuality. Every actual occasion is defined as to its character by how these
possibilities are actualised for that occasion. Thus actualisation is a selec
tion among possibilities. More accurately, it is a selection issuing in a
gradation of possibilities in respect to their realisation in that occasion.
This conclusion brings us to the second metaphysical principle: An eter
nal object, considered as an abstract entity. cannot be divorced from its
reference to other eternal objects, and from its reference to actuality gen
erally (SMW, 1 5 9 ) .
                                                E NTRY   I NTO   M E TA P H Y S I C S   2 1 1




   The eterna l object " i s what it is." A strange definition, with highly sin
gular conseq uences. The first of these consequences is that it is impossi ble
to describe an eternal object, or even to ta l k a bout it, " for itself," that is,
without reference to something other than itsel f. One will not rise back
up from the color to the sensum accord ing to a principle of resemblance
or analogy, for the sensum would then be somethi ng other than " what it
is"; it would also be the a nalogue or the model for something other than
itself. And something would have ha ppened to it: with the appeara nce
of the sense orga ns, it would have acq uired the current means to confer
their finality on these organs. The eterna l object would explain, or be
explained by, the color-sensa tion. Li kewi se, the intel ligible object "circle"
would explain, or would explain itself in, the mathema tical intellect.
   It is important to emphasize that Whitehead will never change his mind
on this point: an eternal object cannot equip any j udgment, found any rea
soning, confer its power on any privilege communicating with any " pure"
experience. It is not the intelligible, nor is it even i ntelligible, for i ntel ligibil
ity refers to an actual experience. It neither guides nor orients. I f it can it
self be said to be " pure " or " transcendent," it is in the sense of being impas
sible, radically indifferent to its own ingressions, radica lly foreign to any
discrimination between the pure and the impure, and even to any proce
dure of purification. And all this for the simple reason that it would then
be something more than wha t it is, since it could be characterized on the
basis of some of its privileged cases of ingression.
  In the essence of each eternal object there stands an indeterminateness
which expresses its indifferent patience for any mode of ingression into
any actual occasion ( SMW, 1 7 1 ) .
   We now come to the question of the relation of one eternal object to
other eternal objects. In fact, in Science and the Modern World, the ques
tion is of its relation to all other eternal objects. Here we will reencounter
the question of envisagement, for what there is envisagement of is never an
eterna l object, but always the eterna l objects, and first of all the " rea lm" of
all the eternal objects.
   When Whitehead speaks of the rea lm of eternal objects, he is not ta lking
about a static and ordered totality. This realm designates the systematically
complete, uniform, nonselective relationality of each eternal object with all
the others. Whitehead devoted a great dea l of effort to an attempt to char
acterize this type of relationa lity, proper to eternal objects. He sought to
define this realm in a way that would make possible the a ffirmation that
the choice of a determinate mode of ingression of a particular eterna l ob
ject implies a determinate mode of ingression for the complete tota lity of
all eternal objects, which Whitehead calls an " ideal situation." Each ideal
2 1 2   FROM T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E   TO   M E TA P H YS I C S




situation corresponds to a " gradation of possibilities," or an abstract hier
archy whose summit is occupied by the selected eternal object. The grades
of entry of the others "can be expressed only as relevance of value" (SMW,
1 62 ) . I will not fol low him in these technical considerations, not only be
cause this is one of those attempts in which Whitehead runs the risk of ax i
omatic formulation, rather than those of metaphysics, but also because
what is at stake in this formulation, the abstract hierarchy that constitutes
each ideal situation, will, as we shall see, raise a major problem, which may
explain why this attempt was to be abandoned in Process and Reality.
What matters here is what was to be formalized : envisagement qua eternal
activity. The realm may be said to be eternal, in contrast to the temporal
ization represented by rea lization, because, like the eterna l objects them
selves, it is indi fferent to what requires it. Nothing happens to the realm as
such, which is eterna lly what it is, indifferently expressed by any of the
ideal situations associated with the "second envisagement."
   Each realization implies the selective actua lization (third envisage
ment) of a " possibility of va l ue" correspond ing to an idea l situation, clas
sifying all the eternal objects. Let us think of the experience: " you who
are looking at me, but perhaps without seeing me," and of the number of
propositions that can be articulated wi th such an experience, of the num
ber of purposeful determinations with regard to the past, of the number
of implications, of " a nds," of "ors," of "and yets," of " and therefores," or
of " and ifs " : potentially, we have here the material for a novel (albeit not
necessarily a good novel ) . The ideal situation generalizes, in the meta
physica l sense, the thread of a l l the questions that can be raised by an
experience henceforth placed under the banner of " presence," as is attested
by novelists or psychologists when they celebrate experience instead of
reducing it to triviality.
   Of course, the perceptual experience " this red table" is clearly not as
loquacious, but, as we have seen, it nevertheless conveys with it an indefi
nite number of possibilities: the possibility of touchi ng, of leaning, of put
ting down, of admiring or displaci ng, and in The Concept of Nature, the
"complete genera l fact " ulti mately comprised " a l l of nature as actually
discriminated or discerned " in a sensory experience. What was important
in The Concept of Nature was that everything we are aware of should
have a respondent in nature. Imagination expla ins nothing; it is what
must be rendered conceivable. The important point here is the character
ization of experience itself, qua realization: individual realization is not
the same thing as substantial independence ! (SMW, 70 ) . Here, Whitehead
seems very close to Lei bniz, for whom it is possi ble to say that the whole
world " conspi res " in every state of each monad .
                                          E N TRY   I NTO   M E TA P H Y S I C S   2 1 3




   As we have seen, the fact that all eternal objects enter i nto the ideal
situation does not mean that there is " equality" between these eternal
objects. On the contrary, each idea l situation corresponds to a determi
nate hierarchical ordering among the indefinite multiplicity of orderings
that the realm can tolerate j ust as wel l . Each occasion thus realizes what
has been actualized as a particular, differentiated mode of ingression for
each eterna l object. Moreover, the ordering constituted by each ideal sit
uation will not only classify the eternal objects according to their mode
of i ngression but also qua excluded . All eternal objects are incl uded, each
correspond i ng to its more or less relevant contri bution to the value of the
actual ity, but some are i ncluded qua excluded, qua " not- being " with re
gard to that occasion. An actual occasion thus presupposes a synthesis,
or a togetherness, of being and not-being.
   By ma king exclusion a mode of inclusion, Whitehead d istances h imself
from Leibniz, that is, from a perspectivism that ca n play only on the scale
of differences between clear and confused . He has provided the ideal situ
ation with the means to affirm itself as a " possibility of value," which
should enable realization to be not a standpoint on the world, but in
volved in a world, thus and not otherwise. Thus, the experience of the
" poet of sensation " exhibits an idea l situation such that the particularity
of the sensa, the fact that they do not necessarily imply the ingression of
other eternal objects, becomes a singularity: the eternal obj ects whose
positive incl usion would imply the perception of a colored landscape are
incl uded qua excl uded . Conversely, the insistence of the future reflects
the inclusion of eterna l objects in a mode that requires the passage to
other individual izations, in which what is not-being may become being.
All the questions that may be inspired by an experience, all the experi
ences that prolong and interpret an experience, or all the variations in in
terest exploring a felt contrast between the d iscerned and the d iscernible
attest to modifica tions of the ideal situation, one eternal object succeeding
another at the summit of the hiera rchy, or an eternal object defined as
excluded finding itself included . Each ideal situation thus defines in an
abstract mode both a world and a " standpoint on the world," but the real
ized, concrete standpoint is stripped of any analogy with vision, reflection,
or conspiration. The standpoint is " prehensive," taking and seizing as much
as it rejects and excludes. It is " for a world," not "of a world."
   We are not done yet, and I will now approach the question of envisage
ment in a way that will be somewhat peculiar. I ndeed , I wish to empha
size that there is something in envisagement of the audacious movement
by which a cat, in the midst of a free fall, twists itself a round to land on
its feet. Like this movement, the third type of envisagement cannot be
2 1 4   F R O M   T H E   P H I LOS O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M ETAP H YS I C S




described i ndependently of the threat it enables Whitehead to escape.
Even i f the cat succeeds in escaping injury, it stil l experienced a fa l l . In
other words, my approach will attempt to problematize the triple en vis
agement which constitutes, if one may say so, the " a bstract " face of indi
vidualization properly so ca lled. I will try to characterize this abstraction
as a risky moment in Whitehead's thought, a moment in which White
head may be undergoi ng the consequences of this abstraction more than
he creates them.
    In fact, the fol lowing question arises: with rega rd to what is the eter
nal underlying activity an a bstraction ? I have insisted on l imiting the
eternal objects to the " how" of prehension in order to combat any confu
sion between this " how" and the concrete fact, or the entity such as it has
actualized itself, thus and not otherwise. Yet it must be admitted that
Whitehead's text is sometimes less clear, that it is not quite categorica lly
opposed to the interpretation that would make actuality a simple passage
to reality of the ideal situation itself.
    It is perhaps here, in the importance I confer upon the risk to which
this interpretation exposes Whitehead's thought, that I feel most intensely
my debt to Gilles Deleuze. For every reader of Deleuze is, by definition,
attentive to the d ifference between " vi rtua l " and " potentia l ." The " poten
tia l " is " made to explain " the real, and therefore places the explanation
under the banner of resemblance or tracing. The " possi ble" in this sense
calls for a realization that is in the first i nstance a selection: as such, each
possible is wel l defined, and all it is missing is rea lity. Realization is there
fore the selection of the one that will be realized . Of the virtual, in con
trast, one must say that it is not actual ized without changing " in nature "
( ta king on a di fferent " mode of existence " ) , a thesis Deleuze took over
from Bergson. This i mplies, first of all, that it cannot be conceived in the
image of its actualization, and that the latter can be no means be assimi
lated to a simple selection.
    When he tries to concei ve of eternal objects as a bstracted from all ac
tuality, Whitehead is situated in the vicinity of the vi rtual : the " real m " of
the eterna l objects must be said to be a coexistence without hierarchy, an
indifference to the d isjunction "either/or," assembled without real together
ness, for all real togetherness i ndicates actua lity. When, however, he de
fines "actual ization " ( not to be confused with Deleuze's) as a selection
among possibilities ( SMW, 1 5 9 ) , Whitehead constructs the figure of an
envisagement that appea rs as self-sufficient, whose result does i ndeed
risk lacking nothing but rea lity, and which would have the power to ex
plain that reality. This is also ind icated by the notion of " possibility of
value " : it seems to be missing only rea lization in order to be " va l ue." In
other words, the aspect of " underlying eterna l activity " consti tuted by
                                          E NTRY   I N TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S   2 1 5




the triple envisagement seems to leave to rea lization only the somewhat
poor role of ratifying the selected possible.
    One might say, of course, that this difficulty designates the a bsence of a
theory of prehension, or taking into account. The problem is that the ideal
situation does not create the " yearning " for such a theory in the reader,
that it does not make its a bsence exist insistently, as that without which
idea l i ty would have no val ue. This is a serious objection, as is attested,
moreover, by the need Whitehead feels to repeat, as if to force his readers
to remember it, " no actua lity, no val ue." In fact, when the theory of pre
hensions arrives, when, in Process and Reality, Whitehead provides him
self with the means to go to the end of what this theory demands, the a b
straction constituted by an "eterna l underlying acti vity " will disappea r.
    It is not surprising that many contempora ry Whitehea d ians dream of
ridding Whitehead 's system of the eterna l objects, or else of conceiving the
possibility of ma king them emerge historical ly. As long as the distinction
between actualiza tion and rea lization in Deleuze's sense is not ra dica l,
that is, as long as Whiteheadian rea l ization can be interpreted as the mere
rea l ization of a predetermi ned possi b i l ity, the envisagement of eternal
objects risks red ucing the di fference between possibil ity of va l ue and
val ue to a ratification. And the question will become all the more crucial
when, in Process and Reality, God becomes an actua l being to whom the
envisagement of eternal objects perta ins. How can one prevent real ization
from being reduced to a mere choice between possible worlds that are
already idea l ly determined from the standpoint of divine envisagement ?
How can one fa i l to detect the old slight of hand that preva ils whenever
one claims to respect the freedom of others, while leaving them only the
freedom of choosing among solutions without participating in the con
struction of the problem?
    If the eternal objects do not bother me in Process and Reality quite      -



the contrary-it is, here once again, thanks to the distinction Deleuze pro
poses between virtual and potentia l . It is beca use this distinction ena bles
me to recognize the risk that it also al lows me to grasp, in what might
otherwise seem to be a thought in continuity, the extraordina ry, problem
atic mutation that was to surmount this risk. In a nutshell, or as a fore
taste, d i vine envisagement will ta ke its place at the very point where re
alization risked being understood as mere ratification. More precisely, it
will pa rticipate in the mode of existence that Deleuze, here fol lowing no
longer Bergson but the philosopher E tienne Souriau, confers upon the
vi rtua l : that of a problem to be sol ved or a work to be accomplished .
   I insist on this idea that as long as the work is in the workshop, the work
is in danger. At each moment, each one of the artists ' actions, or rather
from each of the artist's actions, it may live or die. The agile choreography
2 1 6   F R O M   T H E   P H I LOSO PH Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




of an improviser, noticing and resolving in the same instant the problems
raised for him by this hurried advance of the work; the anxiety of a fresco
painter knowing that no mistake will be reparable, and that everything
must be done within the hour left to him before the plaster dries; the
works of the composer or the writer at their table, with the time to medi
tate at leisure, to retouch, to redo [ . . . 1 it is nevertheless true that all must
ceaselessly answer, in a slow or rapid progression, the questions of the
sphinx guess, or you will be devoured . But it is the work that flourishes
        -



or disappears, it is it that progresses or is devoured (MEOF, 1 3 ) .
   The insistence of the problem does not implicitly contain the means
for its sol ution; the work's " idea " is not an ideal from which the artist
takes inspiration . It exists only through the risk it brings into existence,
by the fact that at every step artists know they are exposed to the risk of
betraya l, particularly when, through laziness, ease, impatience, or fear, they
believe they can decide on the path, instead of capturing, step by step, the
question posed to them at that step.
   Unli ke the mythica l Sphinx, the sphinx of E tienne Souriau does not
know the answer to the riddle. The " deficiency " of envisagement is then
no longer a lack, but designates the Deleuzian d ifference in nature be
tween the virtual and the potential, connoted by a risk and by a wait. A
risk has no determinate identity or stake before i t is actua l ly taken. A
wait is a wait for what wi l l answer, not for such-and-such an answer.
   I needed to present the risk to which, from my (committed ) point of
view, his concepts expose Whitehead, before turning to the elucidation
of the third envisagement, or the third aspect of eternal envisagement, for
this elucidation will be the " last word " of Science and the Modern World.
And I wish to understand this " last word " as a " twisting in extremis, " a
twisting which, as the reader wi l l have understood , is by no means suffi
cient to solve the difficulty associated with ideal envisagement, the fact
that it does not inspire the " yearning" for the concrete . It does, however,
reflect the fact that Whitehead has already discovered the need to resist
the slope down which his metaphysical construction was taking him.
   I have emphasized that the ideal situation prolongs the thesis of The
Concept of Nature, accord ing to which the " genera l complete fact" of
which we have experience is "all of nature." Yet what I did not emphasize
is the consequence of this kind of prolongation : you think you have pro
d uced a local standpoint, thus and not otherwise, but it is a world that
has been chosen. And it is this consequence that the third aspect of envis
agement will " pa rry," at the cost of a conceptual i nvention that testifies
by itself to what the concept of eternal underlying activity lacks: the
" yearning " for actuality, which alone is va lue. For in order to preserve
                                        E N TRY   I N TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S   2 1 7




this i ndividua l value, Whitehead will dare to introduce, in extremis in
deed, since nothing foretold it previously, a metaphysical " God ."
  Thanks to God, we may i ndeed say, between value such as it has mean
ing for experience and va lue such as it fol lows from the possibilities of
val ue that derive from the second type of envisagement, a mode of cha r
acterization will be avoided that would have relegated the first one to a
deficient approxi mation .
                                                         C H A P TER   F O U RTEEN
