The Great Refusal




       [
       .   . 1 .   EVERY ACTUAL OCCASION     is set within a realm of alter
native interconnected entities. This realm is disclosed by all the untrue
propositions which can be predicated significantly of that occasion. It is
the realm of alternative suggestions, whose foothold in actuality tran
scends each actual occasion. The real relevance of untrue propositions
for each actual occasion is disclosed by art, romance, and by criticism in
reference to ideals. It is the foundation of the metaphysical position
which I am maintaining that the understanding of actuality requires a
reference to ideality. The two realms are intrinsically inherent in the total
metaphysical situation. The truth that some proposition respecting an
actual occasion is untrue may express the vital truth as to the aesthetic
achievement. It expresses the "great refusal," which is its primary charac
teristic. A n event is decisive in proportion to the importance (for it) of its
untrue propositions (SMW, 1 5 8 ) .
   Specialists are beginning to learn how to characterize, a t the level o f the
recordings of cerebral activity, the qualitative difference between one and
the "same " performance, according to whether it is due to a routine activity
or to a mind that hesitates with regard to what it is to do. It should be pos
sible to characterize many other di fferences: one walks "as one breathes,"
but the mountain climber's foothold, an "aware" experience characterized
by due attention, exhibits a risk that is usually not consciously formulated:
won't what this foothold trusts give way, will the relief on which i t de
pends be patient to its exploi tation ? And one must also d i stinguish be
tween this mountai n cli mber's a rt, i mplying a tra ined body and concen
tra ted a ttention, and other risky practices, which, for their pan, imply
                                                   T H E   G R E AT   R E FU S A L   2 1 9




conscious hesi tation . Unli ke the mountain climber's risky exploit, " aes
thetic accomplishment" does not have as a stake the risk of " being wrong,"
of seeing the realization of what had been produced as " untrue "-it will
not give way. What is at stake is the very contrast between true and untrue:
each proposition produced as " true " vibrates with the " great refusal " of
everything that, inseparably, will have been produced as untrue. " Pure"
sensation, this red, vibrates with everything it does not include, that it is the
red of this hood, worn by this little girl, who is carrying a big basket and is
headed down there, toward the forest . . . The mountain climber risks faIl
ing, but the artist risks betrayal. It is insofar as aesthetic accomplishment
exhibits the way that the untrue is produced as well as the true that this
accomplishment exhibits actuality as value.
   However, from the dispassionate viewpoint of metaphysics, the fascinat
ing differences between routine, cl umsy hesitation, concentrated attention,
and aesthetic risk yield to the generic problem raised by all the propositions
that every realization will render "true " or " untrue." And this is where the
problem arises. The ideal situation corresponds to a complete envisagement
of the eternal objects and their relations, that is, j ust as much to the determi
nation of what is included as " being" as of what is excl uded as "not-being."
If one had to admit that true and untrue propositions realize the distinc
tion between " being " and " not-being," what aesthetic accomplishment
demands of metaphysics, the " great refusal " qua vita l truth of an accom
plishment would find only a rather ironic answer. This vital truth is noth
ing other than the truth of the ideal situation, a selective one indeed but
hardly a " refusal ."
   But there is another answer, which demands that we confer all its weight
upon a detail in the quotation where Whitehead affirms the great refusal as
a vital truth of aesthetic accomplishment. Here, he speaks of untrue propo
sitions that may be predicated significantly with regard to an occasion, of
the real relevance of these same untrue propositions, and of their impor
tance for the event. From the viewpoint of the ideal situation, the restric
tions i mplied by these terms have no meaning: a l l the consequences and
implications of actualization, as articulated by the ideal situation, are rele
vant, even if this relevance is graded. From the viewpoint of experience,
however, the meaning of these restrictions is decisive. Adam chose to ac
cept tAe apple offered by Eve and to disobey God, but he could not choose
the drama of the Redemption . We may decide on a world, but the fact that
we decide on a world does not correspond to any actual experience in any
of the practices in wh ich the question of aesthetic accomplishment arises.
   It is here, of course, that the contrast between limited human knowl
edge and the infinite, divine viewpoint is usually proposed . The radical
2 2 0   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




disj unction proposed by Leibniz between our experience, in which it is
 "as if" we decided, and the uni verse a s God has eval uated and chosen
it mobi lizes this contrast. We think we can name the reasons for our
choices, but these reasons a re only the result of a multitude of tiny per
ceptions, which, for their part, refer to the choice of God, to the universe
He has chosen, and not to " us." For Whitehead , however, this sol ution
constitutes a defeat for metaphysics. I nsofar as Leibnizian monads do
not al low the formulation of an actua l d i fference, belonging to the pres
ent, between what might be and what is realized, but merely reflect the
d ifference chosen by God, they imply, as Whitehead denounces, a serious
" incoherence." And in fact, what is denied in the na me of a metaphysical
system is what is presupposed by the very activity of thinkers, who must
think that what they enunciate is capable of creating a difference for
themsel ves and for others. However subtle Lei bniz may be, the surprisi ng
effects, vectors of peace and of l ucidity, to which his system is meant to
give rise, a re not included in this system.
    It is precisely this incoherency that Whitehead intends to reject when he
identifies value and actuality. If only actuality has value, it is val ue as our
experiences can manifest it, with the sense of novelty, of risk, of purpose,
all of which allude to what Whitehead calls "addition of the future," not a
va lue that would reduce our experience to a fiction or an ill usion--even if,
as Leibniz was careful to show, this ill usion were wel l constructed .
    To combat this threat, to confer an i rreducible character upon what is
demanded by the propositions rendered " untrue " by an aesthetic accom
plishment, their relevance, their significant character, Whitehead will have
recourse to God .
    The God of Science and the Modern World has nothing in common
with a God of religion, and particularly with the God of the Christians.
One of the very few anecdotes we preserve from Whitehead 's life, more
over, is a sketch played out in his fa mily, where he himself played the
part, not without irreverence, of God, who suddenly has a new idea to
invest a soccer ball with l i fe . He then comments on what happens with
his children ( the Son and the Holy Ghost, of course) , wonders whether
the idea was really all that good, decides to delegate his son to Redemp
tion, and so on. Everything concludes with a solid kick a pplied to the
unfortunate ba l l : the case of creation is truly hopeless. More seriously,
it is against the God of the metaphysicians that Whitehea d unleashes his
i rony and his sarcasm: aga inst the sad habit of addressing metaphysical
compliments to him ( SMW, 1 79), that is, constituting him as a " metaphysi
ca l reason," ma king him the supreme a uthor of the play, who ma y be re
sponsi ble for its success but also for its inadequacies. If Whitehead intro-
                                                   T H E   G R E AT   R E FU S A L   2 2 1




d uced God, it was indeed because the mode in which he needs what he
calls God to intervene escapes this hypothesis.
   In fact, God will only intervene at the end of the game, not as what
imposes itself in an eminent way but as what is required by what imposes
itsel f in an eminent way: the need to define a rea l d i fference between ac
tuality as value and the unlimited total i ty of the determinations and im
plications that correspond to the ideal situation . In short, God will be ex
plicitly required to characterize not envisagement in general but the third
type of envisagement as Whitehead has characterized it, writing in his
insertion of the triple envisagement a bout " the individualised prehension
into individual events of aspects of the ideal situation " ( SMW, 1 0 5 ) .
   S o far I have merely been considering a n actual occasion o n the side of
its full concreteness. It is this side of the occasion in virtue of which it is an
event in nature. But a natural event, in this sense of the term, is only an
abstraction from a complete actual occasion. A complete occasion includes
that which in cognitive experience takes the form of memory, anticipation,
imagination, and thought. These elements in an experient occasion are also
modes of inclusion of complex eternal objects in the synthetic prehension,
as elements in the emergent value. They differ from the concreteness of full
inclusion. In a sense this difference is inexplicable; for each mode of inclu
sion is of its own kind, not to be explained in terms of anything else. But
there is a common difference which discriminates these modes of conclu
sion from the full concrete ingression which has been discussed. This dif
ferentia is abruptness. By "abruptness " I mean that what is remembered,
or anticipated, or imagined, or thought, is exhausted by a finite complex
concept [ . . . 1 There is a limitation which breaks off the finite concept
from the higher grades of illimitable complexity (SMW, 1 70-1 7 1 ) .
   What h a s just been the object o f a "great refusal," in which the risk
proper to metaphysics vibrates, is the generalization of the thesis defended
in The Concept of Nature. There, event and incl usion were conceived
together. Not only was every event incl uded within other events, but it de
clared itself to be such in experience: to discern an event is also to have the
experience of the discernible, it is to have the experience of its meaning qua
included within other events that do not declare themselves otherwise than
qua signified . To state that the complete concrete fact is the totality of na
ture was to emphasize the way in which declared meanings and discerned
objects cannot, as language might ind uce us to think, be isolated from
what we are aware of as i mp l icit or discernible. It was thus to create the
contrast between concrete experience and the abstraction of the reasons,
takings-in to-account, and names in which we place our trust. This is the
sa me contrast Leibniz had proposed when he described the multitude of
2 2 2   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




indisti nct little perceptions that contribute to the roar of a wave, and a lso
the multitude of muffled thoughts that disquiet the thinker. For Leibniz,
this is a pedagogical example of the way the whole world conspires in any
experience, and it is also what Whitehead had accepted in The Concept of
Nature: if there is no reason to set limits to what the event declares in the
mode of the discernible, there is no limit to be set. Yet he has j ust con
cluded in extremis: what was not necessary for a phi losophy of nature is
necessary for metaphysics. Certain kinds of occasion exhibit, as their vital
truth, a limitation, a form of "abstraction " that must find its meaning in
the concept of " complete actual occasion." In fact, it is the occasion char
acterized as ful ly concrete that constitutes an abstraction, in the same way
as " nature." The " vital truth " of the great refusal indicates that the mind is
no longer "the ultimate," but that which obliges us to think.
   To understand an expl icit signification is a lso, of course, to experience
everything to which it a l l udes i mplicitly, and logicians must someti mes be
rem inded of this, as must those scientists who study the order of nature
and take adva ntage of the declared and stabi lized modes of prehension
that disclose the endurance of organisms. Yet it belongs to the metaphys
ics of the actua l occasion to let itself be obliged by " aesthetic accomplish
ment " in order to construct the deployed total ity req ui red by the value
of an occasion . This accomplishment exhibits an actual, decisive break
in the unli mited network of i mplications, an abrupt di fference that inter
venes in the midst of the unli mited totality of what discloses itself only as
signified. To put thi ngs in a grandiose way, the artist's gesture does not
concern the great breath of the world; rather, it is the world that holds its
breath as the artist begins her gesture.
   This breaking off from -an actual illimitability is what in any occasion
marks off that which is termed mental from that which belongs to the
physical event to which the mental functioning is referred [ . . . I the things
apprehended as mental are always subject to the condition that we come
to a stop when we attempt to explore ever higher grades of complexity in
their realised relationships. We always find that we have thought of just
this-whatever it may be-and of no more (SMW, 1 71 ) .
   Here, menta lity does not mean " subjecti vity," but it indicates how
Whitehead has undertaken to think of individual ization as a value. And
his solution is rather origina l . The di fference between a " physical " event,
an event qua " in nature," and the " mental functioning " that gives mean
ing to the complete actual occasion is none other than finitude. Qua
physica l, the event is on the side of the infinite, whereas the finite cha rac
ter of what is " j ust this a nd no more," as is required by the relevance of a
decision, corresponds to the menta l .
                                                  T H E   G R E AT   R E F U S A L   2 2 3




   The relevance of mathematica l physics thus depends on the possibility
of ignori ng the way the occasions obl ige us to conceive of a " break " :
"j ust this . . . and no more." Al though the spatio-temporal functions of
classica l physics say that one heavy body makes more d ifference for
another the closer it is to that other, they do not say that after a certain
distance it makes no difference, only that the di fference becomes more
and more negl igible. It is the physicist, not the body, who is supposed to
define what must be taken into account and what can be considered neg
ligi ble, ignored by approximation. Henceforth, however, mathematical
physics is no longer an adequate testi mony. Where its testimony is rele
vant, this relevance signifies that "what is termed mental " matters little,
makes no calculable di fference.
   As far as the way in which the living organism " holds" qua enduring is
concerned, it certainly exh i bits a selective character, as is ind icated by the
relevance of such technical terms as " detect," " react specifically to," " acti
vate," and so on . Yet it is a selection that endures: we have to do here with
what Whitehead henceforth calls " i ntermediate cases," which could be
described as forms of routine mentality, dominated by the reproduction of
a mode of foothold. In contrast, if one may spea k of a " history of mentali
ties," what becomes crucial is the way in which the di fference between
implicit and expl icit is defined on each occasion or in each epoch.
   "They should have realized that . . . . Since it was an implicit dimension
of the situation, why didn't they make it explicit? " All the scandal that the
professional mentality may inspire, as well as the very problem of what
may also be cal led the history of consciousness, consists in such questions.
Both the chal lenge of education and the career of the historian must
undergo their trial. Experienced teachers know the difference between the
student's first encounter with a new kind of mathematica l definition and
what that definition " says" to them. Historians know how pay due atten
tion to the difference between the questions they themselves, like each of
us, may ask the past, are inclined to ask the past, and those that were rel
evant for the people who lived in that past. More generally, the process of
" ma king explicit" may, of course, ind icate a risk of contingent misunder
standing and then appear as productive of exactness; it may reflect the
legitimate impatience inspired by the professional 's ruts. Yet it may also
be indiscreet or i ntrusive, giving rise to the embarrassment, anger, and
even violence of the person whose gestures, i mpl ications, and meanings
are being interpreted . Fina lly, it may a lso reflect a genuine innovation .
   A s the case may be, then, the implicit may b e what might just as well be
explicit, that whose rendering-explicit raises no other problem tha n that
of a "ca l l to order" that may be redundant or even malevolent, but it may
2 2 4   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




also be that whose rendering-explicit constitutes a form of intrusion, and
finally that whose "discovery " constitutes an event: "I had not realized
that . . . " When Einstein undertook to construct expl icitly the cond itions
in which we may spea k of simultaneity between two distinct events, it was
to create a problem no one before him had thought about. When sixteenth
century chemists undertook to make explicit the difference between them
and the alchemists, the creation was twofold . It concerned alchemy as well,
as they defined it in explicit contrast to chemistry, an alchemy that did not,
as such, exist prior to this operation. And for each student who encounters
a new mathematical being, the point is to learn to take into account a set
of d istinctions that by no means went without saying beforehand .
   In these cases, then, the contrast between the explicit and the implicit
should be assi milated to a genuine horizon. It is i n vain that Socrates acts
as though Meno's slave " a l ready knew " the irrationa l character associ
ated with the measurement of a square's diagonal : the concrete fact is
that the slave did not have the slightest idea of this fact. Socrates is well
aware of this but does not care, because it is i n fact to Meno that he
wanted to show his power while he forced the slave, step by step, to ad
mit everything his decla red knowledge was supposed to imply " i mpl ic
itly." This is why, after the last " You are right, Socrates," he coldly aban
dons his gui nea pig, who has not, for all that, become a mathematician.
If the slave had suddenly said "I understand ! " it was with him that
Socrates should have pursued the dialogue.
  I term this abrupt realisation the "graded envisagement " which each
occasion prehends into its synthesis. This graded envisagement is how the
actual includes what (in one sense) is not-being as a positive factor in its
own achievement. It is -the source of error, of truth, of art, of ethics, and
of religion. By it, fact is confronted by alternatives ( SMW, 1 76-1 77 ) .
   Error and truth, ethics and religion are united, in that the value o f the
experiences corresponding to them also consists in what they do not ta ke
into account " i n fact," a nd it is also in this that they oblige a reference to
the ideality requiring the third mode of envisagement proposed by White
head: what makes ingression is an ideal orderi ng of a finite degree of com
plexity. What exceeds this finite degree is situated beyond its horizon,
excl uded from the purpose and val ue associated with actuality.
   " M y demand is, that the ultimate arbitra ri ness of matter of fact from
which our formulation starts should disclose the same general principles
of real ity, which we dimly discern as stretching away into regions beyond
our explicit powers of discernment " ( S M W, 92-93 ) . Whitehead is now
in a position to satisfy this demand. The "great refusal " declared by our
achievements must be the starting point for a formulation that extends to
                                                T H E   G R EAT   R E F U S A L   2 2 5




every occasion . We have no access to an electronic occasion as such, we
do not k now everyth i ng that counts " for i t," qua positive factor i n its
accomplishment. Yet there is no metaphysical d i fferentiation between a
" physical " a nd a " cognitive " occasion, but rather a pragmatic one, re
spondi ng to the pragmatics of our definitions. An occasion may be qual i
fied as " physica l " i nsofa r as the becoming of the conti nuity to which it
belongs confirms the pragmatic releva nce of the definition Whitehead
gave of nature: by paying it d ue attention, we fi nd more i n it. As we have
seen, things get compl icated when it comes to psychology. And when, in
a typica l domestic scene, the man, infuriated by the "attention" his wife
pays to him, slams the door, his impatience exhibits and requires a " men
ta l ity." Yet if every occasion is characterized in terms of " purpose," qua
related to a limited horizon-not only this a nd not that, but for this l im
ited world, rather than for the indefinite world that "this" cannot help but
imply-every occasion also d iscloses an " ultimate arbitrariness."
   Thus as a further element in the metaphysical situation, there is required
a principle of limitation. Some particular how is necessary, and some par
ticularisation in the what of matter of fact is necessary [ . . . I we must
provide a ground for limitation which stands among the attributes of the
substantial activity. This attribute provides the limitation for which no
reason can be given: for all reason flows from it. God is the ultimate limita
tion, and His existence is the ultimate irrationality. For no reason can be
given for ;ust that limitation which it stands in His nature to impose. God
is not concrete, but He is the ground for concrete activity. No reason can
be given for the nature of God, because that nature is the ground of ratio
nality ( SMW, 1 78 ) .
   The God Whitehead has j ust introd uced i s simultaneously, and equiva
lently, a principle of limitation a nd a principle of concretion. He has noth
ing to do with the despotic God toward whom a l l explanatory cha i ns go
back : It was God's will, God's will be done. He a nswers to a need pro
duced by meta physics. Quite precisely, he is made necessary by the third
type of envisagement. The idea l situation explains only the physica l occa
sion, which is a mere a bstraction. The concrete occasion requires a lim
ited, i nd ividual ized horizon. God does not provide the reason for this
limitation, but he is named i n order to express its " a rbitrariness " in the
sense in which the very notion of reason, and the possibility of defining
" that" for which an account is being req uested, i mply a limitation. He is
that without which the "great refusal " could only be an i l l usion.
  The only alternative to this admission, is to deny the reality of actual
occasions. Their apparent irrational limitation must be taken as a proof
of illusion and we must look for a reality behind the scene ( SMW, 1 78 ) .
2 2 6   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   This is indeed what Whitehead reproaches Lei bniz: to have proclaimed
that " there is a reason for everything," even the choice of God, who has
access to the sole genuine reality, to the infinite conspi ration of the uni
verse with each state of the monad, or, reversibly, to each state of the
monad as a standpoi nt implying an entire universe. If Lei bniz were right,
the true meaning of our experiences would be unlimited, " behind the
scene," and our choices would be mere appearances, with the divine
choice of this world as their hidden reason. Decision must therefore be
primordial, and our reasons must be relative to it. The possi bi lity of in
voking, l ike Lei bniz, the " reasons of God," even defining them as un
knowable, m ust become a metaphysical or a technical impossi bility. The
world cannot be deduced from a calculation, whatever the meaning of
the divine calculation may be. It decides itself.
   Here, then, we encounter once again Whitehead the mathematician, who
has not the least patience for those who wish to ignore the fact that every
question sets in place its " ultimate," that which cannot be questioned be
cause the question presupposes it. It is henceforth the question of metaphys
ics that is under discussion, the question of the nature of things, that is, of
their reasons, and of the ultimate presupposed by the construction of every
reason, whatever it may be. Every search for a reason presupposes a prob
lem, and every problem is a horizon. You may construct reasons, but not
the reason for the limitation of what you envisage with regard to the indefi
nite labyrinths of envisagea ble relations. You can ask people to explain
themselves, to explicate what they mean, or intend to do, or think that they
should do, dic cur hic, but remember that your question demands from
the other, and may inspire in the other, not a si mple explication but a dis
placement of horizon . You can show as much as you want in what sense the
(new ) reasons on the basis of which you ra ise your problem transcend the
particularity of the statements you intend to question: your reasons will still
respond to the problem as you pose it, and therefore to a horizon that is
also limited . Yet those who would take advantage of this li mitation to deny
the novelty of your reasons, to situate you within the " historical context"
that would explain your proposition, could never help but take their place,
a posteriori, within the enlarged horizon you have proposed. The "context"
they would invoke to situate you would be none other than the one which
your proposition has turned into its own situation, and which happens to
have been " patient" to the novelty you proposed, or even suscepti ble of
being infected by that proposition, henceforth accepted as plausible and
interesting. Only endurance, not origi nality, has discernible reasons.
   If there cannot be a metaphysical discourse that deals, by analogy or
otherwise, with God 's " reasons," this is not, therefore, a question either of
                                                  T H E   G R E AT   R E F U S A L   2 2 7




ignorance or of i naccessibility but a question of coherent definition. God
qua principle of l i mitation is that from which every reason derives, and
he therefore cannot have a reason himself. This, Whitehead concludes, is
why God is "categorically determined," required qua principle of limita
tion, but " meta physically i ndeterminate "-agai n Leibniz is wrong.
    Whitehead might have been able to " save" Leibniz, but his judgment is
without indulgence. In contrast, he chooses to attenuate his d ifference
from Spinoza . God, he suggests, might be concei ved as " q uali fying" a sub
stantial activity analogous to Spinoza 's infinite substance, with the attri
butes of Spinoza 's substance being a ssimilated to the domain of the eter
nal objects, as expressed by individual ization in a multiplicity of modes.
Tha nks to God , who is categorica lly determ i ned by this " tha nks to,"
Spinoza 's modes can then be freed from the suspicion that they constitute
mere " reflections" of the infinite. Of course, Spinoza finds himself sl ightly
modified by Anglo-Saxon humor. Possibil ity is no longer an i l l usion but
enters into the economy of infinite substance. As far as the idea of God is
concerned, it is no longer associated at all with a knowledge " of the third
kind," that of ideas that a re finally adequate. Q uite the contra ry, it is
called forth by the need for a n envisagement of the third type, that makes
" i nadeq uacy " i rreducible, that is, by the contrast between the ideal situa
tion and " its" rea l ization, whose va l ue demands its limitation.
    Whitehead's God, a speculative wonder, i s therefore firmly bound to
the refusa l of a metaphysica l speculation that denies what we a re wel l
aware of. The creation of the l imited horizon al lows the a ffi rmation o f
what is implied b y every purpose: the asymmetric character of relations.
My p rehension of you and your prehension of me cannot, from any
standpoint, be redefined in a way that would make their hidden harmony
explicit, two sta ndpoints reflecting the same world with a common pur
pose. My thought is individual ized, a thought of " that," not of a l l the
impl ications and conseq uences of " that" as you may enterta in them. This
is the para digmatic empiricist affirmation: there is no beyond to the fact
that we clash against the i rreducible, obstinate fact of a world which, far
from espousing our variations of interest, may oppose to us the firm dis
continuity of its angles-thus, and not otherwise, no further. Let us listen
to Whitehead in the class he gave on April 1 6 , 1 92 5 :
    I enter a room. The room does not enter me, in any sense at all. Our
experience is always that of entering into the world, not into the world as
supported by oneself in any sense at all ( EWM, 2 8 7 ) .
  It is a lso from this empi rical sta ndpoint that w e c a n sense the possible
instabil i ty of Whitehead's fi rst fully metaphysica l construction. Doesn't
the brea k that ma kes the di fference between idea l i ty and the set of
2 2 8   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   OF   NATURE   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




propositions true and untrue " for the occasion " place novelty under the
banner of passivity ? Endurance may depend on the set of non sequiturs
that real ize and are rea lized by a finite standpoint. Yet can originality be
red uced to a mod ification of this set ? In short, is the restriction really
appropriate to what we understand by " va l ue " ?
   This problem obviously has much in common with that of the abstrac
tion risked by Whitehead : God , as a principle of limitation, is part of
that a bstraction, and does not, as such, ena ble a remedy for its primary
defect, the fact that it does not inspire a " yearning" for a theory of pre
hension. On the contrary, he underl ines this defect, because thanks to his
intervention, envisagement seems to be able to do without the question
of prehension to an even greater degree. Now that the cat has fal len on
its feet, however, it is possible to inspire, aga inst the movement proposed
by Whitehead, the yearning for something else and to specify the sense in
which this movement, which has been from the organism to the actual
occasion, cal ls for another movement, which may, as the case may be,
designate another ultimate.
   The link between value and restriction was constructed in metaphysical
terms, but it had first been formulated in the context of the philosophy of
the organism, insofar as the organism's success is its endurance. An organ
ism " end ures" in the sense that it exhibits functions that are fundamentally
asymmetrical to its environment: here, value is equivalent to j udgment,
and the "intolera nt" organism maintains, as long as it is able to endure, a
remarkably sta ble and simplifying j udgment that defines what counts for it
in its environment and how. Yet the fact that this connection was taken up
again at the level of the metaphysical categories m ight well introduce the
shadow of an "as if'� when it comes to our subjective experience. What of
our i mpression that " having a purpose " is of the order of "taking initia
tive" ? What of our claim-it's called freedom-to be, in one way or another,
"the cause of ourselves " ? And "trust," for which the point, in this case, is
no longer to find a respondent in the order of nature but which is presup
posed every time experience takes the risk of experimentation: can it be
supported by a reference to God as ultimate l imitation ?
   Of course, if the point was to make metaphysical speculation commu
nicate with wisdom, all these objections would collapse by themselves,
becom ing so many versions cal ling for the necessary " detachment from
the sel f" that usually coincides with wisdom . The same would hold true
if we had to do with that practica l aesthetics proposed today by the so
called " sl iding sports." To keep one's hold or to lose it: at each wave,
surfers risk themselves, without any ill usion of control, risk ing their pos
sibility of enduring, of fitting with the wave, at the critica l point where
                                                   T H E   G R E AT   R E F U S A L   2 2 9




only the sensitive, exact insertion of one motion within another can earn
the patience of a brea king wave.
    However, to the world as a breaking wave corresponds the spiritual
ized body, the detachment from the ego, not the art of problems tha t
orients the research of Whitehead the mathema tician. Mathematicians
do not seek to "endure," to styl ize their bodies, gestu res, or soul in a way
that would ena ble them to provide a minimum hold to the trials suscep
tible of desta bilizi ng them. Thei r trust is of a different type, not " they will
not get me," this wave, this i l l usion as a vector of pain, this attachment
that exposes me, but " what transformation do they demand of me ? "
this possi bility that would be so easy for me to ignore, this murmur of
experience tha t I could easily d isqualify, this incoherence I would have no
difficul ty in making people forget, or that I could eleva te, with impunity,
to the status of a riddle or a mystery before which reason must accept to
bow down.
    The speculation of Whitehead the mathematician, because it can be said
to be "control " the construction of a coherent, adequate discourse, m ust
provide a foothold, offer the maximum foothold to what might destabilize
it. At no time may it be transformed into a vector of norms, a norm of slid
ing elegance or wisdom, because a norm, in this case, is too tempting a way
to eliminate, to simplify, or to j udge what might otherwise pose a problem.
    This is why I was able to compare Whitehead's solution, the definition
of the third type of engagement, to the desperate twist that a cat carries
out in order to complete its fa ll on its feet. It may be this twist that enables
Whitehead to adopt Spinoza 's substantia l acti vity, but one may also won
der if it is not the seduction of this substantial activity that had first in
spired his wager: to risk the a bstraction consti tuted by ideal envisage
ment. For ultima tely, Whitehead is closer to Lei bniz than to Spinoza , in
the sense that Lei bniz has not turned the "as ifs " with which he populates
his metaphysics into a path toward wisdom. If there is a link between
metaphysics and wisdom, for Leibniz as for Whitehead, this link cannot
bypass trust in the possibility of a " peace " that must be fashioned actively,
intel ligently, not achieved by some process of conversion. Like Leibniz,
Whitehead worked in this world, for this world, and in a way that any
sage might judge " perverse " : without bri nging to existence a truth that
would have the power of conquering idolatries, passions, and illusions,
but in direct contact, without a beyond, with our polemica l habits. Meta
physica l experimentation, neutral with regard to what matters, has no
other goa l than to produce "elbow room " aga inst the identification of
passionate incoherence with a virtue, of the fight against error with a mo
bil izing slogan, and of thought with a deduction.
2 3 0   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H YS I C S




   Yet if this wager, of making the prerequisite for peace not a purification
that subtracts but a creation that constructs, that adds and complicates
things, must be adequately descri bed in metaphysical terms, limitation
must not be the last word . If the activity of Whitehead, a mathematician
who became a philosopher, is to find its meaning in the terms of his own
meta physics, real ization cannot be described as a restriction.
   Sometimes, i n the course of this text, I have been unable not to antici
pate, and to use the word " decision," which Whitehead was to use in Pro
cess and Reality to name the " breaking off" that turns the occasion into
the affirmation of a " thus and not otherwise." When he named the " great
refusal," Whitehead himself could doubtless not help but be inhabited by
a syntax that makes the occasion the producer of its limitation. No doubt
he was aware, when writing Science and the Modern World, that his con
cept of an occasion was merely a first approximation. And perha ps the
use of the word " decision," in Process and Reality, indicates that he has
henceforth provided himself with the means to ful ly affirm the meaning
William James conferred upon this term: that of a l iving moment that
produces its own reasons.
   Decisions, for him who makes them, are altogether peculiar psychic
facts. Self-luminous and self-justifying at the living moment at which they
occur, they appeal to no outside moment to put its stamp upon them or
make them continuous with the rest of nature. Themselves it is rather who
seem to make nature continuous; and in their strange and intense function
of granting consent to one possibility and withholding it from another, to
transform an equivocal and double future into an inalterable and simple
past (DO, 1 5 8 ) .
   With James, Whitehead refused to make continuity primary; that is, he
also refused to al low the occasion to be deduced from the whole. Every
continuity is a result, a succession of resumptions that are so many " pur
poses," deciding the way the present will prolong the past, give a future to
this past and make it " its " past. Yet the way James characterizes decision,
"granting consent to one possibi l i ty and withhold ing it from another,"
could not be adopted as such, for it contains too many unknowns. It had
to be constructed, in a way that enables every production of existence to
be characterized as a decision. It is the actual occasions themselves that
will affirm, no longer merely " j ust this, and no more," but " thus and not
otherwise."
   Everything m ust therefore be redone. Everyth ing will be redone in the
course of the writing of Process and Reality.
