Hie C i rcu l i , H i c Saltus




            E CAN    and we may, as it were, jump with both feet off the
            ground into or towards a world of which we trust the other
            parts to meet our jump and only so can the making of a per
fected world of the pluralistic pattern ever take place. Only through our
precursive trust in it can it come into being.
   There is no inconsistency anywhere in this, and no "vicious circle " un
less a circle of poles holding themselves upright by leaning on one an
other, or a circle of dancers revolving by holding each other's hands, be
 "vicious."
   The faith circle is so congruous with human nature that the only expla
nation of the veto that intellectualists pass upon it must be sought in the
offensive character to them of the faiths of certain concrete persons.
   Such possibilities of offense have, however, to be put up with on empiri
cist principles. The long run of experience may weed out the more foolish
faiths. Those who held them will then have failed: but without the wiser
faiths of the others the world could never be perfected ( SPP, 230-23 1 ) .
    This text, a veritable profession of fa ith, is probably one of Wi lliam
James's last writings, and the way it connects trust, leap, and circle of
fa ith no doubt constitutes the best introduction to what Process and Re
ality com m its its reader to. Whatever path of approach to Process and
R eality one chooses, this path presupposes a leap far from the sol id
ground of our sel f-evi dence. It is a very curious leap, involving both mo
bilizing experience a nd putting thought to the test. A speculative leap.
    Philosophers have long since learned that speculation is a temptation
that philosophy owes itself to resist. We must reject any recourse to an
2 3 4   CO S M O LOGY




" i ntel lectua l intuition " that assumes the possi bility of a di rect access to
a h igher order of truth, accepting the finitude of the human cond ition.
Thi s-after all, no profit is too smal l-ena bles us to hunt down in others
the ill usory bel iefs that we ourselves have renounced . Whitehead is not
unaware that he is swi mming against the current: aga inst the " progress"
that has made the di fference between (outdated ) speculative philosophy
and the philosophy that is finally modern. Right from the outset of Pro
cess and Reality, he assigns his undertaking the " first task " of defining
the " speculative philosophy " he is going to practice, but the definition he
gives it is not likely to reassure the sceptics.
  Speculative Philosophy is the endeavour to frame a coherent, logical,
necessary system of general ideas in terms of which every element of our
experience can be interpreted ( PR, 3 ) .
   A n excessive program i f ever there was one, whose totalitarian nature
might, a priori, inspire fear. If a system were to be capable of deducing
everything we a re lia ble to be aware of, it would rea l ize the wildest
dreams of a bsol ute knowledge. Except that when expressing this fear, I
replaced " interpret " by " deduce," which means that I have attri buted to
the system the power of a theory, a power that Whitehead refuses to it.
What he has j ust defined is not a power, but a demand concerning the
genera l ideas that are to be assembled . They will have to succeed in not
selecting, that is, in not j udging, measuring according to a norm, or dif
ferentiating between experiences whose objects a re legitimate or i l lusory.
This does not mean, however, that the experiences involved with the
production of measures, the crea tion of criteria , and the differentiation
between the illusory and the legitimate must be denounced . However, for
the " necessity " proper to the speculative system to have a sense, they
must lose their privileged import.
  Thus the philosophic scheme should be "necessary," in the sense of
bearing in itself its own warrant of universality throughout all experience,
provided that we confine ourselves to that which communicates with im
mediate matter of fact. But what does not so communicate is unknow
able, and the unknowable is unknown; and so this universality defined by
"communication " can suffice ( PR, 4 ) .
  In a note-notes a re rare in Process and Reality-Whitehea d specifies
that the "doctrine" he has j ust stated concerning " what does not com
municate " is a pa radox, and, in a rather atypica l way, he a l lows hi mself a
touch of irony: " I nd ulging in a species of fa lse modesty, 'cautious' philos
ophers underta ke its definition."
  In The Concept of Nature, Whitehead had undertaken to put every
thing we are aware of in perception " i n the same boat." The mind wa s
                                            H I C   C I RCU L I .   H I C   S A LT U S   2 3 5




the ultimate then, that which is presupposed by all perception. The proj
ect is now prolonged; for the point will be that this scheme, by its very
working, affirms itself to be capable of interpreting " any element of ex
perience " in the same wa y as long as the la tter communicates with an
immed iate state of affairs, that is, as long as there is an actual experience
rather than a possibil ity of experience ("if only we could . . "). However,.



the subj ect of discussion is no longer perceptive experience, and the mind
is therefore no longer ultimate. What is in question is that of wh ich we
have experience-joy, grief, freedom, responsibility, as well as swa llow,
stone, or sun. And this ra ises a new problem, for here the tota lity ca nnot
be defined by reference to what does not belong to it.
   Whitehead knows quite precisely what awaits every attempt at defini
tion in this case: has he not, with Russell, encountered the paradoxical
class of bei ngs who, l i ke Epimenides, the Cretan who ( truthfully ? ) defined
all Cretans as lia rs, belong to the set they define in a way that contradicts
the possibil ity of that definition ? To define the set of experiences that
communicate with an immed iate state of affairs i n a way that opposes it
to a nything else would again fa ll victim to the same paradox, for the mere
fact of producing that " a nything else " qua having the power to assert it
self as " other," escaping any possibility of actual experience, makes it fall
back into the set. There is a placing-in-communication with an immed iate
state of a ffa irs because there is an actua l experience, the experience of this
very power. Hence the paradox: the set includes what cla imed to define it
excl usively.
   The speculative leap does not announce an entry into logical paradox,
but a farewell to the power of logical definition, for it is the power Epi
menides the Cretan assumed to define " the set of all Cretans" that creates
the paradox. Likewise, it is the " prudence" of the philosophers who think
they can designate the class of what is knowa ble, or, as Wittgenstein sa id
in the Tractatus, of " that of which one may spea k," that makes them slip
into an infinite labor of mourning in which " that of which one may spea k "
n o longer h a s much importance, compared with what one must learn to
keep silent a bout.
   To interpret will thus not i mply a definition of the set of what can be
interpreted, or of the cond itions that a uthorize belonging to that set. On
the contrary, the system's necessity reflects a commitment that ma kes all
the constra ints weigh on the interpretation itself, which takes up the
cha llenge of having actua lly to place all experiences on the same level,
whether or not they a re able to define their object, that is, to a ffirm them
all qua obliging interpretation . By this commitment, Whitehead by no
means opposes to the philosophers' " prudence " a source of knowledge
2 3 6   CO S M O LOGY




whose necessity would transcend all definition. Right from the openi ng
paragraph of his work, he limits himself to affirming that the k nowledge
produced by speculative philosophy as a method is " i mportant."
   No term would seem to be more vague that this one: importa nt. And
yet it practically constitutes the "cipher," or the trademark of the concepts
proposed by Whitehead 's "speculative phi losophy," and it will confer its
singular style upon the " leap " or j ump of the imagination to which the
reader of Process and Reality is invited. For this word in fact designates
what cannot be defined by anything else; it is an " ultimate genera lity "
proposed b y its own system .
   Importance is a generic notion which has been obscured by the over
whelming prominence of a few of its innumerable species. There are per
spectives of the universe to which morality is irrelevant, to which logic is
irrelevant, to which religion is irrelevant, to which art is irrelevant. By this
false limitation the activity expressing the ultimate aim infused into the
process of nature has been trivialized into the guardianship of mores, or
of rules of thought, or of mystic sentiment, or of aesthetic enjoyment. No
one of these specializations exhausts the final unity of purpose in the
world. The generic aim of process is the attainment of importance, in that
species and to that extent which in that instance is possible (MT, 1 - 1 2 ) .
   A circular si tua tion : in order t o present itsel f, the undertaking that
begins with Process and Reality uses a term upon which it will confer a
meaning without which its way of presenting itself is hard to hear. One
must always begin a circle somewhere, but there is nothing dizzying about
that. It is enough to accept that, in any case, no one ever really begins with
the beginning. Even currents of thought that seem axiomatic "start out "
from their principles only subsequently, and more to verify their formula
tion than to " discover " thei r consequences. No doubt because he knew the
demands of a truly axiomatic construction, Whitehead does not try to save
appearances. Serious readers may complain that they cannot make heads
or tails of his approach. What matters is that at the end of the day one may
finally go back to the beginning, that the snake can bite its tail. Here, in
deed, is the fina l sentence of Process and Reality:
  In this way, the insistent craving is justified-the insistent craving that
zest for existence be refreshed by the ever-present, unfading importance of
our immediate actions, which perish and yet live for evermore ( PR, 3 5 1 ) .
  What has happened between the book's beginning and its end ? The
vocation of speculative phi losophy qua productive of " important" knowl
edge has not been modified, but the phrase has been laden with all that is
required by the seemingly obvious fact that certa in objects of knowledge
can be " i mportant." It is the expression " to be i mporta nt" that is primary,
                                             H I C   C I R C U L I ,   H I C   S A lT U S   237




and i t is on its basis that we may try to define why it is importa nt, to
what extent, and accord ing to what criteria . And of course, these efforts
are themselves " i mportant " ; there is no reason to denounce them, and
especially not to disqualify those " species " consti tuted by ethics, logics,
rel igion, art . . . . Yet it is important to strip them of their power of limita
tion, to fight agai nst their clea r propensity to denounce what, to spea k
with Wi lliam James, is " repugna nt to them." And so, speculative phi loso
phy, for its part, will not be able to prod uce any l i mita tion; it will not be
able to " dea l " with anything that can be defined as an " object," whether
that obj ect falls under the definitions of logic, ethics, rel igion, or art. The
" zest for existence" wi l l have been " refreshed," but not by the proposal
of a special aim defini ng the meaning or vocation of that existence. What
Whitehead hopes to have accomplished is, quite the contrary, to have
el iminated the specific definitions which, by trying to explain what mat
ters, that is, to found importance accord ing to special categories, reduce
our insistent, craving need that " it matter " to the trivia lity of the "guard
ianship" of a chosen definition.
    This craving matters. It must therefore be j ustified, but as the reader will
have understood, this cannot happen by contrast with something else. In
particular, it cannot be retranslated in terms of va lue, ethics, or freedom,
such that what happens to a rock, a swallow, or an electron may be said to
be " without importance." Where The Concept of Nature demanded that
everything we are aware of in perception be placed in the same boat, we
can say that the " verification of the scheme," or the test of its necessity, will
be that "all that communicates with experience " may matter. This, more
over, corresponds to the sudden halt imposed upon the definitional power
of logic. Whatever may be the subtle delights of discussions of the relations
between the statement " the cat is on the rug" and this cat that is on this
rug, whether the state of affa irs can verify the statement or remains sepa
rated from it by an impassa ble abyss, the fact is that " this" cat and " this"
rug matter little. It is enough to have a cat, whichever it may be, and a
carpet, whichever it may be, each one defined by its belonging to the sets
designated by the words "cat" and " rug." Both cat and rug, because they
present themselves as capable of being defined in isolation, in a way that
authorizes belonging to a well-defined set, confer a privileged role upon
logic and are therefore inappropriate for metaphysical statements. And the
same obviously holds true of reasoning of a deductive type.
   It has been remarked that a system of philosophy is never refuted; it is
only abandoned. The reason is that logical contradictions, except as tem
porary slips of the mind-plentiful, though temporary-are the most gra
tuitous of errors; and usually they are trivial. Thus after criticism, systems
2 3 8   COS M O LOGY




do not exhibit mere illogicalities. They suffer from inadequacy and inco
herence. Failure to include some obvious elements of experience in the
scope of the system is met by boldly denying the facts. A lso while a philo
sophical system retains any charm of novelty, it enjoys a plenary indul
gence for its failures in coherence. But after a system has acquired ortho
doxy, and is taught with authority it receives a sharper criticism. Its denials
and its incoherences are found intolerable, and a reaction sets in ( PR, 6 ) .
    The warrant of universality that a philosophical system bears with it i s
an effect of its worki ng, which i nevita bly implies the question of what
matters in a given epoch . When what a system has fai led to incl ude takes
on enough importance for this failure to be experienced as intolera ble,
the necessity collapses, and the system becomes a rbitrary. And the same
holds true when its incoherencies become intolerable. As we have seen,
Whitehead cha racterized his own speculative system by its ambition for
coherence, logic, and necessity, an ambition that is obviously insepa rable
from the diagnosis he has j ust laid down with regard to what makes a
phi losophical system be abandoned . This does not mean, however, that
his a mbition is that his own system should never be a bandoned . Indeed,
unl i ke logic, neither necessi ty nor coherence can be defined in terms of
wel l-specified demands. This is why logic is what one m ight call a " minor
vi rtue," which certa inly entails demands, but not obl igations. As soon as
there a re specifications, arrangements can a lways be made. In contrast,
coherence, like necessity, obl iges thinkers to think against the assurances
of language, against any meaning that presents itsel f as " going without
saying," and their abil ity to do so cannot be a bstracted from the way
their epoch enables them to think.
   " Coherence," as 'here employed, means that the fundamental ideas, in
terms of which the scheme is developed, presuppose each other so that in
isolation they are meaningless. This requirement does not mean that they
are definable in terms of each other; it means that what is indefinable in
one such notion cannot be abstracted from its relevance to the other no
tions. It is the ideal of speculative philosophy that its fundamental notions
shall not seem capable of abstraction from each other. In other words, it is
presupposed that no entity can be conceived in complete abstraction from
the system of the universe, and that it is the business of speculative phi
losophy to exhibit this truth. This character is its coherence ( PR, 3 ) .
   Once again, a circle: w e had started out from " ideas," but the quotation
leads brutally to the " entities," ta ken to be in the " system of the universe."
The ideas will, of course, have to allow us to define speculatively both
what an entity and the "system of the universe " are, but they also define
themselves as mere " entities " among others. Thei r relation of reciproca l
                                              H I C   C I R C U L I ,   H I C   S A LT U S   239




presupposition merely exhibits what is, speculatively, to be thought. And
once aga in, the circle is not logical, in the sense of those paradoxical state
ments in which thought " feels" that it is spinning its wheels. It is " prag
matic," in the sense that it brings the " matter" of speculative philosophy
into existence, what it risks, that toward which it leaps " with both feet off
the ground," with trust but with no solid certainty.
   It is usually said that the measure of the solidity of an intellectual con
struction is the solidity of its wea kest link. Yet this argument presupposes
the possibility of putting each link to the test separately, a nd it is precisely
against this possibility that Whiteheadian coherence affirms itself. Recip
roca l presupposition replaces the i mage of linking by that of Wil l i a m
James's revolving circle of dancers, w h i c h " makes true," or verifies, what
an isolated dancer would have refuted . The circle enables each movi ng
body not to fal l , al though the vertical projection of its center of gravity is
situated dra matica lly outside of its susta i ning base. Likewise, the ambi
tion of speculative coherence is to escape the norms to which experiences,
isolated by the logical, mora l, empiricist, rel igious, and other stakes that
privilege them, are subject. The point is to leave behind the sol id ground
designated by these stakes and take the risk of ignoring each dancer's cen
ter of gravity. Speculative philosophy must, in its very production, bring
to existence the possibil ity of a thought " without gravity," without a privi
leged direction, that " neutra l " metaphysical thought of which Science and
the Modern World had al ready risked the adventure.
   The dancers' spin is only possible because each of them trusts the others
" precursively " at the moment when they accept that their own body is put
off balance: they all accept to no longer define themselves by their own
means but by supposing the others, in the precise sense in which, taken in
isolation, these others would be quite incapable of giving what is asked of
them. None is a guarantor, as a pillar would be. Each one presupposes the
others. Likewise, the speculative concepts or " fundamental ideas," because
they cannot be rooted in any privileged experience, must circle with each
other. Taken together, they must affirm what speculative thought " trusts "
to think " without support." Coherence is what creates the specific space
of the spec ulative circle, what engages the " trust" without which there
is no leap, and what dema nds of the leap tha t it lea ve with both feet
the sol id ground of our special ized interests. That toward which there is
a leap must be expressed in neutral, " generic" terms, not with the clarity
that our interests always confer on the statements that correspond to
them.
  The verification of a rationalist scheme is to be sought in its general suc
cess, and not in the peculiar certainty, or initial clarity, of its first principles.
2 4 0   CO S M O LOGY




In this connection the misuse of the ex a bsurdo argument has to be
noted; much philosophical reasoning is vitiated by it ( PR, 8 ) .
    I n fact, the " first principles " a rticulated i n the scheme Whitehead pres
ents at the beginning of Process and Reality " do not speak of anything."
The scheme " speaks itself," as the production of a thinker struggling with
the question of coherence, a veritable abstract machine, carefully stripped
of any reference to the privileged cases in which we expect every phi los
opher: truth, responsibility, freedom, mind, matter, and so on . The scheme
is asignificant. To try to understand it " for itsel f" presents the same kind
of difficulty as trying to understand an i mmobile machine, where one
doesn't know from which end to look at it.
    Yet coherence itself, which obl iges the thinker and which the scheme
makes preva il, would, if it were an end in itsel f, be bereft of importance,
for what it cannot render explicit is precisely that in which it matters. If
the principles must be stated in generic terms, no leap is generic. In order
for imagination to leap, it needs to trust that something will come to meet
it. The knowledge produced by the coherent scheme must be actually " im
portant." Indeed, everything changes when the schematic machine is set
in motion, when its multiple movements produce the twofold discovery of
the articulation between its components and its effects on the situations
and statements it transforms. A radica l contrast, beca use, although the
scheme is mute, the sta tements or applications it induces are the warrant
of universality that Whitehead associates with necessity. And they will be
such a warrant by separating abstractions from their claim to universality.
Every abstraction, every right conferred upon a general ity, will communi
cate with an immediate, concrete state of a ffa i rs. One never has a right,
one takes it, and the question is not to criticize the taking but to correlate
it with what it produces.
    This is the case, for instance, with the " a rgument from the a bsurd,"
whose deplorable use in philosophy Whitehead criticizes, whereas it is an
essential resource for mathematical creation . Its use presupposes the
right, when faced by a contradiction, to try to find out which of the
premises of the reason i ng, or, most often, which of the premises laid
down by the tradition that the thinker inherits, is "guilty," as i f each one
could be modified separately. It is not a matter of criticizing the right that
philosophers thus clai m but of correlating it with its predictable effect:
each new philosophy becomes the one that was announced, despite, and
even by vi rtue of, its defects, by the lame ensemble of its predecessors,
until i t, in its turn, is abandoned .
    In The Concept of Nature, Whitehead hi mself had made use of the
argu ment from the absurd, but the aim was not to lend his reasoning the
                                           H I C   C I R C U L I ,   H I C   S A LT U S   2 4 1




authority of logic, or to confer upon it a consensual evidence. The aim
was to make a bsurd ity felt. " That's absurd! " is a cry that commits us, a
" cause" that will force us to take the least prudent " risks." In Process and
Reality, by contrast, there is no longer any " ca use," or else everything has
become a cause: every element of experience must be understood and
i nterpreted . And, to the greater perplexity of his readers, Whitehead has
put his own doctrine i nto action. Whereas in the course of writing his
book, he varied most of his definitions, he never proceeded to the slight
est self-criticism, or the least explanation of the contradiction to which a
definition would have led if it had not been modified. He limited himself
to "clarifying," by inserted additions, the way i n which the function of a
notion had to be understood because of its " relevance " for other notions.
And this is so even i f this "clarification " in fact modified the global
economy of the system in formation .
    According to Lewis Ford, the initiator of the compositional ana lysis
of Whitehead's work, up to twelve layers of successive writing may be
d istinguished in Process and R eality. In contrast to what was the case in
Science and the Modern World, we no longer have do only with more or
less massive and countable add itions, but also with raw, continuous in
terventions, the work of successive rereadings that wager on the possibil
ity tha t a given i nsertion, here, in the middle of this paragraph, will suf
fice to make the text's meaning slide for the reader as it "slid" for the
a uthor when he reread: " Yes, I agree, but . . . "
    And this time, the wager was won. Most readers and commentators
have assigned to the work as a whole a meaning which, according to Ford,
is that of the " last" layer, at the cost of wondering why Whitehead thought
it well to create so erratic an itinerary, why a given expectation or conse
quence, which certainly had to be produced, will indeed be affirmed, but,
perhaps, one hundred and fifty pages further on. Without doubt, no book
has ever been more inseparable from its index. And as far as I know, it has
not happened to any other book to undergo the strange treatment that the
American philosopher Donald Sherburne reserved for Process and Reality.
Tired of guiding his students through this labyrinth, he chose not to re
write it but to sort it and organize i t, and he published " another " book,
A Key to Whitehead's "Process and Reality," which is entirely made up of
rearranged fragments of Process and Reality. Some of its pages constitute a
mosaic whose pieces come from ten different pages of the original work.
   Sherburne wanted to turn Process and Reality into a book with which
one could " become acquainted," but the recomposition to which he pro
ceeded entailed a rather surprising change of nature, both of the text and of
its author. An author endowed with a well-defined thought, his own, sets
2 4 2   COS M O LOGY




forth his ideas, but what has disappeared is the back-and-forth between
concepts, and between concepts and empirical experience, the movements
of thought entangled in one another, one of which never becomes apparent
without appealing to others that have not yet been deployed. What the
readers miss is the test constituted for them by the perpetual implication of
what is explained within what explains it. What has been erased is the au
thor's incessant return upon his trade: Whitehead, rereading his own text,
operating not by yes or by no, but always by "yes, but." Instead of an au
thor discovering new, unforeseen problems, we must speak of an author in
the process of becoming, fashioned by the text he is fashioning. The author
has become anonymous, in the sense that he makes the distinction between
author and reader undecidable. The hand that writes the insertion is not
that of the author correcting himself, but that of the reader fashioned by
reading, or else that of the author-reader undergoing the series of thought
events that happen to him more than he produces them.
   If Whitehead is simultaneously the a uthor and reader of his own text,
the reading for which this text calls seems to me to be the one that turns
the reader into a uthor, inserting and prolonging, and zigzagging, like the
author, from "yes, but " to "but then." Even Lewis Ford , that parad igmatic
reader, seems to have undergone this highly particular effect. He could
not learn to distinguish and place in chronological order the insertions,
transpositions, reorganizations ( here, the vocabulary of historians of the
genome could be highly useful), without at the same time underta king to
prolong, that is, to modify. More generally, if the community of White
headians is indeed, as Deleuze wrote, a " sl ightly secret school," it is be
cause it cannot manifest i tself publicly under the academically prescri bed
form of doctoral dissertations competing for the most exact reading or
the tightest interpretation . As long as Whitehead's text remains alive, it
will transform its readers into coauthors, accepting the adventure of the
imagination to which the text calls us.
   Unlike my choice in the case of Science and the Modern World, there
fore, I do not see any great advantage in organizing my presentation
around a tale of the succession of Whiteheads at work in Process and
Reality. I will go even further, not hesitati ng to appea l to such later writ
ings as Adventures of Ideas ( 1 93 3 ) or Modes of Thought ( 1 93 8 ) . For the
movement of a coherence that discovers itself by inventing itself cannot
be narrated : it is pursued. And this is what I wi l l try to do, even when, on
several occasions, this pursuit will imply a " tale" of what has caused a
mutation in a mea ning or an articulation, a tale that will be my i nterpre
tation . In fact, when Whitehead went back to his work in the mode of
"yes, but " that a uthorized him to carry out i nsertions without rewri ting,
                                            H I C   C I R C U L I .   H I C   S A lT U S   2 4 3




he probably would often not have been able to " tel l " what had made him
"change his mind ." He had become capable of " feel ing " a new aspect of
the indefinable, that is, just as much, by contrast and retroactively, to feel
the definition of a notion as too " isola ted " from the others, or too slanted,
und uly privi leging certain types of experience.
   Philosophers can never hope finally to formulate these metaphysical
first principles. Weakness of insight and deficiencies of language stand in
the way inexorably. Words and phrases must be stretched towards a gen
erality foreign to their ordinary usage; and however such elements of
language be stabilized as technicalities, they remain metaphors mutely
appealing for an imaginative leap ( PR, 4 ) .
   I n fact, the way I have j ust interpreted the composition o f Process and
Reality constitutes in itsel f an " i maginative lea p." Whitehead never ex
plained himsel f. He refused boredom, as Lewis Ford deplores, and con
sidered it boring to " start all over agai n," to write in order to say more
clearly what he had alrea dy understood . Yet as I have al ready empha
sized, other reader-interpreters, such as Jorge Luis Nobo, wager on sys
tematic unity, and become ind ignant at the fact that one could prod uce
the hypothesis that Whitehead is lazy, deceptive, and even mendacious
when he a ffirms in the preface to Adventures of Ideas the unity of the
undertaking of his three books, Science and the Modern World, Process
and Reality, and Adventures of Ideas. The differences, Whitehead affirms,
reflect the fact that each of these books completes wha t was omitted or
simplified in the other ones. Yet the argument is a bit weak . It is undeni
able that there is continuity, and it goes back much further than the three
books j ust mentioned . In the preface to Science and the Modern World,
Whitehead specifies that this book is the product of thoughts and read
ings pursued for years, without a ny intention of publication ( the author
thus excuses himsel f for the a bsence of reference to his sources, which
is indeed rather remarkabl e ) . But a s I have a l ready emphasized, to say
continuity is not the same as to say " ready-made thought," reeled off as
books provide the occasion, del iberately simpl i fying or omitting some
questions to spare his rea der. Whitehead never spared his readers, and
my reading wager, including narrativizations of what happened to White
head in the course of his writing, is intended to present a " becoming of
continuity."
   My read ing wager is thus that Wh itehead was not lying when he spoke
of the unity of his undertaking, but that, to an equal extent, he refused to
lie by erasing the traces of his i tinerary. The " boredom" he rejected is that
which is the price of the production of mendacious fiction, which wants
authors to establish the portrait of a world they claim to have understood
2 4 4   COS M O LOGY




once and for a l l . As far as possible from certai n ded uction, the text as I
will read it will come to exhibit what Whitehead, as we shall see, under
stands by a " route of occasions " : each occasion must be defined as " hav
ing to take i nto account," " heir," and " obliged," but each occasion has to
decide, for itself and for everything that will subsequently have to take it
into account, its own mode of accou nt. Each has to decide how it will
ha ve been obl iged by what it, de facto, inherits. " Yes, but. "
   To refuse to be bored when writing also means trusti ng the reader, that
is, trusting the becoming, undecidable in any case, that will decide " how"
the reader will read you, on the basis of what demands, that is, of what
experiences. The readers, for their part, a re thus called upon to leave be
hind the status of an ignoramus, faced by an a uthor who says what it is
appropriate to think. They have to head, in their turn, " down the road,"
a road on which thought stumbles at every step, and must invent itself all
over again. Yet throughout Process and Reality the point is indeed to re
invent, and first of a l l to reinvent, while prolonging it, the tradition in
which the book ta kes its place. A tradition which-and this is a test for
the contemporary reader-Whitehead does not hesitate to identify with
rationa lism.
   That we fail to find in experience any elements intrinsically incapable
of exhibition as examples of general theory is the hope of rationalism.
This hope is not a metaphysical premise. It is the faith which forms the
motive for the pursuit of all sciences alike, including metaphysics.
   In so far as metaphysics enables us to apprehend the rationality of
things, the claim is justified. It is always open to us, having regard to the
imperfections of all metaphysical systems, to lose hope at the exact point
where we find ourselves. The preservation of such faith must depend on
an ultimate moral intuition into the nature of intellectual action-that it
should embody the adventure of hope. Such an intuition marks the point
where metaphysics-and indeed every science-gains assurance from reli
gion and passes over into religion. But in itself faith does not embody the
premise from which the theory starts; it is an ideal which is seeking satis
faction. In so far as we believe that doctrine, we are rationalists ( PR, 42 ) .
   The author who diagnoses the point where metaphysics passes over
i nto religion is obviously not religious. Just as whirling dancers do not
need to be reassured that they will not fa l l by sprouting a third leg, for
insta nce, and restoring relevance to the laws of gravitation on each iso
lated body, phi losophers do not need to appea l to religion in order to
preserve their faith, unless they wish to found their hope, provide it with
a guarantor, and constitute it as an exclusive premise. Thus, if rational
ism becomes tha t on which hope in this world depends, it will justi fy
                                            H I C   C I R C U L I .   H I C   S A LT U S   2 4 5




i mperatives and j udgments: " We must, or else despair will reign ." White
head, for his part, intends to trust movement as such, that is, at the same
time, to confer upon it its maximum amplitude, freeing it from the limits
a lways entai led by the concern for foundations. The hope of rationalism
concerns experience, not any kind of rel igious Beyond . The beyond of
experience is always merely i nsurance against the loss of that hope.
  Philosophy destroys its usefulness when it indulges in brilliant feats of
explaining away ( PR, 1 7 ) .
   If w e are rationa l ists, a n d because w e a re rationalists, w e m ust also
be empiricists, and take the demands of empi ricism to their extreme: to
accept as a constraint to deliberately abstain from the great resource
of philosophy, " explaining away," that is, by eliminative j udgment. This
"exploit " is not only a n act of violence committed against what we are
aware of, but also a betrayal of the rationalist hope. The power of hierar
chizing, of red ucing things to an i llusion, of disqualifying, rectifying, i n
short, the power t o j udge that makes the " masters " of thought, then takes
the place of the adventure of reason. The ideal no longer seeks satisfac
tion, at its own peril, but demands satisfaction.
   The regime of read ing and writing by which ideas are explained and
transformed will thus oscillate between what Whitehead calls the " ratio
nal side " and the " empirical side," two sides that render explicit the obli
gations associated with coherence and necessity.
   Logic and coherence express the rational side. As we have seen, the point
is first to refuse all arbitrary disconnection between principles. It demands
a refusa l of the principles that would derive their authority from privi
leged cases, to which they apply so clearly and d istinctly that they seem to
be necessary and sufficient: that is, capable in and of themselves of defin
ing that to which they apply. This is the case, for i nstance, with the two
substances, "extended " and " thinking," in Descartes: the authority of the
principles that define each of them needs nothing other than itself to ex
ist, and, a bove all, they do not need each other. This makes a virtue out of
what is, for Whitehead, a radical i ncoherence. " Cartesian dualism " is a
failure of thought, for its principles a re i ncapable of accounting for the
reason why a world that would be either purely material or purely spiri
tual would be inconceivable.
   What belongs to the " empi rical side" is what provides verification for
the scheme, the success against which Whitehead asks to be eval uated .
From the viewpoint of his interpretations, the scheme must be applicable
and adequate, and it is the practical coupling between adequacy and ap
plication that gives meaning to the need for a system " that bears i n itself
its own warrant of universality."
2 4 6   C O S M O LOGY




  Here "applicable " means that some items of experience are thus inter
pretable [ i n terms of the scheme], and "adequate " means that there are
no items incapable of such an interpretation ( PR, 3 ) .
   The d ifference between applicability and adeq uacy i s announced i n
terms that evoke logic, but in a rather paradoxical way. Indeed , the state
ment that there is no case that escapes interpretation is logica lly equiva
lent to the statement that every case is subject to interpretation, which, it
seems, makes the affirmation that some cases a re i nterpreta ble redundant.
The distinction between appl ica ble and adeq uate is therefore not logical ,
b u t practical.
   The demand for adequacy is the aspect of the empirical side that is di
rectly correlated with the rational side. It obl iges philosophers not to i n
voke any ca use a llowing them to elimina te, forget, treat as an exception,
or disqualify an element of experience. In particular, the scheme must be
able to embrace the very thing that would be invoked in the mode of a
challenge, contradiction, or scanda l : but what do you do with "this "? In
contrast, the a ffirmation "there exists   .  " is the aspect of the empirical
                                               .   .



pole that is correlated with the success of the scheme and with its verifica
tion. Applicability demands that some elements of our experience actualIy
lend themselves to the imaginative leap to which the wordi ng of the
scheme made a mute appeal, prod ucing by that very fact the experience of
their relevance. The cond ition of applicability, when it designates a set of
cases privileged by a metaphysical system, is always fulfilled . It is ful filled
equally well by any science, for every science makes the functions it pro
poses correspond to states of affa irs that exhibit what the function defines
in terms of the articulation between varia bles. Yet when it comes to the
" ra tional adventure ," the freedom with which each science "camps" on its
pri vileged examples, consti tuting them as a territory, becomes a trap.
Appl icability cannot communicate with any normative or even pragmatic
privilege. It cannot correspond to the identification of situations that " lend
themselves" to application ( as is the case, for i nstance, with the paradigms
described by Thomas Kuhn ) . Applica bility must be verified by an inven
tive dynamic, which creates the transformations of meaning and the
stakes required by adequacy.
  The adequacy of the scheme over every item does not mean adequacy
over such items as happen to have been considered ( PR, 3 ) .
   Let u s take, for instance, a statement that seems typica lly t o make na
ture bi furcate: "atoms truly exist ! " Here, one may be tempted to carry
out an act of censorship: "atoms, whether in the sense of Democritus or
in the sense of physics, a re not a n element of our experience, and must be
excl uded." Yet by the sa me movement, the experience of all those who
                                            H I C   C I R C U L I ,   H I C   S A LT U S   2 4 7




actively implicate atoms in their reasoning, and have succeeded in bring
ing them to "explain themselves," for instance, in saying how many there
are in 5 . 92 gal lons of hydrogen, would be censored. For physicists, chem
ists, engineers, the fact is that atoms henceforth " communicate " well
with their experience. It would be an attempt at disqua l i fication, at
tempting to catch the speakers in the act: they don 't know what they 're
saying, they believe what the scientists claim . . .
   In contrast, the statement " atoms truly exist" can and should be linked
to the pragmatic difference that its enunciation in a given situation is sup
posed to make, to the way it is intended to be taken into consideration. If
physicists are confronted by sociologists, who seem to them to shed doubt
on the objectivity of physical real ity, the statement can, in particular, com
municate with an experience of perplexity or shock, and atoms will surge
forth here not in the sense that they are implicated in a specialized reason
ing, but in their capacity as representatives of an "objective reality " : " You
cannot deny that atoms truly exist, independently of human knowledge! "
This challenge a lso communicates with an actual experience, but unlike
the chemist minding her own business, which relies on the possibility for
atoms to be counted, this experience reiterates the mode of differentiation
that made nature bifurcate, a mode which, with the " philosophical pri
mary qual ities," had made it bifurcate well before the physicists and
chemists found a way to make atoms intervene effectively and irrevocably
in their practice.
   If the scheme is adequate, it is thus the link between "you cannot
deny . " and "independently of human knowledge " that it will address
     .   .   .



and constitute as an example of application. And what is then at stake in
this applica tion is no longer the atoms of the physicists, the chemists, and
the engineers. Those atoms by no means exist independently of human
knowledge, since they have only been taken into account insofar as they
have surmounted the tests set up by these scientists, as they have satisfied
demands intended to make the difference that matters for scientists, be
tween free interpretation and interpretation veri fied in a reliable way by
its consequences. Quite the contrary, the point will be to present the
situation-j ust as concrete, but completely distinct-that has given its
meaning and passions to the strict separation between that which, exist
ing independently of human knowledge, should impose agreement be
tween humans and that which, dependent on such knowledge, would
forever be a source of conflict and ill usion.
   Here, then, think ing with Whitehead means learning to celebrate at
oms, but to celebrate them aga inst the bifurcation of nature with which
they are associated, against the breakage of the constitutive link between
2 4 8   C O S M O LOGY




these atoms and the insistent, passiona te urgency of the scientists who
have succeeded in creating the possibility of transforming them i nto inte
gra l and rel ia ble protagonists in their practices. These scientists were part
of an adventure of hope, trusting the possibi l i ty of defeating skepticism:
they and the atoms they succeeded in constituting as the respondents of
their statements require a description that does not stop where habitual
language stops. Whereas we usually have a choice between looking at the
moon while forgetting the finger pointing a t it, or looking a t the finger
and disqua lifying what is designated as releva nt merely to this designa t
ing gesture, the point is to succeed in affirming at the same time both the
finger and what this gesture requires and presupposes, and what this
gestu re gives us to perceive.
   Every science must devise its own instruments. The tool required for
philosophy is language. Thus, philosophy redesigns language in the same
way that, in a physical science, pre-existing appliances are redesigned. It
is exactly at this point that the appeal to facts is a difficult operation. This
appeal is not solely to the expression of the facts in current verbal state
ments. The adequacy of such sentences is the main question at issue. It is
true that the general agreement of mankind as to experienced facts is best
expressed in language. But the language of literature breaks down pre
cisely at the task of expressing in explicit form the larger generalities
the very generalities which metaphysics seeks to express ( PR, 1 1 ) .
   Philosophy is an experimenta l practice like physics, but it experi ments
on la nguage, tha t is, it devises concepts that will have no meaning unless
they succeed in bringi ng to existence those d imensions of experience that
usual statements can ignore, since these statements are insepa ra ble from
specialized thought. Such dimensions are req uired by the general ities of
metaphysics, as it endeavors to achieve neutra lity with rega rd to any spe
cia l ization. In both cases, scientific and speculative, experi mentation
ma kes " truth " and " p roductive practice " correspond. Whereas the exis
tence of atoms, for physicists, chemists, and engineers, has been " veri
fied " by a practice that produces situations in which those a toms have
received the power to impose themselves agai nst the hypothesis that they
are a mere i nterpreta tive fiction, the " truth " of Whiteheadian concepts,
from the events and objects of The Concept of Nature to the speculative
scheme of Process and Reality, is insepara ble from a transformation of
experience. This is wha t Whitehead ca lls " imaginative rationalization."
   We habitually observe by the method of difference. Sometimes we see
an elephant, and sometimes we do not. The result is that an elephant,
when present, is noticed. Facility of observation depends on the fact that
the object observed is important when present, and sometimes is absent.
                                             H I C   C I R C U L I ,   H I C   S A LT U S   2 4 9




   The metaphysical first principles can never fail of exemplification. We
can never catch the actual world taking a holiday from their sway. Thus,
for the discovery of metaphysics, the method of pinning down though t
to the strict systematization of detailed discrimination, already effected by
antecedent observation, breaks down. The collapse of the method of rigid
empiricism is not confined to metaphysics. It occurs whenever we seek the
larger generalities. In natural science this rigid method is the Baconian
method of induction, a method which, if consistently pursued, would have
left science where it found it. What Bacon omitted was the play of a free
imagination, controlled by the requirements of coherence and logic. The
true method of discovery is like the flight of an aeroplane. It starts from
the ground of particular observation; it makes a flight in the thin air of
imaginative generalization; and it again lands for renewed observation
rendered acute by rational interpretation. The reason for the success of this
method of imaginative rationalization is that, when the method of differ
ence fails, factors which are constantly present may yet be observed under
the influence of imaginative thought ( PR, 4-5 ) .
   The transformation o f experience must always be produced. I n other
words, the applications of the scheme are always local . They designate cases
which, at the moment when the plane lands, may seem to be privileged, but
the privilege is nothing other than the possibility thereby gained of a new
type of verification: the imaginative leap. " Imaginative rationa l ization " thus
makes Whiteheadian necessity correspond to a dynamics in which, accord
ing to the expression of Deleuze and G uattari, " to penetrate is to create."
   Correlatively, " reason " no longer corresponds here to any " principle of
parsimony " : the applications, as numerous as one may wish, will have to
take place in the concrete mode of "one by one." Never, therefore, accord
ing to Whitehead, will philosophy give to thought what navigational satel
lites have given aviation: an exhaustive and neutral coverage of the field of
experience. Deduction will never replace discovery, for the latter implies,
each time, a becoming that transforms both the person doing the describing
and what is described . The scheme does not dictate, but it " calls," and the
cal l always requires the elucidation of the concrete meaning of the situation
for the person exploring it, that is, an effective transformation by which the
problem raised by this situation ceases to be general, referring to questions
of right or legitimacy, to become "commitment," exhibiting the kind of im
portance it claims. The concepts devised by Whitehead are therefore in a re
lation of mutual presupposition with the "flight of experience," or the itiner
ary of an interpretation that constructs as it goes what is required by the
dimensions of experience it becomes capable of discerning, and whose im
portance it becomes capable of affirming.
2 5 0   C O S M OLOGY




  The primary advantage thus gained is that experience is not interro
gated with the benumbing repression of common sense ( PR, 9 ) .
   Whitehead's phrase is ambiguous: is common sense what represses or
what is repressed ? Most philosophers would opt for a repressive com
mon sense, but for Whitehea d, common sense is wha t is capa ble of
a ffirming " what we know" wi thout a l lowing itself to be bothered by the
question that poisons modern philosophy: " What can we know ? " ( MT,
74 ) . Specula tive philosophy, wh ich has the vocation of uniting imagina
tion and common sense ( PR, 1 7), thus pursues, with other means, the de
fense of common sense undertaken since The Concept of Nature agai nst
the repressive power of abstractions a nd the authority given special ized
theories, which makes our knowledge bifurcate.
    It goes without saying, however, tha t the " fl ight of experience " which
Process and Reality tries to induce through, with, and against language
has no critical or demystifying vocation with regard to the special ized
la nguages. The point is no more to set up immediate experience against
atoms tha n it is to establish the objectivity of the sciences against the zest
for existence, as refreshed by the importance of our immediate actions.
The point is to trace a " line of flight" with regard to these oppositions that
a re optimally expressed by philosophica l language. In particular, the gen
eralities at which Whitehead a ims cannot, therefore, leave intact any
" fact" that presupposes the grea t dividing line between subject and object,
upon which most phi losophical languages comment even when they seem
to justify it. Yet this flight has nothing to do with the takeoff of an inspira
tion, with the efficacy of an emergent conviction that sweeps away opposi
tions by the power of a general " vision," be it mystica l, poetic, or dia lecti
ca l. To be sure, the Whiteheadian scheme is, for Whitehead, a " matrix," but
here we must not understand matrix in a vital or fluid sense, as the spon
taneous source of a living thought beyond dea d oppositions. " Ma trix"
must be understood in the sense of mathematics: a device mute in itself,
representing nothi ng, calling for a leap of the imagination, tha t is, having
meaning only through the transformations, always " this" transforma tion,
produced by its " a pplications."
  The use of such a matrix is to argue from it boldly and with rigid logic.
The scheme should therefore be stated with the utmost precision and
definiteness ( PR, 9 ) .
   Whitehead h a d defined the ambition o f speculative phi losophy by
necessity, coherence, and logic. In the name of necessity and coherence,
logic, as we have seen, was stripped of its power to define, that is, also to
sort. Yet here it is in its rightful place, coupled with a udacity. Logic only
gi ves orders when it places thinkers in difficulty, when it obliges them to
                                             H I C   C I RC U L I ,   H I C   S A lT U S   2 5 1




go farther, when it forces them to create, i n cases where they thought they
could prolong an already formulated situation. The adventure of rational
ity i n Whitehea d 's sense, i n the sense of an i deal seeking satisfaction,
affirms the most radica l divergence from the critical or logical positi vist
ideal, which, since the latter is j udicial, does not seek but rather demands
satisfaction . And this divergence will find its full unfolding in what seems
to have been one of Whitehead 's last conceptual creations in the adven
ture of Process and Reality: the audacious, logical transformation of God
into an actual entity endowed with a " consequent nature." Another circle:
the truth of Whitehead's God presupposes that upon which this God will
confer his metaphysical j ustification, that is, the audacity and trust that
may al low destructive contradictions to be surmounted. Here, speculative
creation can be a udible only in its very movement: in that it presupposes
the realization of what is i ntended by its concepts, the elimination of the
" benumbing repression " that suggests that we carry out a heroic sorting
process, separati ng what is " rationally j ustifiable" from what is " vital." At
the cost of eliminating that which we might need, but which, we should
admit, is a matter of mere fiction.
   One might nevertheless fear the total izing character of the circle de
vised i n this way: the phi losopher would be the person through whom
the rea l i ty of what exists finall y accedes to i tself or to a finally coherent
explanation. Except that this expla nation is openly factitious, fa bricated
in a philosophical way, and in an experimental mode. It is only i mportant
to the extent that it succeeds, where the multiple experiences whose
scheme runs the risk of i nterpretation will patiently allow themselves to
be infected by the translations it carries out of them, and will accept the
contributions it proposes to them as important.
   The circle never stops turning. As a generic notion, importance i mplies
that the very meaning of what exists is proposed in pragmatic terms-the
production of what matters . But the i mportance of this proposition can
only claim a pragmatic j ustification-is the transformation of experience
produced by this proposition important?
   In literal terms, pragmatism thus proposes not so much a new definition
of truth as a method of experimentation, or construction for new truths.
To experiment is to consider theory as a creative practice. This is why it is
no longer a question of knowing what is true, but how truth comes about.
And this question is itself inseparable from another one: what does the
truth do? A true idea, in the pragmatic sense, is an idea that changes some
thing in a satisfactory way in the mind of the person thinking it. The true
idea is not only what one believes, does, or thinks, it is what makes us
believe, makes us act or makes us think (WJEP, 59 ) .
2 5 2   COSMOLOGY




   Pragmatism as a method for the production of new truths is no doubt
the key to the construction of Whitehead 's cosmology; yet this construc
tion is not the advent of the truth of the cosmos but merely one of its
"exemplifications." The production of speculative phi losophy belongs, in
its constra ints and its hopes, to a " particular human special ty," which is
certainly importa nt, but loca l : the adventure of rationa l ism. The starti ng
poi nt is thus "conti ngent" insofar as it designates its " milieu " : both wha t
obl iges Whitehead to think and what enjoins hope. Of course, Whitehead
seems to return toward a ma nner of thinking held to be i rrepa ra bly out
dated, but the movement he proposes, beca use it affirms itsel f to be an
adventure, produces the mime of a return operation. The " fl ight of expe
rience " reawa kens and activates wha t modern philosophy had renounced
in order to be a ble to attribute to truth the ability to defea t skepticism. It
constructs " true ideas," but thei r truth is exhibited as rela tive to this flight
and to the obligations (coherence, adequacy ) that make it exist. Correla
tively, the knowledge that the scheme should produce, and therefore the
transformation of experience it should induce, are not a reencounter with
a truth on which we have turned our backs but the production of a new
truth . This i mpl ies, in a circular way, the parad igmatic case for which
Whitehead 's scheme will have to exhi bit its appl ica ble character: it should
give mea ning to the production of new truths.
   A new exhi bition of the circle: the scheme proposes the ca tegories of a
world, but the categories do not define a rea lity independent of the pro
cess that produces this proposition. Wha t exhi bits a rea lity is the propo
sition and its effect, tha t is, the working of the scheme, the flight tha t is at
the same time tha t of experience and tha t which transforms experience,
and the point is thus less to define them tha n to bring them to existence.
The ca tegories make us think in a way that exhi bits the rea lity of which
they propose the definition. Whereas rea l ity becomes philosophica l, phi
losophy becomes rea l ization. Or, as Deleuze and Guatta ri proposed,
philosophy in this sense is doing for thought what a synthesizer does for
listening: "making audible the sound process itsel f, the production of
that process [ . . . I Philosophy is no longer synthetic j udgment; it is l i ke a
thought synthesizer functioning to make thought travel, make it mobi le,
make it a force of the Cosmos " ( M P, 424 ) .
   A s the reader will have understood, when describing how Whitehead's
scheme works, I have also presented my approach, the one dictated to me
by an author who becomes a reader, returning indefatiga bly to what he
has written in the mode of " Yes, but . . . " If the writing of Process and
Reality entangled " flights of experience" by Whi tehead himself, every
reading of Process and Reality can constitute, in i ts own way, an entangle-
                                           H I C   C I RC U L I ,   H I C   S A LT U S   2 5 3




ment of fl ights of experience, both experiencing and putting to the test the
scheme that induces it. Each flight is singular. The ones Whitehead carried
out as an author have the peculiarity of having produced, in their very
itineraries, the scheme that should constitute the matrix for the totality of
"Whiteheadian flights." Those we can attempt, more than sixty years after
his death, should not have understa nding what Whitehead thought as
their prima ry goal, but rather experiencing and putting to the test what it
means to " think with Whitehea d " i n our epoch, which he did not know,
   This flight has already begun, for The Concept of Nature and Science
and the Modern World are, in this perspective, certainly part of the same
history, and they report the first " landings " of the Whitehead ian flight. We
will, moreover, have occasion to revisit sites we have a l ready explored :
the question of l iving beings, that of bodies, that of perceptive experi
ence, and, of course, that of the bifurcation of nature, for they designate
what fi rst incited me to think with Whitehead, the possibility of descri b
ing in a different way the terrains popul ated by the abstractions to which
philosophica l thought has granted the power to j udge experience. Other
stagings were certainly possi ble, in particular those that would have al
lowed a more systematic reference to the keywords of philosophical tra
dition or to the treatment to which Whitehead subjects his predecessors.
But these would be other flights, produced by other readers, whom White
head had guided through other questions. No reading of Whitehead
such is my wager--can be " neutral ." All must combine experimentation
and putting to the test, thereby prolonging the adventure of an ideal
seeking satisfaction.
                                                            C H A P TER   S I X TEEN
