Th i n k i ng under the Constra i nt of Creativity




          N ALL PHILOSOPHICAL THEORY
      I
                                             there is an ultimate which is ac
       tual in virtue of its accidents. It is only then capable of character
       ization through its accidental embodiments, and apart from these
accidents is devoid of actuality. In the philosophy of organism this ulti
mate is termed "creativity " ( PR, 7 ) .
   The ultimate, i n Whitehead 's sense, cannot, as w e recal l , b y any means
be identified with any form of transcendence, in the sense that any kind
of sublime or intrinsically unthinkable cha racter would be attached to it.
If there is transcendence, it is a " technica l " tra nscendence. The ultimate is
not the j udge of problems and opinions, but is rela tive to the way the
problem is framed and therefore li able to cha nge along with the problem.
This is why the Whiteheadian ultimate, whatever its avatars, will always
communicate with what is "without reason," not in the sense of the point
of col lapse of all reason but in the sense in which every reason is a solu
tion to a problem and cannot therefore transcend the " fact" that the prob
lem was raised in this way and not otherwise, communicati ng with some
determinate designation of the ultimate, and not with another.
   The Concept of Nature and Science and the Modern World already
designated distinct " ultimates," presupposed by all the statements corre
sponding to the problematic space that was to be constructed . In The
Concept of Nature, the ultimate designated the " mind," so that to nature
had to correspond a concept that would make it the " respondent" ca l led
upon by each of the " acci dental incarnations " of the mind, that is, by
each of the footholds that succeeded, implying, at least at a first a pproxi
mation, that d ue atten tion has been pai d to this nature. In Whitehead's
              T H I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   C O N ST R A I N T   O F   C R E AT I V I T Y   2 5 5




first metaphysica l construction, at the end of Science and the Modern
 World, God appea red as the ultimate, the foundation of all concrete ac
tua l i ty, in the double sense of the ultimate a rbitrary and of the ultimate
principle of determination: that which i s presupposed by any construc
tion of reason, and which we therefore ca nnot define in terms of reason.
The ultimate i rra tiona l i ty constituted by the existence of God was to be
followed, in Process and Reality, by what is neither rational nor irrationa l
as such, but has, with regard to this opposition, the neutrality of meta
physics. Whitehead baptizes this ultimate as "creativity."
    Creativity was a l ready presupposed by the definition of specula tive
phi losophy: it is what is presupposed and exhibited by the " i maginative
rationality " associated with the "flight of experience." As an ultimate, how
ever, it is not what will j ustify specula tive philosophy, nor what the latter
m ust thi n k . As is a ttested by Process and R eality's subtitle, "An Essay i n
Cosmology," it is t h e cosmos t h a t is henceforth t o b e concei ved. Not,
however-especially not-in the form of a " cosmic creativity." If White
head had made the reference to the cosmos his " ultimate," it would have
constituted a genuine tra nscendence, that in the name of which the actual
may be j udged, that which demands that thought recognize the d iffer
ence between cosmos and chaos, and place itself in the service of cosmos.
The ultimate would then consti tute, behind the scenes, the secret of rea l
i ty. This is why "crea tivity" is a bove all not " cosmic." In itself, it has no
d iscriminating character. Wi th regard to i t, everythi ng that happens must
be sa id in the same mode: that of the accident.
    Crea tivity thus has the neutra l i ty of metaphysics, and obliges the phi
losophy tha t defines it as " ultimate " to ta ke the risk that is proper to
empiricism : to a ffirm all tha t exists, all tha t happens, all that i s created
qua i rreducible to a reason higher than the decision to exist, to happen in
this and in no other way, to affirm a nd exhibit such-and-such a va lue and
no other. And i f everything we have to dea l with a t each i nstant, i nclud
i ng ourselves, must be said to be first and foremost a n " accident" of cre
ativity, a l l that is to be thought, i ncluding the hypothesis that we have
to do with a cosmos, must first be greeted with eq uanimity as a new a nd
interesting exemplification of crea tivity.
   "Creativity " is another rendering of the Aristotelian "matter," and of the
modern "neutral stuff. " But it is divested of the notion of passive recep
tivity, either of "form," or of external relations; it is the pure notion of
the activity conditioned by the objective immo rtality of the actual world
a world which is never the same twice, though always with the stable
element of divine ordering. Creativity is without a character of its own in
exactly the same sense in which the Aristotelian "matter " is without a
2 S 6   COSMOLOGY




character of its own. It is that ultimate notion of the highest generality at
the base of actuality. It cannot be characterized, because all characters are
more special than itself. But creativity is always found under conditions,
and described as conditional ( PR, 3 1 ) .
    In a sense, crea tivity as Whitehead has j ust presented it seems to pro
long the " eterna l activity " tha t Science and the Modern World had placed
under the banner of a triple envisagement. Yet the fra ming of the prob
lem has changed. Eterna l activity presented itself as an abstraction, and
as such was qualified by what it shou ld give mea ning to, by the possibili
ties of va lue, in contrast to the actua l ity that is value. Creativity, for its
part, is bereft of qualifications. In particular, we must avoid associating
it with a n underlying i mpulse. Its "activity " has nothing to do with the
power of a river, that always ends up destroying the banks that imprison
it. Creativity is " activity," but activity affirms, simultaneously and insepa
ra bly, the river a nd the banks without which there would be no river,
whether i t overflows or not.
    However, it wi ll be objected, creativity, according to Whitehead, can
only be descri bed as "condi tioned." And "condition " is never very fa r from
"expl ication " : the condition then allows the deduction of what is subject
to it. The river's course can be deduced from the rel ief of its banks. If, how
ever, in addition, wha t conditions creativity a lways entails " the stable ele
ment of divine ordering," how can we avoid reducing creativity to some
kind of more or less tracta ble materia l, whereas intelligibility, legitimacy,
rationa lity, and right refer to what conditions it?
    Let us leave the " divine ordering " in indeterminacy for the moment,
and limit ourselves to noting that it does not contradict what, in The Con
cept of Nature, was cal led " passage," both of nature and experience. Let
us affi rm right off the bat that the entire conceptua l construction pro
posed by the metaphysica l scheme of Process and Reality is an answer to
this problem : to express in concepts wha t condi tions crea tivity, in a mode
that does not make the condition a principle of explanation; to create the
concepts that make what is produced under a condition converge with
what produces its own reason. And it is this problem that Whitehead
begins to solve when he selects the terms that wi ll intervene in the fi rst of
the four series of ca tegories included i n the scheme, the " ca tegory of the
ultima te." This selection is risky, for these terms, if they ca me to com
municate in a privi leged way with special ized characteristics, including
those that correspond to the cosmic hypothesis, would sea l the defeat of
the attempt.
  "Creativity," "many," "one " are the ultimate notions involved in the
meaning of the synonymous terms. These three notions complete the
              TH I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   CONSTR A I N T   OF   C R E AT I V I T Y   2 5 7




Category of the Ultimate and are presupposed in all the more special
categories.
   The term "one " does not stand for "the integral number one," which is a
complex special notion. It stands for the general idea underlying alike the
indefinite article "a or an," and the definite article "the," and the demonstra
tives " this or that," and the relatives " which or what or how." It stands for
the singularity of an entity. The term "many " presupposes the term "one,"
and the term "one " presupposes the term "many." The term "many " conveys
the notion of "disjunctive diversity "; this notion is an essential element in the
concept of "being." There are many "beings " in disjunctive diversity [ . . . J
   " Creativity " is the principle of novelty. A n actual occasion is a novel
entity diverse from any entity in the "many " which it unifies [ . . . J
   "Together " is a generic term covering the various special ways in
which various sorts of entity are "together " in any one actual occasion.
Thus "together " presupposes the notions " creativity," "many," "one,"
"identity," and "diversity." The ultimate metaphysical principle is the ad
vance from disjunction to conjunction, creating a novel entity other than
the entities given in disjunction. The novel entity is at once the together
ness of the "many " which it finds, and also it is one among the disjunctive
"many " which it leaves; it is a novel entity, disjunctively among the many
entities which it synthesizes. The many become one, and are increased by
one [ . . . J
   Thus the "production of novel togetherness " is the ultimate notion
embodied in the term " concrescence." These ultimate notions of "produc
tion of novelty " and of "concrete togetherness " are inexplicable either in
terms of higher universals or in terms of the components participating in
the concrescence. The analysis of the components abstracts from the con
crescence. The sole appeal is to intuition ( PR, 2 1 -22 ) .
   A s we can see, Whitehead proceeds with the greatest precaution. The
creator of axioms is at work, demanding as general as possible an ar
ticulation between the primary terms of his system, those that are pre
supposed by metaphysical statements and will never be explained by
them. At this stage, therefore, it is i mpossible to explain, for every expla
nation will imply the primary terms. It is nevertheless possi ble to accen
tuate, and, in the present case, to accentuate the contrast between the
many, placed under the banner of d isj unction, and the one, placed under
the banner of conj unction ( togetherness ) . The fact that we ha ve to deal
with primary terms means that one will never ask why there is a con
j unction, that is, how i t comes about that the many can become one.
What will have to be characterized is the " how," which Whitehead re
lates d irectly, qua " relative," to the " one." This certai nly indicates that
2 5 8   COSMOLOGY




there cannot be a genera l " how," that is, that every conj unction is, as
such, " new."
   Creativity is the principle of novelty, and a l l the primary terms White
head a rticulates have the vocation of giving meaning to this definition.
Thus, the fact that the many are characterized by disj unction excludes a
"together" that would explain the unity of their synthesis, or their together
ness produced by the new unity. And the fact that the latter, once pro
duced, shou ld be added to the many in the mode of disj unction excl udes
any dominant position of the synthesis with regard to what it synthesizes.
Every synthesis is " new," and everything must be started all over again
every time.
   Novelty thus has no need of being defended : it is generic. All production,
whatever it is, constitutes, by the same token as any other, an "accidental
incarnation " of creativity. The "many " have become "one" in this way, and
not otherwise. No higher universal will al low the resorption of this " fact."
In other words, creativity, which is neutral, is not to be celebrated . On the
contrary, it induces a rather peculiar humor. For both the "calculating
thought" denounced by Heidegger as " forgetfulness of being " and its own
meditative remembrance a re testimonies to creativity. Creativity is j ust as
much affirmed by the reasoning that Bergson condemns as the spatializing
negation of duration as by the harmonic intuition of that duration .
   Whitehead ian humor is formidable, and deeply annoying, because it
cancels any dramaturgy of thought. In his terms, when Bergson writes, for
instance, that " time is an invention or it is nothing at all," the invention of
this grandiose a lternative should be saluted as new, as a purely Bergsonian
"cry." In contrast, the possibility of taking the a lternative itself seriously,
or of conferring upon it the ability to close the philosophical debate, may
be ignored . It is the cry itself that bears witness and is added to the terms
of the opposition it articulates. What Bergson calls " invention " is not cre
ativity but creativity "on condition," the conditions that correspond to the
specialized categories designating what he calls " intuition."
   The fact that creativity, as an ultimate, cannot be conceived as such,
that we can never characterize it " in itself" but a lways on condition, that
we can descri be it only as cond itioned : all this by no means constitutes
"limits of thought " in the sense that the term " l imit" wou ld imply the
possibility of transgression or the evocation of The One for whom such
limits do not exist. What is unknowable is unknown, and any pretended
transgression will constitute another accidental "creature " of creativity,
cond itioned by the terms that define the limit that, in this case, matters.
Instead of a l i mit, it is fitting to speak of an obl iging constraint. As an
ulti mate, creativity obliges the thinker to a ffirm that all the verbs used,
              T H I N K I N G   U N D E R   TH E   C O N STR A I N T   OF   C R E AT I V I TY   2 5 9




" to characterize," " to have to deal with," " to descri be," themselves pre
suppose creativity. As soon as a situation matters enough for us to be
tempted to see in it an " example of creativity," the generic terms " one"
and " many" will have been specified, and thought will be conditioned by
special ized categories, those that matter for this situation . Once again,
this specification is not a screen, and does not sepa rate us from an inacces
sible truth. It is neither a source of nostalgia nor an object of denuncia
tion, nor, above all, the instrument of a critique of the fal lacious character
of a l l explanation. If creativity intervened as a critical instrument, it would
be characterized, ena bling such-and-such a position to be defended against
such-and -such another, whereas both a re j ust as much its accidents. As a
constra int, the neutrality of creativity thus has as its first effect to turn us
away from the temptation always constituted for thinkers by a position
that a ffi rms itself to be " neutra l," defining them as " not participa ting "
in a deba te, which they will then be a ble to adjudicate. In Whitehead's
speculative ph i losophy, there is no position of adj udicator, or else every
"creature of creativity " is the carrying out of an adjudication, and adju
dicators themselves are the one as unifying the many.
   Correlatively, creativity obl iges us to think of conditions. There is not,
nor can there be, any tension between creativity and condition ing, nor
even between novelty and explanation, for novelty is inseparable from
the way something is expla ined by something, the way a being is cond i
tioned by what Whitehead often calls its " socia l environment." Nothi ng
is more al ien to Whitehead than the strategy of Descartes' " radical doubt,"
which underta kes to make a clean sweep of a ny inference that could be
recognized as ficti ve or mendacious but forgets a l l that is presupposed by
this very approach, incl uding the fact that his decision and his research
presuppose, at the very least, words to formulate the legitimate reasons
to reject, one a fter the other, everything that is no longer to be believed .
Descartes' doubt requires the special ized social envi ronment which, most
creati vely, it undertakes to j udge.
   The data upon which the sub;ect passes ;udgment are themselves com
ponents conditioning the character of the ;udging sub;ect. It follows that
any presupposition as to the character of the experiencing sub;ect also
implies a general presupposition as to the social environment providing
the display for that sub;ect. In other words, a species of sub;ect requires
a species of data as its preliminary phase of concrescence [ . . . 1 The spe
cies of data requisite for the presumed ;udging sub;ect presupposes an
environment of a certain social character ( PR, 203 ) .
   You think you a re free to interrogate what you have to dea l with, like
a j udge demanding an explanation . And you come to ask yourself i f the
2 6 0   COSMOLOGY




explanations you constantly, and successfully, provide refer to a world
whose reasons it renders explicit, or if they merely refer to your own inter
pretations. But it is you yourself who, by interpreting, prod uce yourself
from this world which you interpret. And the very act that produces you
qua j udging bears witness, by itself, to the fact that the d isj unct many
you gather under the unity of a judgment were indeed ( socially) lia ble to
turn you into a j udge.
   "I'm the one who asks the questions ": in fact, however, it is already the
dissolved self of the one being questioned that speaks through his tor
turer ( D R, 255 ) .
    Perhaps i t i s the experimental sciences that constitute the most dramatic
example of this co-creation between judgment and social environment. It
is in reference to these sciences that Kant celebrated as the " Copernican
revolution " the "discovery " that it was not fitting to learn from nature as if
it was a master, that the knowing subject was rather submitting it to the
question, like a judge interrogating a prisoner according to the categories
that allow offense and delinquent to be identified . Kant might well have
believed he had stabilized the relations between subject and object, giving
the sciences their horizon, that of a monotonous el ucidation of the way in
which the object is indeed, once and for all, determined by the categories of
the subject, but scientists cannot, any more than judges or torturers, pre
vent their decree from being taken up into new adventures. Whatever may
be the reasons mobil ized by the judgment, or the claims that accompany it,
these reasons and these claims will come to be added to the indefinitely
proliferating cohort of the many available for a new unification, condition
ing a new creation. The very justifications they will invoke in order to claim
to transcend apparent diversity toward what conditions that diversity will
condition the creative advance, adding to the disparate diversity that will
constitute the problematic terrain for new syntheses.
    In fact, Kant was extremely creative: he had to be, in order to turn Gali
leo, the prototype of the scientist who has carried out his Copernican revo
lution, into a " knowing subject" testifying to a generality. If there is one
case that exhibits itself a vector of novelty, it is indeed the case of the two
fold " prod uction " of a Galileo discovering that he is capable of telling the
difference between fiction and scientific statement, and a new type of data
( " experimental " ) that confers this capacity upon him. The production of
Galileo the experi menter, and of his data, is inseparable from the new envi
ronment constituted, as soon as they are produced, by "the experimental
laboratory," that is, in this case the new type of apparatus that conditions
this double production, the inclined plane that transforms the way a ball
rolls into an ( " objective" ) argument judging away what is then nothing
              TH I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   C O N STR A I N T   OF   C R E AT I V I T Y   2 6 1




more than Aristotle's "opinion." And the entire experimental adventure of
physics, even if it can be placed under the banner of the ever-renewed
" face-to-face " between " judge" and " na ture," which this judge summons
to answer his questions, a lso narra tes the fa brication of the increasingly
sophisticated social environments required by that face-to-face. In so-called
high energy physics, the face-to-face in question needs years of preparation
and demands a meticulous articulation between an indefinite number of
instruments, the creation of languages intermed iary between " data " and
theories, the mobilization of hundreds of researchers, the invention of a r
guments suitable for convincing politicians and inspiring the public, and so
on. Yet the most elementary judgment, the one carried out by a (condi
tioned ) pigeon when it pecks at circular forms and not the others, also re
quires an indefinite and disparate number of stabilized relations, a hybrid
social environment intermingling the pigeons and the psychologists who
undertake to pass judgment on the pigeon's capacity to judge.
    As a principle of novelty, creativity does not impose any limit on expla
nation but merely suggests that explanation not forget the social environ
ment that simultaneously conditions it, and conditions what is proposed
as explica ble. This does not mean, however, that an explanation is " rela
tive " in the sad sense in which relativism announces the ironic and disen
chanted equivalence of a l l explanations, hel d to be eq ually fictitious. For
this would sti ll be to appeal-only to declare it impossible-to an ideal
that cannot be stated by any language obliged by creativity, and that does
not communicate with any actual experience. What is unknowable is
unknown . "The only appeal," Whitehead concl udes, " is to intuition " : not
to Bergsonian intu ition, which resists intellectual constructions, but to
the constructed intuition I have characterized as the " fl ight of experience."
Yet this flight a lso exempl ifies creativity in a way that is cond itioned by a
"social environment" : the environment constituted by the scheme, and
the demands for coherence to which it responds.
    In Process and Reality, the call to intuition will be produced in a way
that counteracts a ny confusion between creativity as an ul timate relative
to the problem articulated by the scheme, and any romantic figure of
emergent, spontaneous creativity " without a reason ." To avoid such con
fusion, it is not enough, as I have emphasized, to a ffirm that creativity is
always conditioned. The image of a pipe channeling the great creative
flow, adjusting its emergent activi ty in a passive way, would still be pos
si ble. We must affirm the impossibil ity of distinguishing between passive
cond itioning and active prod uction . And it is this affirmation that will be
sounded by the "ontological principle," taking up the pa radigmatic ratio
nalist cry: " noth ing happens without a reason ! "
2 6 2   COSMOLOGY




  According to the ontological principle there is nothing which {loats
into the world from nowhere ( PR, 244 ) .
    Officially, the ontologica l principle corresponds, within the scheme, to
the eighteenth category of explanation. As its na me ind icates, however, it
is by no means one category among others, and it receives, moreover, a
large number of distinct formulations in the course of the text, conferring
on it a differently accentuated relevance each time. The version I have
j ust cited is opposed to the appeal to a " spontaneity" that comes from
nowhere. This is also the aim of the formulation that a ppears in the eigh
teenth category, but this time it forbids, in a more explicit way, that cre
ativity or any other generic principle be invoked by way of a reason .
  This ontological principle means that actual entities are the only rea
sons; so that to search for a reason is to search for one or more actual
entities ( PR, 24 ) .
  Since an actual entity is always " this" entity, n o reason can have a gen
era l value. The ontologica l principle thus implies that there is no stable
difference between expla nation and description, but only distinctions
dea ling with what matters, and with the environments required by what
matters . Correlatively, other formulations emphasize, for their part, that
what must " be explained " exhaustively in terms of " its " reasons, that is,
the way in which " the many become one," is a " decision."
   The ontological principle asserts the relativity of decision; whereby
every decision expresses the relation of the actual thing, for which a deci
sion is made, to an actual thing by which that decision is made ( PR, 43 ) .
   The ontological principle declares that every decision is referable to
one or more actual entities, because in separation from actual entitles
there is nothing, merely nonentity- " The rest is silence " ( PR, 4 3 ) .
   A s a " category o f explanation," the ontologica l principle may seem to
concern "our" sea rch for reasons, ask ing us not to refer to genera lities,
to abstractions, to anything that claims to transcend " this" world-or, at
least, not to do so in ignorance of the fact that in no case will we arrive,
in this way, " beyond empirical appearances." The ontological principle
thus takes on an "epistemological " import, demanding that every expla
nation exhi bit itself as a testi mony to creativity, that is, to this extent,
contingent, accidenta l, and properly " democratic." No explanation can
lay claim to a higher instance of j ustification than what makes a d iffer
ence for it, what matters for it. Yet when it comes to " decision," the prin
ciple takes on a truly ontological import, an import that will deprive the
rationa list cry " nothing is without a reason " of all its epistemological
power, as it will oppose any possibil ity of esta blishing communication
              TH I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   C O N STRA I N T   OF   C R E AT I V I T Y   2 6 3




between " reason " and "submission to a deduction." Everything has a
reason, but everything is equally decision. Rational ity is usua lly cele
brated, or criticized, because it intends to subject everything that happens
to reasons. Whitehead is fully rational ist, but he takes this rational i ty to
the l imit, and therefore makes it change its nature.
  To ensure the divorce between reason and submission, however, it is not
enough for reason and explanation to divorce, as is shown by the Lei bniz
ian operation: the divorce between reason and human explanation did
not prevent Lei bniz from invoking a God to make reason and explanation
converge. The divorce will be actual, however, if among the reasons that
ma ke a being exist, there appears the decision of this bei ng itself. Among
the actual beings that a re the only reasons, the ontological principle will
include the actua l entity that " decides for itself" : thus, and not otherwise.
  The ontological principle can be expressed as: All real togetherness is
togetherness in the formal constitution of an actuality ( PR, 32 ) .
   For Whitehead, " reason " does not communicate with " submission." A
being becomes determined by determin ing its reasons: such is the mean
ing of what Whitehead ca lls " the formal constitution of an actuality."
Whereas the notion of submission impl ies that the " reasons" have in
themsel ves the power of determining what they will be the reason of, this
power, accord ing to the ontologica l principle, must itself have a reason :
only in the process of constitution of the entity of which they will be
reasons a re reasons a rticulated, " put together," in a way that confers
upon each of them its determinate power.
   Let us think, for instance, of a judge's decision . This decision must be
based on multiple considerations, and yet the j udge is anything but sub
missive, for it is the decision itself that has assembled these considerations,
and presented them in a way that makes the judgment their consequence.
Yet this does not make j udge's decision arbitrary. It is "conditioned," but
it is the judgment itself that determines the relation between the decision
and what conditions it. Whitehead can therefore accept that everything
has a reason, that nothing happens without a reason, that nothi ng "comes
from nowhere " : yet all the while specifying that, of course, nothing is a
reason independently of the way in which a decision produces it qua the
reason for this decision or this actuality.
   Every decision is thus explained by its reasons, and as such it exempli
fies creativity, the way in which " the many become one." Creativity has
then nothing to do with a form of " s upplement of soul," of " subjective
eva l ua tion " of what is given, adding a touch of origi nality to what al
ready holds together. It is presupposed by this very " holding-together."
2 6 4   C O S M O LOGY




Nothing holds together independently of a decision, which is played over
again each time with regard to the " how," with rega rd to the way it will
hold together.
   The ontological principle will place the rational pole of Whitehead's
system under a constraint that forbids it any facility, any shortcut to the
transcendence of what might claim to be indubitable, to go without saying,
holding together by itself, without risk, without adventure. The principle
will demand reasons, while forbidding that the slightest authority be con
ferred upon reasons. If you're looking for a reason, you are looking for an
actual element that conditions creativity, but don't forget that the very
way this element cond itions creativity affirms this creativity j ust as much,
for it is the decision through which what has produced itsel f as "one " has
produced its reasons that has determined the actual role played by this
conditioning.
   In a sense, an actual occasion is causa sui ( P R , 8 6 ) .
   Neither creativity a s a n ultimate, nor the ontological principle have as
sumed their full i mport independently of the process of writing Process
and Reality. The smart reader, who has not forgotten the "divine order
ing," a stable element cond itioning creativity, will have already understood
that this process of determination must have involved the question of God .
If the ontological principle is to take on its full import, God will have to
figure among the actual entities "that are the only reasons," for otherwise
he would be metaphysically useless. What is more, like all other entities,
God will have to " make a difference " without having the power to define
the difference he will make. In fact, in the conceptual adventure constituted
by the writing of Process and Reality, the ontological principle is insepara
ble from the construction of the concept of God, until the final decision, in
which Whitehead will propose a divine experience that would be, in its
way, the "conseq uence " of the constitutive decisions of the (other ) actual
entities. We will return to this point, but let us emphasize already that
without this decision, an eventual "d ivine ordering " would have consti
tuted an infraction against the ontological principle. In order not to corre
spond to a form of transcendental "togetherness," this ordering will have
to have actual entities as its reasons; that is, these entities will have to be
reasons for God . But this is possible only i f God himsel f becomes, produc
ing these reasons as " his" reasons.
   Perhaps we can imagine Whitehead at the mo ment when he came to
conceive of this major phi losophico-theological innovation. He did not
and this is a constant element of his position-wa nt any part of a creator
God . Moreover, when he decided to ma ke creativity the " ultimate " af-
             T H I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   C O NSTR A I N T   O F   C R E AT I V I T Y   2 6 5




firmed by his system, he had a l ready been forced to a bandon a possibil ity
he had envisaged in 1 926, in Religion in the Making: that of God as a
" principle," " idea l entity," or " formative element," that is, an a uthority
bereft of individual ity, a name for an aspect of the creative advance of the
worl d . Since creativity is the ul timate, none of its aspects can any longer
be named, that is, privileged . God can no longer be a principle, and if
Whitehead needs him, he wil l have to be conceived, l ike everything else,
as an "accident of creativity."
   Whitehead had thus arrived at the hypothesis, which subsists in many
pages of Process and Reality, that God m ight be actual and not temporal,
required as a " reason " for the actuality of new possibilities, and identi
fied as such with the eternal envisagement of all ideal possibilities. Sud
denly, however, he decided to ta ke the decisive step.
   Opposed elements stand to each other in mutual requirement. In their
unity, they inhibit or contrast. God and the World stand to each other in
this opposed requirement. God is the infinite ground of all mentality. The
World is the multiplicity of finites, actualities seeking a perfected unity.
Neither God, nor the World, reaches static completion. Both are in the
grip of the ultimate metaphysical ground, the creative advance into nov
elty ( PR, 348-3 49 ) .
   The very cry o f coherence resounds here. Retroactively-for i t i s always
retroactively that a position is sensed as incoherent-the nontemporal God
who has j ust disappeared can indeed be diagnosed as a poor solution; a
strong-arm move or an ad hoc response, since this God has no other role
than to respond to a difficulty. For Whitehead, an actual but nontemporal
God had no other " reason" than to act as a remedy for the confrontation
between two kinds of reason: those designated by the ontological princi
ple, referring to the actuality of decisions already taken, "objectively im
mortal," and those that imply a reference to what is possible, without
which our experience could never be interpreted adequately but merely
red uced�ven if, according to Spi noza, such reduction is the path to wis
dom. Coherence, however, is little concerned with wisdom, but it demands
the reciprocal presupposition: if we need God, he must need us. The " deci
sion " to endow God with a consequent nature will thus mark the passage
from the voluntarist postulate to the positive articulation of reasons: con
frontation becomes reciprocal presupposition .
   God can no more be conceived independently of the World than the
World can be conceived independently of Him. A moment of properly
Whiteheadian decision, but also of perplexity: will everything have to be
rewritten ?
2 6 6   C O S M O LOGY




   In the subsequent discussion, "actual entity " will be taken to mean a
conditioned actual entity of the temporal world, unless G od is expressly
included in the discussion. The term "actual occasion " will always ex
clude God from its scope ( PR, 8 8 ) .
   This "warning " brutally concludes a d iscussion ( inserted late) o f how
the divine works. In the history of phi losophical literature, it proba bly
constitutes the most discrete signa l of a major conceptua l upheaval ever
emitted . Whitehead refused to get bored, and no doubt renounced verify
ing every occurrence of the term "actua l entity." For some of them, from
now on, can bea r j ust as much upon God as upon actua l occasions, since
God is no longer merely a nontempora l accident of creativi ty, but, l i ke all
other entities, a "creature of creativity." Rather than proceeding to an
exha ustive sorting process, Whitehead thus limited hi mself, where it was
importa nt, to pointing out explicitly that God is included in the sta te
ment. In the other cases, " by default," it is better for the reader to think
exclusively of the entities that belong to the " temporal world."
   Not until the fifth part of Process and Reality will Whitehead deploy
freely, poetica lly, almost prophetica lly-what his own creation has made
of h i m . We w i l l get to this, but here the point was, fi rst and foremost,
to poi nt out a spectacular example of creation, carried out under the
twofold constra int of the ontologica l principle and the appetite for co
herence. To ma ke God a creature may constitute a revolutionary idea for
theology. Here, this mutation imposes itself as a conseq uence of White
headian speculative working cond itions. It may be why Whitehea d did
not show off this i nnovation . Instead, we can easily imagine Whitehead
perplexed, wondering whether he will be forced to intervene and make
corrections every time God a ppears in a textua l stratum dating from the
time when he was a " nontemporal accident," then ma king up his mind in
accorda nce with the " formul a " of Melville's Bartleby, celebrated by De
leuze: "I would prefer not to."
   Each original is a powerful, solitary Figure that overflows every ex
plainable form: it launches flaming bolts of expression, which mark the
obstinacy of a thought without images, of a question without an answer,
of a logic that is extreme and without rationality. Figures of life and of
knowledge, they know something inexpressible, they live with something
unfathomable. There is nothing general about them, and they are not
particular: they escape knowledge and defy psychology. Even the words
they pronounce overflow the general laws of the language ( "the presup
positions "), as much as the simple particulars of speech, since they are
like the vestiges or the projections of an original, unique, primary lan
guage, and they carry all of language to the limit of silence and of music.
              TH I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   C O N ST R A I N T   OF   C R E AT I V I T Y   2 6 7




There is nothing particular about Bartleby, nothing general either: he is
an Original (CC, 1 06 ) .
  A n original never wants t o b e an original, unless w e a re t o pl unge i nto
the masq uerade of Oedipal conflicts . Creators should never wish them
selves to be " creative," a lthough it is sad to have to repeat this some
times. It is proba ble that Whitehead-who-refused-to-be-bored, but who,
every time he tried to explain himself, made the proliferation of "yes,
but " and "but then " start up aga in at some point of his explanation, did
not want to " defy psychology " or impose upon his reader the terror of
an unfathoma ble experience. I f he did not j udge it to be important, or
perhaps even desirable, to take his reader by the hand, it is probably
because what he fi rst wanted to communicate was the contrast between
what "can " be communicated and what speculative language, beca use it
must prod uce the genera l izations which every special ized language does
without, " must" communicate: the i mpossibility of ever defining what
one " means."
   The point is that every proposition refers to a universe exhibiting some
general systematic metaphysical character. Apart from this background,
the separate entities which go to form the proposition, and the proposi
tion as a whole, are without determinate character. Nothing has been de
fined, because every definite entity requires a systematic universe to supply
its requisite status. Thus every proposition proposing a fact must, in its
complete analysis, propose the general character of the universe required
for that fact ( PR, 1 1 ) .
   It pertains to speculative propositions to " make us feel " what is, in fact,
a generality that bears upon every proposition: it pertains to them to pro
pose not a fact, opinion, state of a ffairs, or even a vision of the world, but
the universe required by thought itself prod ucing that proposition, a uni
verse whose general, systematic character is none other than the very
experience of thought as a " leap," productive both of the thinker and of
what is to be thought. Speculative propositions do not designate a world
that exists prior to them, but, quite the contrary, they bring into existence
what Deleuze and Guattari cal l an " i mage of thought," in the sense that
such an image coincides with a " thought without images," that is, without
a stopping point that makes words and things communicate in a satisfac
tory way. No longer the thought of someone a bout something, but thought
experiencing itself as anonymous, as if prod uced not by the thinker but by
its very movement.
   According to Deleuze and Gua tta ri, a n " i mage of thought " is not
described but is produced in the very movement in which thought ex
ceeds the images tha t fixate i t, to itself become production-sensation, an
2 6 8   COSMOLOGY




"a bstract machine" prod ucing concepts that i nhabit what is, in itself,
neither thought nor thinkable, the " plane of imma nence."
    The plane is like a desert that concepts populate without dividing up.
The only regions of the plane are concepts themselves, but the plane is all
that holds them together. The plane has no other regions than the tribes
populating and moving around on it. It is the plane that carries out con
ceptual linkages with ever-increasing connections, and it is concepts that
carry out the populating of the plane on an always renewed and variable
curve.
    The plane of immanence is not a concept that is or can be thought but
rather the image of thought, the image thought gives itself of what it
means to think, to make use of thought, to find one's bearings in thought
[ . . . ) The image of thought implies a strict division between fact and
right: what pertains to thought as such must be distinguished from con
tingent features of the brain or historical opinions (QPh, 3 9-40 ) .
   " Creativity " would thus b e a Whiteheadian name for what Deleuze
a nd Guattari ca l l the " plane of immanence ." On this plane, an event as
seemingly important as a radical mutation of the concept of God is merely
a new linkage, of which Whitehead is not the a uthor but the operator,
who does not share his writing between before and after, but merely im
poses the emergence of new folds i n the ever-va riable curvature of a
chapter, a pa ragra ph, or even a sentence. While the insertions populating
the text multiply, thought loses the certa inty of its images to experience
what it means to think.
  If philosophy begins with the creation of concepts, the plane of imma
nence must be considered prephilosophical, not in the way in which one
concept may refer to others, but in the way concepts themselves refer to
a non-conceptual comprehension (QPh, 43 ) .
   The plane o f imma nence designates the imperative-that which insists
and demands to be thought by the philosopher, but of wh ich the philoso
pher is not in any way the creator. The plane does not command con
cepts, and does not connect them without them making its curvature
va ry. This is why the appropriate name for the plane of imma nence that
haunts the philosophers' thought may mutate. It is not that what ha unts
them has "cha nged," like one changes one's mind; rather, the zone of con
nection that constituted the site for this name has been brutally i ntro
verted, imposing new operations of l inkage, causing the emergence of new
accentuations of what is insistent. Thus, we can affirm that "organism"
was the first name for the Whiteheadian plane of immanence. It desig
nates the moment in which " what pertains to thought" can be ca l led
" trust." The organism is insepa ra ble from the diagnosis of the modern
              TH I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   C O N S T R A I N T   OF   C R E AT I V I TY   2 6 9




epoch, insofar as Whitehead trusted that this epoch was to pass away,
and it does i ndeed carry out a new d istribution of fact and right. Trust is
insepara ble from thought as such: it does not refer to an opinion, whether
historical or subjective. Nor will it ever be reducible to some functioning
of the brain. The bra in will never explain trust, for every explanation, by
the brain or by something else, first of all manifests in principle the trust
of those who have undertaken to explain. Trust can be killed by disquali
fyi ng words, by dominant opinions, by the accidents of l i fe, but trust
itself is not accidenta l . Trust is on the side of " right," of what is presup
posed by every explanation.
    The organism is a way of expressi ng this trust, because it conj ugates
existence and success . Nothing is " no matter what," secondary, epiphe
nomenal, superstructure, anecdota l, with regard to something more gen
eral. Everything that exists, in the sense that we can undertake to describe
it, or even to explain it, has first, and prior to any explanation, succeeded
in existing. Our trust exhibits the success to which we owe our existence
as thinking beings, a success that nothing guarantees. It has the cha racter
of a wager, but a wager with nothing beyond it, on the basis of which it
could be dissected . The orga nism expresses the task of thought: not to
j udge, but to learn to appreciate.
    And perhaps because it is the orga nism that made him a creative
thinker, Whitehead will continue, in the first layers of the writing of Pro
cess and Reality, to baptize his philosophy as a " philosophy of the organ
ism." Yet the concepts that, since April 1 925, have come to populate the
plane have produced what the distribution between fact and right k nown
as " organism " could not realize. The plane has taken on a new and
highly curious curvature. Henceforth, it must be i mpossible for the d istri
bution between fact and right to communicate with a j udgment, even if
the latter merely a ffirms the wager of " trust." The speculative movement
must refer every right to an accident of creativity, and celebrate every fact
together with all that it implies, as the conditioning of the creativity to
which it bears witness.
    Retroactively, the organism could not be conceived independently of
the universe that it required, but it required it i n a way that was merely
impl icative and i ncapable of explaining itsel f. It may equip the thought
of an educator inventing new ways to address thi rsty young souls that
school threatens to turn into professionals. All that matters then are the
"good habits" to be acq uired , those that should enable students to resist
the dead abstractions that come from the discipli nes. But Whitehead
could not describe in terms of habits his own soul, which undertook to
awaken the ha bit of aesthetic enjoyment in his students' souls. Nor could
2 7 0   C O S M O L O G Y




he apprehend these souls i n the process of becoming, i n the terms in
which he taught them to apprehend the living, limited, and intolerant
va lues that a factory succeeds in perpetuating. He could only trust them
and teach them to trust, to dare the lea p whose possibility the organism
does not state. In short, Whitehea d, for whom education was an adven
tu re, cou ld no more descri be himself i n terms of his educational project
than Epimenides the Creta n could classify himself within the set of lying
Creta ns he defined. The concept of orga nism was meant to answer the
cha llenge of education, but it was mute about why this cha llenge would
ma ke itself felt at a l l .
   " Habit" was, however, never t o assume a pej orative sense i n White
head. Above all, the criticism to be addressed to the professiona l must
not be confused with a critique of habits. And if the orga nism, because its
inspiration is biologica l and proposes " keepi ng its hol d " as what is at
sta ke, is inadequate, it is beca use it does not seem to leave any other al
ternative in the face of professiona l habits than the project of mak ing
them " lose their hold," which is certainly q uite tempting but ultimately
catastrophic, for this is exactly what professiona ls think: if they " let go "
of their abstractions, they are lost. Yet the " applications" to which the
specu lative scheme appea ls a re, again and aga in, questions of the habits
to be adopted . The di fference is that these habits exhi bit a trust that is no
longer paradigma tica l ly that of an educator, but may be that of a partici
pant i n the adventure of mathematics, in which the art of an imagination
obl iged by coherence is cultivated as such.
   In this case, Process and Reality dema nds, in the minor key of an
(origina l ) habit to be acquired, what Deleuze and Guattari descri be in a
somewhat d izzying way.
   Thought "merely " demands motion that can be taken to infinity [ . . . I
What defines infinite motion is a coming and going, because it does not
go toward a destination without already turning back on itself [ . . . l It is
not, however, a fusion, but a reversibility, an immediate, perpetual, in
stantaneous exchange, a bolt of lightning. Infinite motion is twofold, and
there is only a fold from one to the other. It is in this sense that it is said
that thinking and being are one and the same thing. Or rather, motion is
not the image of thought without also being the matter of thought. When
the thought of Thales leaps forth, it returns like water. When the thought
of Heraclitus becomes polemos, it is fire that returns upon it [ . . . I the
plane of immanence has two faces, like Perseus and like Nature, like Phy
sis and like Nous. This is why there are always a great many motions
implicated in one another, folded up within one another, insofar as the
return of one instantaneously relaunches another one, in such a way that
             T H I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   CONSTR A I N T   O F   C R E AT I V I T Y   2 7 1




the plane of immanence never stops weaving itself, like a gigantic shuttle
( QPh, 40- 4 1 ) .
   Each concept calls for a leap of the imagination, but none of them is
privileged, none can be a roused or experienced without other motions
surging forth, each of which may be at the starting point and/or at the
point of arriva l . Every starting point is contingent. Every point of arrival
is a stage on the way. All that counts is the incessant weaving between
the two faces that this motion bri ngs i nto existence as it weaves itself:
Thought and Nature, Nous and Physis. It perhaps belongs to Whitehead
to have made reversibi l i ty-the immediate, perpetual, i nstantaneous ex
change between what thought intends and its return upon itself, its be
coming " matter for thought "-the very thing that is to be inhabited , of
which the habit is to be acquired . . . by applying the scheme. The two
fold wager of a transformation of the sciences of nature and of the aims
of education has thus not d isappeared, but constitutes one starting point, or
else one point of arrival among others, for a motion that brings into exis
tence simultaneously a " Physis" in which thought matters, and a "Thought"
that no longer belongs to the thinker.
   The ancient doctrine according to which "no one crosses the same
river twice " is generalized. No thinker thinks twice ( PR, 2 9 ) .
   Simultaneous contraction and d i l ation: if n o thinker thinks twice, the
two faces we call Nous or Physis are required to think a thought. God
and the world, both under the sway of the gigantic shuttle of the creative
advance.
   However, is it possible to i nhabit a thought i n the form of a Mobius
strip, where one cannot explore one face without finding oneself on the
other ? Can one l ive i n the world of Escher, i n which two hands draw one
another? Anglo-Saxon humor: it is a habit to be acquired, it suffices not
to allow oneself to be trapped by the paradox of thought thinking itself.
For this paradox, inducing the experience of a d izzyi ng, uninhabitable
mise en abyme, by no means i nd icates a limit of thought coll iding with
itself, but is due to the i nadequate a bstraction of a reflection that claims
to grasp its proper conditions. The fact that my itinerary takes me back to
the other face, which it presupposed but to which it cou ld not accede, the
fact that my hand d raws what is drawing it, are only d izzying for the
third party I have introd uced surreptitiously: the person who contem
plates the opposing faces of the Mobius strip, or sees those two hands,
each of which is drawing what draws it. There is no third party i n White
head's system: there is only itinera ry, fl ight, movements, or gestures . And
the thinking experimentation on thought corresponds, again and again, to
this pragmatic question: what difference in experience could be produced,
2 7 2   C O S M O L O G Y




what new regime of habit could be experienced i f, in principle, 1 a ffirm
that everything that pertains to thought, all the rights it claims, a l l the
hopes it nourishes, are so many testimonies to the " reality " that is its
problem, so many req uisites for the construction of the solution to this
problem ?
   The fact that habits to be acqui red come up for discussion again and
aga in is all the more important in that it is easy to confuse a philosophy
that defines crea tivity as an ulti mate, with a phi losophy i nha bited by
what is attested by the adventure of creators . The image of Whitehead ian
thought is not the i mage of Deleuzian thought. It does not place the cre
ator under the banner of an imperative that irresisti bly dista nces him
from all the others, all those who are satisfied by opinion, by the securi
ties of routine, by words as they are proposed to our perceptions: a
world that is most often reassuring, saturated with cul tura l arti facts that
orient us, giving rise to due attention without our even having to be aware
of it. This is why Whitehead, the thinker of crea tivity, will never celebrate
the creator in the heroic mode of radical risk and extreme soli tude to
which Deleuze sometimes yields.
  Philosophy, science and art want us to tear open the firmament and
dive into chaos. Only at this cost will we vanquish it. A nd I have thrice
crossed the A cheron, victorious. The philosopher, the scientist and the
artist seem to return from the land of the dead ( Q Ph, 1 90 ) .
   From a Whiteheadian viewpoint, the proposition i s slightly exagger
ated . Creatures confronting chaos take for granted a respecta ble number
of conditions : the endurance proper to electromagnetic regularities, to
molecules, to cellular meta bol ism, and finally to the body, which, even
when submitted to terri ble trials, must ma inta i n certain crucial habits . . .
Not to mention an entire inherita nce of things and items of knowledge,
some of the components of which will eventua lly be subverted, but never
all of them at the same time. Not to forget, finally, all that creators have
learned that ma kes them able to " d ive" without being swallowed . A d ive
cannot be improvised, but demands equipment. Unlike those who may
happen to " sink " into chaos, creators are those who know that what they
experience "matters," and that they will be able to recount something of
what has ha ppened to them, that is to come back . . . even from the land
of the dead.
   Madness, the destruction of consensus, the terrible and somber truth
of chaos from which opinion tries to defend itsel f thus do not belong to
the i mage of Whiteheadian thought. The fact that " I " is "another" will
not, by its proximity to madness, make vibrate the thought of the man
for whom " no thinker thinks twice" is perfectly inhabitable, for whom
              TH I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   C O N STRA I NT   OF   C R E AT I V I TY   2 7 3




the " I " is an i nteresting habit, an ingred ient of the link ceaselessly re
created by each act of thought, by each new d istribution produced be
tween thin kers and what they think.
   Correlatively, it is not so much the problem of risk as it is the impor
tance of the fact that one can " come back from the land of the dead "
that wil l establish itself as what obliges us to think. What ma tters is not
that a mathema tician l i ke Cantor " went mad "-such things ha ppen
but that, unlike Cantor, other mathematicians have been able to find i n
their community those who have accepted t o inhabit the new possibilities
that they have brought back . The solitude and misundersta nding to
which the creator may give rise are not a privileged testimony to creativ
ity, for creativity also acts as a constra int when it comes to thinking
about rejection, misunderstanding, or else recuperation, the way in which
what the solitary adventure has "brought back " from chaos is trans
formed into a consensual " acquisition."
   As a mathematician, Whitehead was never tempted by the iconoclastic
gesture that intends to make a clean sweep of the past. He knows the
extent to which mathematica l creation requi res the past, even when it
may present itself as a brea k . And the very adventure of writi ng Process
and R eality i ntroduces a process that exhibits the d ifference between in
tuition, or vision in the sense that Plato associated it with mathematica l
truth, and the work of fashioni ng concepts. Such concepts dema nd a leap
of the imagination, of course, but none of them " make an image," none
holds all by itself, because a l l are " conditioned " by a process that pro
duces its own trials, the questions that never cease reviving it, making
new demands surge forth that impose a problem where an answer had
been form ulated. This process does not req uire the figure of a creator
or a visionary, confronting what exceeds the categories of thought or of
perceptions, but testifies instead to a practice to which phi losophers may
owe their existence. When Whitehead defined the phi losophica l tradition
as a series of " footnotes " to the text of Plato ( PR, 3 9 ) , what he designated
was indeed a tradition that requi res reading and writing. What are phi
losophers other than those who read other phi losophers ? But they read
them in a way that will communicate with writing, that will make them
add, subtract, modify, and i nsert the " footnotes " that make a text mu
tate. Including, for instance, a l ittle note " i nterpreting " the contemplative
vision of ideas as a " leap of imagination."
   When Whitehead makes creativity the ultimate, therefore, he does not
particularly celebrate creators. Thinking under the constraint of creativ
ity has nothing to do with a heroic adventure, and crea tivity demands
nothing. Whatever we do, whether we l ive in the most reproducible of
2 74   COS MO lOGY




routines or whether we cross the Acheron, each moment of our lives is
equally and impartially the creature of creativity. But also, and perhaps
above all, thinking under the constrai nt of creativity has nothing to do
with the vision of a " creative cosmos" that might, as such, become the
subject of our descriptions. Such a vision is not ba nished, of course, but
it does not belong to the register of applications of Whitehead 's scheme,
of his " verification," for the visionary flight then seems to be the only
thing that matters, and not its landing " for renewed observa tion ren
dered acute by rational interpretation " ( PR, 5 ) . Similarly, Whitehead 's
God, as an accident of creativity, cannot be isolated from the adventure
of the successive revisions of the categoreal scheme that will end up i n
its definition. It neither expresses nor calls for a vision. It i s the scheme,
i ncluding God, that ca lls for verification, experimentation of the d iffer
ence it prod uces upon our habits of thought, incl uding those that are
religious.
   When he committed himself to the adventure of a speculative cosmol
ogy, then, Whitehead did not aba ndon the definition of philosophy he
had proposed in Science and the Modern World: if we cannot think with
out abstraction, it is important to revise our modes of abstraction. And,
for instance, it is important not to abstract creators from the equipment
on which they cannot help but rely when they undertake to cross the
Acheron, and from the equipment they provi de themselves in order to be
able to "come back."
   Perhaps, then, humor is one of the ways of cha racterizing the transfor
mation Whitehead intends to produce upon our habits. The habits of
professiona ls are bereft of humor: what questions their mode of abstrac
tion is either j udged to be insigni fica nt-reduced to ignorance of what
is demanded by science or rationa lity-or as enda ngering civilization
many scientists speak of a " rise in i rrationality " when they sense that the
questioning of what they propose can no longer be rejected by a shrug of
the shoulders. The habits to be acquired, what creativity appea ls to as a
constrai nt, would be, compared to professional habits, like a wa l l of dry
stones compared to a cement wa l l . Cement rejects the i nterstices i n which
the weed grows that will one day crack it open. The dry stones, for their
part, can of course be d isplaced, and the weed that d isplaces them might
certai nly be tempted to abstract from the fact that without the stone the
earth i n which it grows would not have held. But the wa ll of dry stones is
not defined against the interstices; the latter belong to it j ust as much as
the stones that make it up. Thinking what imposes itsel f as obvious
under the constra int of creativity, Whitehead 's wager is that we can learn
modes of abstraction that enable us to celebrate together both the obsti-
             TH I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   C O N S TR A I N T   O F   C R E AT I V I TY   2 7 5




nate stones and the interstices that will transform them into precondi
tions for what will eventua l ly d isplace them.
   Thus, Whitehead will avoid all the words susceptible of d isqualifying
the type of order presupposed by opinion. The cha rge of contempt in
these words, the absence of humor, and the somewhat misplaced heroism
they suggest, add nothing to the risk ta ken by thin kers when it comes to
this particular thinker who, at this insta nt, has produced this proposition
that turns this opinion into that whose point is to experience its abandon
ment. Yet these words risk insulting the world, the immense, heteroge
neous popul ation of " opinions " tha t endure in the interwoven and pre
carious relations of " trust," or mutual presupposition. In the process, they
risk cementing against them an all iance that wil l confirm that the histori
ca l truth they propose is unbearable to self-righteous people or to the
"system."
   Yet the point is not to condemn those by whom the scandal arrives. The
words they use are not theirs, but those suggested to them by the modes of
abstraction of our time. Whiteheadian humor, demoralizing the great op
positions, the binary choices between adherence and polemic, is addressed
to our time, simultaneously dominated by professiona l modes of j udg
ment and fascina ted by heroic protests. This humor does not attack, for
the point is not to know who the good guys and who the bad guys are.
The point, i mpersonal and cosmologica l, is that of the " trick of evi l ."
   Each task of creation is a social effort, employing the whole universe.
Each novel actuality is a new partner adding a new condition. Every new
condition can be absorbed into additional fullness of attainment. On the
other hand, each condition is exclusive, intolerant of diversities; except in
so far as it find itself in a web of conditions which convert its exclusions
into contrasts. A new actuality may appear in the wrong society, amid
which its claims to efficacy act mainly as inhibitions. Then a weary task
is set for creative function, by an epoch of new creations to remove the
inhibition. Insistence on birth at the wrong season is the trick of evil. In
other words, the novel fact may throw back, inhibit, and delay. But the
advance, when it does arrive, will be richer in content, more fully condi
tioned, and more stable. For in its objective efficacy an actual entity can
only inhibit by reason of its alternative positive contribution ( PR, 223 ) .
  M y readers have now been warned . If they are fascinated b y the heroic
grandeur of refusal, and despise compromises; if they deplore the fact
that the rad ical demands of every new position are recuperated by what
was supposed to be subverted; if " to deconstruct" is a goa l in itself for
them, and scandalizing self-righteous people is a testimony to truth; if
they oppose the pu re to the impure, the authentic to the artificial; if they
2 76   C O S M O LOGY




cannot understand how the most " unplatonic" of philosophers situated
himself as a " footnote " to the text of Plato . . . Iet them close this book.
Never will they see celebrated in it the power of a truth that is verified by
the destruction of fa lse pretenders. They wi l l therefore find in it only dis
appointments and reasons for contempt.
                                                          C H A P T ER   S E V E N T EEN
