The Risks of Speculative I nterpretation




      r HILOSOPHY DOES NOT INITIATE          interpretations. Its search for
         a rationalistic scheme is the search for more adequate criticism,
         and for more adequate justification, of the interpretations which
we perforce employ [ . . . 1 the methodology of rational interpretation is
the product of the fitful vagueness of consciousness. Elements which
shine with immediate distinctness, in some circumstances, retire into pen
umbral shadow in other circumstances, and into black darkness on other
occasions. A nd yet all occasions proclaim themselves as actualities within
the flow of a solid world, demanding a unity of interpretation. Philoso
phy is the self-correction by consciousness of its own initial excess of
subjectivity (PR, 1 4-1 5 ) .
   Speculative philosophy must a i m a t neutra lity, not i n the sense that
neutra lity, objectivity, and rationa l i ty are associated i n the experi mental
sciences, but as an immanent practical obligation that condemns it to the
most risky interpretation. From this perspective, every statement that
presents itself as " neutral," in the scientific sense of " a uthorized by a sta te
of affairs," is not only eminently selective, but also specifica lly partial.
The clarity of the reference is not only detached from da rkness, but also
reflects the excess of subjectivity that leads us to deny that darkness.
When the subject faces the object, when, for i nstance, it defines itself as
pure i ntentional i ty, it silences, with passion, violence, and purifying bias,
the confused totality of what Leibniz called " little perceptions," i ndefinable
but as i nsepa ra ble from distinct perception as the cloth from the fol d that
qualifies it.
2 7 8   COSMOLOGY




   Correlatively, the neutra lity aimed at by speculative philosophy bea rs
witness to a cosmos to the same extent that, by its undertaking, it presup
poses the possibility for consciousness of affi rming the dark a nd the dis
tinct, the cloth and its noteworthy folds. I f consciousness must be cor
rected of its excess of subjectivity, the correction m ust not proceed in the
name of a demanding i mperative but i n terms of a possibil ity which, as it
is suggested, becomes inhabitable by this very fact. Otherwise, it might
wel l become a new case i l l ustra ting the " trick of evi l ."
   To speak of suggestion is not to speak of precautions, prudence, or
slow, controlled progress. These are the characteristics of a practice ar
ticulati ng the hunter and the prey that is to be caught unawa re or else to
be directed toward the enclosure in which it will finally be held prisoner.
It matters little i f, at that moment, it panics, charges, tries to regain its
freedom, or yields to the despair of the vanquished : it is too late. White
head by no means intends to obl ige his readers, step by step, to admit
that they a re progressively reduced to submission, unable to object, sum
moned to accept without knowing any longer where they should have
rebelled, where they could have escaped . By no means does he proceed
like Socrates the d ia lectician, whom his adversaries compared to an elec
tric ray, anesthetizing his adversa ries and numbing their a bi l ity to resist.
Quite the contrary, he never ceases to utter verita ble enormities, leaving
his reader, at each i nstant, the freedom to laugh, to smi le, but also to ex
perience what it means to be able to laugh or smile where a dramatic al
terna tive held sway.
   Thus, those who might be tempted to raise the question of the legiti
macy of speculative thought will receive the following answer, cava lier to
say the least:
   The scheme is true with unformulated qualifications, exceptions, limi
tations, and new interpretations in terms of more general notions (PR, 8 ) .
   The scheme i s " true " : whatever the definition o f truth may b e that a
philosophy honors, this a ffirmation is so "enormous" that it literally d is
arms thought. It is not unti l, and unless, the movement has been engaged
that confers a meaning upon the a ffirmation that the i mport of this re
striction becomes important. Whitehead appea ls to a future when the
l imits of the scheme will ma ke themselves fel t, that is, when the specula
tive interpretations of which i t is the matrix will become judgment, when
application will impose silence, in short, when the genera l ities articulated
will produce the experience of their inadequacy. In that future, the scheme
will have rendered one of the most importa nt services of which it is
capable: to have brought about the disclosure of unformulated limita
tions, to have made percepti ble the insi stence and the interest of experi -
                     T H E   R I S K S   O F   S P E C U L AT I V E   I N T E R P R E TAT I O N   2 7 9




ences that i mpose, in return, the qual ification of this scheme, exhibiting
its selective character.
   In this way, moreover, Whitehead goes on to praise the phi losophical
systems of which he is the heir. It is true, for i nstance, that, as Kant main
tained , the way concepts work constitutes an essentia l aspect of percep
tual experience. Kant's ana lysis of experience, as a subjective process that
produces objectivity, thus designates a genera l idea that ma kes Kant an
important philosopher. Whitehead inherits the idea of experience as con
structive functioning, but he calmly reverses the order in which this func
tioning works: the process he will describe produces subjectivity from
objectivity, and not vice versa . This is a homage to Kant, for
   The order is immaterial in comparison with the general idea ( PR, 1 5 6 ) .
   I t is highly unli kely that today's Kantians will appreciate the homage
in question, any more than historians of philosophy will appreciate the
"cavalier" perspective Whitehead adopts on this matter. Yet as we have
seen, Whitehead is j ust as " caval ier" with his own thought, and with what
was the truth of his i ntentions when he was writing such-and-such a
paragrap h . In fact, there is only one case in which he rea lly points out a
disagreement, and this, rather curiously, is when the philosopher i n ques
tion is no doubt the one who was closest to him: Lei bniz, a mathemati
cian like him, and who, like him, gave primacy to coherence.
   There is a book that should be written, and its title should be The
Mind of Leibniz ( MT, 3 ) .
   The way Whitehead condemns Leibniz, again and again, for what he
describes as a genuine fault, a " magician's trick " ( preesta blished har
mony ) must be understood as that of one mathematician attacking
another mathematician, reproaching him with being content with a
" trivia l " solution, in the sense of mathematics, to what should have been
" the problem," that is, the question of the solidarity of a l l that exists. Yet
in a l l the other cases, Whitehead accepts, and he prolongs "with a sl ight
modification"-that is, in a way that makes the apparent casualness
communicate with a genuine fa brication. He creates what can be associ
ated with a " caval ier perspective."
   One ca lls "cavalier perspective" a perspecti ve that combines two con
trad ictory properties: a scenography in relief, and the conservation of the
principal d imensions of the object placed in perspective. The most distant
parts will be "seen " as d istant, and yet their size will not be reduced in
comparison with that of the nearer parts. Whitehead superbly ignores the
dilemmas of the history of philosophy, the attempt to understand a philo
sophical system from an immanent viewpoint contemporary with itself,
while relating it to a historical filiation by which the sta kes pursued by
2 8 0   COSMOLOGY




the philosopher a re situated . The western " adventure" of rationality, as
Whitehead inherits i t, is not a " history " but a succession of " planes" that
make ideas that matter su rge forth, and whose importance must be pre
served such as it is, independently of the intentions we may attri bute to
those who have produced them. The cavalier perspective, ignoring i nten
tions, deliberately abstracts from what might impose a choice between
faithfulness ( return to the " real " Kant) and assignment to an obsolete
past ( i n Kant's time . . . ) .
   The freedom with which Whitehead captures and retranslates the
" general ideas " of his predecessors, at the risk of making them undergo
mutations of meaning, no doubt puts to the test the " excess of subjectiv
ity " that can transform a phi losophical work into " doctrine," with regard
to which the question of faithfulness or opposition fi rst ari ses. Yet this
freedom is first and foremost that of a phi losopher-mathematician, for
whom philosophy, like mathematics, is creation.
   Mathematicians celebrate their crea tions as " genera lizations," which
succeed i n ridding a definition of its excessive attachments to a particular
case. And this success is not a j udgment upon what mathematicians of
the past thought or believed, for in mathema tics definitions do not trans
late intentions or convictions, but possi bilities of operating, of ra isi ng
problems, of producing new cases of solution. The cavalier perspective in
philosophy thus suggests that philosophy, like mathematics, is adventure,
but it does so in a way that leaves phi losophers perfectly free to go their
way wi th a shrug of the shoulders: how ca n someone be criticized who
renounces so ra dically all the justifications in terms of which others de
fend themselves agai nst the threat of disqualification? They will therefore
not feel themselves constrai ned to dig defensive trenches around a threat
ened i nterpretation. Not only does Whiteheadian practice discourage this
reaction, but phi losophers who do not d rop the book while concluding
 "He's crazy, there's no use continuing " have already undergone a modifi
cation that ta kes away their taste for becoming a censor. This is no doubt
why Whi tehead's work has remained marginal in the aca demic world,
for rea ders find themselves " d i sarmed ," deprived of that paradigmatic
academic weapon, the critical commentary.
   The risk of be ing rejected by the academic community does not raise
a " cosmic " problem, to the precise extent to which such rejection is re
flected by an indi fferent shrug of the shoulders, not intensi fied by any
j ustification whereby the rejecters would become worse than they were,
more intensely dependent on a position demanding the destruction of
what enda ngers it. But the risks of speculative i nterpretation become
very different when Whitehead no longer has to deal with phi losophers
that is, with interlocutors who a re, in fact, ra ther used to shrugging their
                      T H E   R I S K S   O F   S P E C U L AT I V E   I N T E R P R E T AT I O N   2 8 1




shoulders and to having their statements cause others to shrug theirs
but with interlocutors engaged by a conviction that rejects the possibil ity
of indifference. In this case, the question of adequacy is raised in a com
pletely d i fferent, much more risky way.
   In fact, mathematica l humor does not suffice when i t can resemble
ironic renunciation, when what Gil les Deleuze honored as the " truth of
the relati ve," which it ma kes perceptible, can, predictably, be percei ved as
the caval ier affirmation of the relativity of all truth. A humorous refor
mulation can certa inly retranslate any pretense while neutralizing it, but
it can do nothi ng against the concern of those who, upon seeing their
convictions retranslated, have the impression that they are being made
fun of, that one refuses to hea r them out, that they a re being transformed
into a bull driven mad by the pirouettes of the bullfighter's cape. And this
concern may be transformed into hatred i f no adequate response is made
to the "cry " : but all ways of unifying, all ways of becoming "one" with
regard to the many are equivalent !
   This cry can be " specialized," but for Whitehead, a l l specializations af
firm one and the same thing. They all bear witness to the inadequacy of
a thought that would reduce real i ty to chaos, to the pure multiplicity of
disparate free acts, an a bsurd dream, a ta le told by an idiot, ful l of sound
and fury, and so on. Each cry demands the recognition that it i mports,
and there is a speculative obl igation to give meaning to that demand.
   However, the problem is not solved for a l l that. When it comes to cor
recting the excess subjectivity of creators who propose themselves as
marginal or subversive, it is rather relevant to make the " cosmic i mpor
tance " of their work communicate with the " socia l effort" that its recep
tion will impose . Yet when it comes to convictions that i rreducibly asso
ciate thei r i mportance with a pretense to exclusivity, such a " cavalier
perspective " can no longer be placed under the banner of humor, contrib
uti ng a sma l l correction to the excess of subjectivity. It risks a fronta l col
lision. What will collide is the fact that, as such, the cosmic perspective
proposed by Whitehead cannot " verify " any cry in particular: a l l the spe
cies perta ining to a genus a ffirm that genus without a hierarchy. Both the
anti-Dreyfusards, for whom the Army and the Nation were wel l worth
the sacrifice of one innocent, and the Dreyfusards, for whom a l l that mat
tered was the triumph of Justice and Truth, a ffirmed and presupposed a
cosmos. And also those who will say, it is important not to place these two
affirmations on a n equal level, to make expl icit a difference between anti
Dreyfusards and Dreyfusards.
   In other words, speculative interpretation must take the risk of disap
pointing. Discreet but without hypocrisy, Whitehead was to propose a test
somewhat similar to the one i mposed by the ra bbi, who, according to the
2 8 2   COSMOLOGY




story, when confronted with two contradictory theses, declared each one
right in turn, and answered his students, who had objected that both pro
tagonists could not be right at the same time, that they too were right.
This latter " Yes, you too are right," apparently so cavalier, is a quiet test,
offering students an opportunity, but also leaving them free to go away
with a shrug of the shoulders, abandoning that cowardly i mpostor.
   In Religion in the Making, published in 1 926, Whitehead first took the
risk of a speculative interpretation of what inspi red passion for exclu
sivity much more intensely than philosophy or science. Philosophers a re
used to indifference, while scientists are interested only rather second
arily in " d i ffusing " their knowledge, the essential part of thei r passion
being focused on the questions they share with their colleagues. In con
trast, the question of religion, and more particularly the question of the
Christian religion, is indissolubly linked to that of "conversion." Can one
be a convinced Christian, and accept that faith in God " matters " in a way
that is merely specific?
   Religion in the Making is a transitional work, some of whose statements
Whitehead apparently even regretted . Yet this work is very interesting, in
that it allows us to " follow" the way Whitehead answers the challenge
of ci rcumstances . It consists of the text of four lectures given in Febru
ary 1 926 at King's Chapel in Boston, once again in the context of the
Lowell lectures, as was the case for Science and the Modern World. This
time, however, it was religion that Whitehead was to discuss before his
audience.
   In his preface, Whitehead does not omit to mention, as usual, that he is
applying the same procedure to religion as the one that he had applied in
1 925 to the sciences, in the lectures that gave rise to Science and the Mod
ern World. Yet the " sa me," in Whitehead, should never be taken quite seri
ously. In contrast, the invariant that is to be taken seriously is that, ad
dressing a new type of audience, it is the members of this audience he
must address, and it is the primary terms of the practice that unites them
that he must celebrate adequately . . . while reinventing them, of course.
The risks to which the situation he has accepted will expose him are so
many engagements.
   The limitation of God is his goodness ( RM, 1 5 3 ) .
   This statement, which occurs i n the text a lmost without warning, is
not compatible with the God of Science and the Modern World, for God,
as a principle of limitation, cannot have any limitation . It could, however,
have been signed by Lei bniz, for whom God 's choice of creating this
world, and not j ust any other, must answer to a reason: i f we do not want
to insult God by attributing to him the arbitrariness of despots, He can-
                     T H E   R I S K S   O F   S P E C U L AT I V E   I N T E R P R E TAT I O N   2 8 3




not, by definition, wish a nything but the best. Coming from Whitehead's
pen, it may well be that this statement signifies " taking up a hypothetical
position," the k ind of position he would like to construct, but the means
to which he must formulate.
   In fact, Whitehead's position will be a rticulated around the question of
the moral order, that is, the d istinction between good and evi l . It is im
possible to add ress people of Christian fa ith without insulting them if
one cannot give this distinction an i rreducible meaning, which cannot be
dissolved into the humor of neutral ization. The point is thus not only to
ma ke room for this distinction, but to give it i ts full import. Since God, as
the unqualifiable principle of a l l limitation, could not qualify good and
evil , it is the entire construction of Science and the Modern World that
must be reassembled in a new coherence, at the cost of transforming the
definition of God from top to bottom. This is indeed the " same" proce
dure of thought as the one that constra ined Whitehead to atomize be
coming, in order to give meaning to the possible.
   Of course, the d istinction between good and evil must be created, not
accepted as is. In this case, Whitehead takes up the great rational ist tradi
tion that refuses to believe that evil can be desired for evil 's sake. All that
exists produces its own value, and all values are positions, to be described
positively. The distinction between good and evil cannot, therefore, be a
radical opposition. It may, however, entai l the consequences of a position
for its environment: physical suffering or mental suffering, where it mat
ters l i ttle whether they designate others or one's own person. Between
people who cannot help doing what they feel they should not do and who
suffer as a result, and people who make others suffer, the d ifference is en
tirely relative, concerning only the definition of the environment, accord ing
to whether it includes, or fails to incl ude, the person who causes the suffer
ing. If he read it, Whitehead would have approved the world of Erewhon
invented by Samuel Butler, in which the sick are punished and the crimi
nals cared for, as being perfectly reasonable. In any case, whether the sub
ject is evil or illness, the problem is the same: how can they be understood
without end ing up in a position which, by making God responsible for
good, should also lead to holding him responsible for evil and suffering?
   The fact of the instability of evil is the moral order in the world.
   Evil, triumphant in its enjoyment, is so far good in itself; but beyond
itself it is evil in its character of a destructive agent among things greater
than itself [ . . 1 Evil is positive and destructive; what is good is positive
                .



and creative [ . . . 1
   This instability of evil does not necessarily lead to progress. On the
contrary, evil in itself leads to the world losing forms of attainment in
2 8 4   C O S M O LOGY




which that evil manifests itself [ . . . 1 For example, a species whose mem
bers are always in pain will either cease to exist, or lose the delicacy of
perception which results in that pain, or develop a finer and more subtle
relationship among its bodily parts.
   Thus evil promotes its own elimination by destruction, or delegation,
or by elevation. But in its own nature it is unstable. It must be noted that
the state of degradation to which evil leads, when accomplished, is not in
itself evil, except by comparison with what might have been. A hog is not
an evil beast, but when a man is degraded to the level of a hog, with the
accompanying atrophy of finer elements, he is no more evil than a hog.
The evil of the final degradation lies in the comparison of what is with
what might have been. During the process of degradation the compari
son is an evil for the man himself, and at its final stage it remains an evil
for others [ . . . 1
   There is a self-preservation inherent in that which is good in itself. Its
destruction may come from without but not from within. Good people
of narrow sympathies are apt to be unfeeling and unprogressive, enjoying
their egotistical goodness. Their case, on a higher level, is analogous to
that of the man completely degraded to a hog. They have reached a state
of stable goodness, so far as their own interior life is concerned. This type
of moral correctitude is, on a larger view, so like evil that the distinction
is trivial ( RM, 95-9 8 ) .
   Whitehead does not accept distinctions without transforming them.
Not only does he not construct a distinction in content between " good "
and " evil," but he risks a comparison between those who know what the
good is, those in whom the question inspi res no doubt, and those " com
pletely degraded," who no longer even suffer from thei r debasement. The
elimination of evil has destroyed " things greater than i tself," but the
j udgment brought to bear upon these relative magnitudes is purely im
manent: it is a ssociated with the comparison between what is and what
might have been. When the witnesses to what m ight have been disappear,
it should be noted, this situation can be descri bed in terms of the theory
of the organism. If the good were to be defined by its endurance, "a sta
ble state of goodness," it would depend, like a sta ble state of degradation,
only on the patience of the environment: the maintenance of a unilateral
position, insensi tive to the possibly destructive character of the infection
associated with it, a lien to hesitation, that is, to what is possible.
   God is not directly necessary for understanding the order of nature,
what is affirmed as " good in itsel f," of which hogs, "good people of nar
row sympathies," as well as the " professionals" of Science and the Mod
ern World, constitute so many examples. He will, however, be necessary
                      T H E   R I S K S   O F   S P E C U LATI V E   I N T E R P R E TAT I O N   2 8 5




to affirm how a suffering being ca n develop " a finer and more subtle rela
tionship among its bodily parts." It is this possibi l ity that-like everythi ng
that matters-imposes a " cosmos " that is, at the same time, an eva luatory
authority: in this case, God as the " measure of the aesthetic consistency of
the world."
   The kingdom of heaven is not the isolation of good from evil. It is the
overcoming of evil by good. This transmutation of evil into good enters
into the actual world by reason of the inclusion of the nature of God,
which includes the ideal vision of each actual evil so met with a novel
consequent as to issue in the restoration of goodness ( RM, 1 5 5 ) .
   Whi tehead's solution is not yet techn ica lly well constructed . For this
to be achieved, it will be necessary for terms like " i deal vision," " conse
quent," and "so met with as to issue i n " to be understood in such a way as
to avoid attributing to God a form of " knowledge " that would guide cre
ativity. In that case, indeed, what Whitehead a lways fought against would
be restored : the figure of a God who " k nows better," and who can there
fore be j udged responsi ble for the evil he a llows, if only by a bstenti on. The
demand is already in place that this figure must be avoi ded: it is novelty,
associated with relevance ( " to issue i n " . . . ) that indicates the " ki ngdom
of heaven," tha t is, that permits the affirmation of a " mora l order," or a
cosmos.
   Whereas, one year previously, i n Science and the Modern World, God
was a principle of limitation, he has now become an actual but a tempo
ral entity. He is pa rt of the " formati ve elements " of the temporal world,
in the same sense as creativity, which, for its part, is associated with the
temporal passage toward novelty, and the domain of " i dea l enti ties," not
actua l in themselves but exemplified in each actua l occasion. God, like
creati vity and like the ideal entities, is required by the need to affirm not
only the possi ble but also the insistence of the possi ble, that is, evi l as
what may be overcome. This is what is to be thought, and what White
head a ffi rms, "as i f it were done."
   Nothing is done-and we wi l l return to this point-but the " cavalier
perspective" wi l l be mainta i ned, with its own risks. For it is not, i n this
case, addressed to those "adventurers of reason " known as phi losophers,
who are summoned to recognize themselves as such, to a bandon the cult
of any kind of power of reason in favor of the humor of a n adventure of
hope. In fact, the history of philosophy is so densely populated with bi
zarre risks, unusual positions, and unstable constructions, unani mously
despised by rea l professionals, that it clearly exh ibits that its mere endur
ance is the hope, constantly reborn, of overcoming incoherence, of mak
ing concepts hold together even at the cost of an edifice so i mpla usible
2 8 6   C O S M O LO G Y




that it inspires only la ughter on the part of the environment. Although
they have drea med of it, philosophers have never been excellent counsel
ors to princes, and thei r concepts, in the final ana lysis, have caused little
suffering. The sa me does not hold true of the Christian rel igion, and here
Whitehead must hope tha t the " kingdom of heaven" testifies in his prop
ositions. Will the Christians listening to him be able to accept that if God
" knew " wha t the good is, in a sense tha t transcends the multiplicity of
occa sions of experience, i f he constituted i n this sense a sta ble measure
of the good, a measure closed to progress, he wou ld in turn be ana logous
to the man degra ded i nto a hog, or to good people of na rrow sympa
thies ? This is the unknown of which Whitehead risks the question .
    In fact, the suggestion of a moral order of the world implies a con
struction that has nothing religious about it. If the good is God 's l i mita
tion, tha t i s, the way that God ca n be qual ified as an " actua l fact in the
nature of things," i t is excl uded meta physica l ly, tha t is, gramma tica lly as
wel l, tha t God should know wha t the good, which is his limitation, is. To
know one's own limita tion is not to be limited but subject, it is to be able
to envisage evil even when one can will only the good. This may be an
extrapolation, offering God the stra nge metaphysical compliment of be
ing " l i ke us, only better," free as we are, but " free for the good," a happy
state which, according to Augustine, was promised to Ada m if only he
had resisted the trial of tempta tion . Above all, however, it is the fa tal
combination of the rationa l and the empirical tha t enables God to be
fa shioned in the image of man, by mea ns of a passage to the limit tha t
eliminates imperfection by ma king pretensions pa ss to the infinite. White
head, for his pa rt, tries to think of the cosmos, not of man who, in one
way or another, God wo uld have made in his own image, a typical ex
ample of the excess of subjectivity tha t is to be co rrected . And the cos
mos, d i fferent from every state of a ffa i rs, does not correspond to any
" image." In short, what is assigned to God is a role or a function .
   The fact of " not knowing" is not a lack, but the cha racterization of a
mode of working. Gramma tica lly, God cannot have availa ble an abstract
definition, independent of the "actual world," opposing the good to the
bad, beca use it is the very na ture of his functioning to contribute ro the
immanent possibility, for each crea tive act, of crea ting tha t difference.
God is that thanks to which each act of creation can integra te within its
own process the importa nt possi bility of "overcoming " evil. Not evil in
general, but always " this " evil here and now, or " this" destructive posi
tion, insofar as it cannot a ffi rm itself without denying. Correlatively, the
good has no identity in itself. It is never good that overcomes: it is evil
that, beca use it is overcome, designates a good that has no other identity
                    T H E   R I S K S   O F   S P E C U L AT I V E   I N T E R P R E T AT I O N   2 8 7




than this overcoming, that possibility of articulating what was destruc
tively opposed .
   Whitehead wi l l articulate this metaphysica l proposition in a more sat
isfactory way in Process and Reality, when he makes creativity his " ulti
mate." In Religion in the Making, however, the first point is to think of
rel igion, and hence the adventure that we empirically in herit. And here,
Whitehead, undeniably, belongs to his time. What he undertakes to de
scribe is nothing other than "the Ascent of Man " ( RM, 3 8 ), the emergence
of what can be described as co-creation of the religious sentiment, and of
the truth of consciousness for itsel f.
   This doctrine is the direct negation of the theory that religion is pri
marily a social fact. Social facts are of great importance to religion, be
cause there is no such thing as absolutely independent existence. You
cannot abstract society from man; most psychology is herd-psychology.
But all collective emotions leave untouched the awful ultimate fact,
which is the human being, consciously alone with itself, for its own sake.
   Religion is what the individual does with his own solitariness [ . . . I
Thus religion is solitariness; and if you are never solitary, you are never
religious. Collective enthusiasms, revivals, institutions, churches, rituals,
bibles, codes of behaviour, are the trappings of religion, its passing forms.
They may be useful, or harmful; they may be authoritatively ordained, or
merely temporary expedients. But the end of religion is beyond all this
( RM, 1 6-1 7 ) .
   B y religion, it seems w e must understand what Whitehead called " reli
gious vision " in Science and Modern World, to distinguish it from religion
as an institution . This time, however, we should pause over this question
of the rel igious vision, for here we are at the starting point of a specula
tive adventure, and no longer of the description of the modern world.
Hasn't this adventure, which recogn izes neutrality as its primary obliga
tion and its first being-put-to-the-test, j ust emitted a somewhat " cavalier"
judgment against what it calls " social fact," to identify it now with herd
psychology ?
   There are two ways to understand such a text. If we understand it in a
register that ratifies the j udgment emitted agai nst those who were un
awa re of the truth of their solitude, we wi l l have to think that Whitehead,
after Hegel and at the same time as the almost unanimous chorus of his
contempora ries, is a llowing himsel f to celebrate the appea rance of mono
theistic religions as participating in the emergence of a truth that tran
scends history. Yet it is equally possible to understand it on an empirical
level, without which I wo uld have to concl ude that the speculative inter
pretation, in this case, has been blind to its own risks.
2 8 8   COSMOLOGY




   The risk associated with the link between rel igion and the feeling of
solitude is to a uthorize a rea ding of human history as a site of the revela
tion of a truth endowed with the power of j udging. And i n this case, in
the first place, to assign a " herd psychology " to all those peoples who
have thought of themselves i n terms of belonging. I n such a case, there
would indeed be " technica l wea kness," for what has been celebrated as
the " d isenchantment of the world," Man's discovery of his own solitude,
has been and sti l l is the basic reference for a l l the modes of presentation
that link monotheism to the denunciation of attachments said to be idola
trous. Solitude, if it were an " ulti mate fact" in this sense, would place
speculation in the service of the most routine j udgment possible aga i nst
those who are protected by their " beliefs " from the terrible news : they
wi ll, a fter all, have to recogn ize, like us, that their a ncestors are dead,
that their fetishes have no other power than the one they lend it, that the
world is deaf to their rites and indifferent to their superstitions. In short,
Man's sol itude ca nnot be expressed without destructive opposition,
dooming those who cannot bea r to live alone to the pa in of awakening,
for their greater good .
   It is possible, however, to affirm that Whitehead here presents himself
as the heir to a n " empirical fact," precisely the one that is to be described
in another way, to be produced accord i ng to a cava lier perspective that
revea ls the importance of novelty aga inst the pretenses which, histori
cally, have turned that novelty into the discovery of a preexisting truth .
The novelty that constitutes the awareness of man's solitude, an ultimate
fact as soon as it i s felt, wou ld then be sepa rated from all coincidence,
finally rea lized , between fact and right.
   Usual ly, what one becomes aware of, in this case, sol itude, is defined
as preceding the acquisition of awareness . Sol itude is then what " Man"
primordially fled, taking refuge in the certa inties of the group, unti l he
found the courage to accept the hard truth . For Whitehead, however,
" becoming aware " means to produce, to bring something new into exi<;
tence i n the guise of the interpretation of the old. No interpretation can
claim to be a simple eluci dation of something a lready there. And, in this
case, even herd psychology belongs to the contrast produced by novelty:
by tautological definition, what the sol itary consciousness despises, against
which its cry rises up when it seeks its respondent in God . Job da res to
dema nd an account from God of the evils overwhelming him, dares to
affirm that his cry finds an advocate before God, the witness and de
fender of a cause that no fa lse friend could convi nce him to deny. But
those he silences beca use they bear witness, from this new viewpoint, to
a " herd psychology " are his own contempora ries. Their "conformism"
                     T H E   R I S K S   O F   S P E C U LATIVE   I N T E R P R E TAT I O N   2 8 9




belongs to the same epocha l fact as his protest, and thus legitimizes i t
i n a very norma l way. All refer together t o the same genera l dogma that
God is j ust, to derive d ivergent consequences from it: Job to demand
j ustice, his friends to ask him to return to the ranks, to accept his case as
deducible, i n one way or another, from the dogma .
   In the book of Job we find the picture of a man suffering from an al
most fantastic array of the evils characteristic of his times. He is tearing
to pieces the sophism that all is for the best in the best of possible worlds,
and that the ;ustice of God is beautifully evident in everything that hap
pens. The essence of the book ofJob is the contrast of a general principle,
or dogma, and the particular circumstances to which it should apply
( RM, 48 ) .
   Here, o f course, stil l and once aga in, the figure o f a typica lly White
headian circle presents itself. The contrast between principle and circum
stance that ra ises the question of divine j ustice is new, associated with the
monotheistic figure of an omnipotent God . Yet this contrast a lso belongs,
typica lly, to the risks proper to the rationa list adventure, a lways liable to
eliminate what does not correspond to the postulated reasons. In this
sense, this contrast is part of what commits Whitehead to the construction
of his cosmology. Job's cry rises up to the heavens and returns to earth i n
the form of the risks associated with Whitehead's speculative interpreta
tion: how can we hear this type of cry while correcting the excess subjec
tivity it conveys, and avoiding the exacerbation of factual suffering by the
feeling of injustice that tortures the solitary consciousness? How can we
say that the words that make the d i fference between j ust and unj ust
matter but belong to an idiom and do not express an ultimate genera lity,
without, however, joining the number of Job's false friends ? Without hav
ing recourse to the Leibnizian trick na med " the best of worlds " ? The risk
proper to Whitehead's cosmology, the wager of his adequacy, is not that
Job is satisfied, but that he is transformed, and that the transformation of
his experience bears witness to what is to be trusted: not the good qua
more powerful than evil, but evil qua lia ble to be overcome.
   No reason, internal to history, can be assigned why that flux of forms,
rather than another flux, should have been illustrated. It is true that any
flux must exhibit the character of internal determination. So much fol
lows from the ontological principle. But every instance of internal deter
mination assumes that flux up to that point. There is no reason why there
could be no alternative flux exhibiting that principle of internal determi
nation. The actual flux presents itself with the character of being merely
 "given." It does not disclose any peculiar character of "perfection." On
the contrary, the imperfection of the w orld is the theme of every religion
2 9 0   COSMOLOGY




which offers a way of escape, and of every sceptic who deplores the pre
vailing superstition. The Leibnizian theory of the "best of possible
worlds " is an audacious fudge produced in order to save the face of a
Creator constructed by contemporary, and antecedent, theologians. Fur
ther, in the case of those actualities whose immediate experience is most
completely open to us, namely, human beings, the final decision of the
immediate subject-superject r . . . 1 is the foundation of our experience of
responsibility, of approbation or of disapprobation, of self-approval or
of self-reproach, of freedom, of emphasis. This element in experience is
too large to be put aside merely as misconstruction. It governs the whole
tone of human life. It can be illustrated by striking instances from fact or
from fiction. But these instances are only conspicuous illustrations of hu
man experience during each hour and each minute. The ultimate freedom
of things, lying beyond all determinations, was whispered by Galileo
E pur si muove-freedom for the inquisitors to think wrongly, for Gali
leo to think rightly, and for the world to move on despite of Galileo and
inquisitors ( RM, 46- 47) .
   The freedom, in other words, for Whitehea d, to perhaps " have made a
mista ke," to have transformed his reader, or the Christians listening to
him, i nto enemies, ready for any kind of violence if they cannot a ffirm
that, i n one way or another, their truth has the power to emerge victori
ous agai nst error. Job may wel l have been right to refuse the hypocritical
consolations of his friends, but we must a lso imagine a Job suddenly furi
ous in the face of the " consolations " of a Whitehead telling him, " Yes, of
course, the feeling of inj ustice to which you bear witness has a respon
dent," only to add, "and the same is true of what you denounce as resig
nation, indifference, or hypocrisy on the part of your friends, and a lso of
the course of the world, which is free to reduce you to a wreck on a pile
of manure, whether you l i k e it or not, and whether your friends like it
or not."
   " But I demand that the inj ustice I have undergone be genuinely real,
that no one in the world may say that what I am feeling is of the nature
of a fact! And if you tell me that this demand is a lso of the order of fact,
all I have left will be violence to make you understand that your tender
ness and your humor a re unbearable to me-that I prefer, like Samson, to
destroy the universe rather than admit the nonexistence of a beyond
which, here and now, j ustifies me, me and me al one."
   The suffering of this cry corresponds to what Whitehead calls evil, for
what is a ffirmed proclaims its need for the destruction of what is greater
than the cry. Was it provoked by metaphysica l neutra l ity ? Certa inly, if
the latter insisted on proposing itself " at the wrong season," which is a
                      TH E   R I S K S   O F   S P E C U L AT I V E   I N T E R P R E TAT I O N   2 9 1




typica l trick of evil . This is why Whitehead's text never exhibits, as I have
j ust done, the test his categories constituted for our sense of the true and
the j ust. His cavalier and artificial perspective then seems to descri be,
whereas it is betting on a transformation that it does not describe. My
commentary, just as caval ier, implies a change of epoch and a change of
risk . The empirica l fact is that what I experience as " what is to be avoided "
is the possi bility of constituting human sol itude as an ultimate, and that
what I feel as " what is to be anticipated " is the possi bility that my reader
may consider " the death of God " to be an irreversible fact, with regard to
which any hesitation is regression .
   The vast causal independence of contemporary occasions is the preser
vative of the elbow-room within the Universe. It provides each actuality
with a welcome environment for irresponsibility. "Am I my brother's
keeper? " expresses one of the earliest gestures of self-consciousness. Our
claim for freedom is rooted in our relationship to our contemporary en
vironment (AI, 1 95 ) .
    "Am I m y brother's keeper ? " This cry o f Cain comes, rather curiously,
to i nterrupt a technical development in which Whitehead was d iscussing
the past, present, and future in reference to the physical theory of relativ
ity, as is indicated by the term "contemporary." For Wh itehead, two occa
sions are contemporary if neither belongs to the past of the other. In
usual relativistic terms, what does not belong either to the past or the
present of an event ( for those who might be reminded of something by
this, what is situated outside Minkowski 's double cone ) belongs to its
"elsewhere." And this is i ndeed what Whitehead is attempti ng: to raise
to the power of metaphysics the independence of the here with regard to
the contemporary elsewhere. Our contemporary environment does not
doom us to say " we can't bel ieve it any more." I am not the guardian ei
ther of what my epoch defi nes as an " ultimate fact " or of what it defines
as an " i rreversible acquisition."
   Whitehead no more ta kes the side of Ca in, claiming i rresponsibility,
than he does that of Job, who dema nds an account of the evils over
whelming him; no more of Galileo-the ancestor, albeit despite hi msel f,
of all those who wil l answer to the hypothesis of God by this ca l l from
the heart: " but He does not really exist! "-than of the inquisitors who
proposed that Galileo accept that his thesis was only a hypothesis and
that it does not pertain to man to constitute the world as the respondent
for his ideas. The freedom for the world to move, whatever Job and Cain,
and Galileo and Bel larmi n, and Whitehead and Nietzsche or Artaud may
th ink, since its very movement has produced them all, the dissonant heirs
of unforeseen possi bi lities of feel i ng and of suffering, of affirming and
2 9 2   COSMOLOGY




destroyi ng, of demanding accounts, reasons, and j ustifications, those pos
sibilities that are our fate, that comment on us and render us thinking.
And if speculative philosophy has a meaning, it is in sl ipping among
these possibilities, of new modes of la ughter, of cavalier creation, and of
humor: we ought not to exaggerate.
   Freedom for what inherits! A refusal to ra ise the vibrant continuities,
the mandates accepted, the risks prolonged, to the power of metaphysical
or existential affirmation. A refusa l to confer an excess of legitimacy on
what may have been ta ken up aga in, confirmed, echoed in multiple testi
monies and adventures . A refusal to j ustify a lineage by ratifying the emi
nent quality it assumes, whose consequences it should loya lly unfold. A
refusal to come to the aid of victory, blessing what has ta ken place, that
is, also kicking what might have been when it is down. For what we can
testi fy to has certa inly found in us its proxies. But the i mportance of the
testimony does not consist in its fidelity, and a bove all, no testimony is
possible with rega rd to the crowd of what has cried in vain, of what has
found no other echo than a touch of worry, a certa in something that si
lently testifies that something that might have been is not. Every perspec
tive is cava l ier.
   Whitehead 's caval ier perspective, whether he is addressing phi loso
phers, the a uthors of concepts that have so often made reason rhyme
with power, or Christians, who, in the name of the power of Truth, have
destroyed what their words disqua l ified, is neither that of a righter of
wrongs nor of a denouncer. The present does not have to take cha rge of
what has been excluded, to become the guard ian and spokesman of its
own culpability. Irrespons ible, it cannot help but decide for the epoch to
which it belongs . The terrible question-to defect, or to assume a pa in to
whose truth one no longer adheres-yields to the speculative problem:
"What might this epoch be capable of? " A humorous problem, beca use it
leaves undeci ded, and undecidable, the question of whether what this
epoch might be capable of belongs to it, or topples it into the past. Yet it
is also a technical problem, and it is up to Whiteheadian concepts to cre
ate its terms, to create the actual possibility of belonging to an epoch
without letting oneself be defined by it.
   Here, speculative empiricism reencounters somethi ng of what Nietz
sche called a " ha mmer-thought," supposed to crush and abolish what
cannot bear it. Whereas the ha mmer crushes things, Whiteheadian em
pi ricism " makes things hold together," but it does so in a rather perverse
way, apt to demora l ize the j udgment that, as an excess of subjectivity,
never ceases to come in second with regard to all experience, and every
possible that is sensed, never ceasing its claim to submit what has hap-
                     T H E   R I S K S   O F   S P E C U LAT I V E   I N T E R P R E TAT I O N   2 9 3




pened to a measure authorizing its pronouncement. In both cases, the test
is in the present. The Nietzschean eternal return: you who judge, you will
ret urn again and again, carried, prod uced, and nourished by what you
think you can judge. Tender Whiteheadian perversity: the rights conferred
upon you by the critical consciousness by which you authorize yourself
are a wonderful i l lustration of creativity; they will be added to the many,
and perhaps be articulated with what they claimed to disengage them
selves from. What you claimed to j udge once and for a l l wi l l return in
new contrasts.
   The eternal return is indeed the Similar, repetition in the eternal return
is indeed the Identical-but precisely resemblance and identity do not
exist prior to the return of what returns. They do not initially qualify
what returns, they are absolutely merged with its return. It is not the same
that returns, it is not the similar that returns, but the Same is the returning
of what returns, that is, of the Different, the similar is the returning of
what returns, that is, of the Dissimilar (DR, 3 8 4 ) .
                                                          C H A P TER E I G H TEEN
