Fee l i ng One's World




           E A R E NOW up aga i nst the wa l l . Enough of putting things in
             perspective: what demands to be thought will have to be popu
             lated with concepts . First of all, that which, in Science and the
Modern World, had not succeeded in being thought: actua lity, which is
" the only va lue." As we reca ll, the Whiteheadian approach, following the
lead of the " possibilities of val ue," had fa iled in the pragmatic sense. It
was inca pable of awakening the appetite for what a bstraction left out of
consideration. The " fl ight of experience " brought a bout by " eterna l ac
tivity " did not ca use a new sun to rise, germi nating new q uestions. We
must therefore forget this eterna l activity and start all over aga in i n an
other way; starting out this time from the only thing that, according to
the ontologica l principle, is a cause for the ontologica l principle: the ac
tual entity.
   That the actua l entity is a " feel ing" of " its " world is what Whitehead
tried to think from beginning to end of Process and Reality. And if there
is one thing that must first be associated with " feel ing," it is the notion of
a vector. To feel is " to be affected by," that is, at the same time, to confer
upon what is felt " there " the power to have an effect " here." The point is
thus to ta ke literally the common-sense statement " this thing is present in
my experience insofar as it is elsewhere," and to construct its concept,
even in its most phantasmagorica l consequences . The tempta tion to
escape this " i mmediate fact " of experience is insepa ra ble from the mis
placed concreteness associated with the notion of simple loca lization . It
is this tempta tion which, for Whitehead, inspired the set of sleights of
hand through which metaphysics becomes judgment, disqua l i fying what
                                                 F E E L I N G   ONE'S   W O R L D   2 9 5




we sense in favor of what we j udge reasonable, sleights of hand that a re
destined to wind up at what is, for once, a genuine phantasmagoria, that
of the bi furcation of nature. In other words, the choice is between a con
ceptual deployment that exhibits the actually fantastic character of expe
rience, of any experience, and a retreat of this experience to reassuri ng
categories which are, above all, not to be followed too far in thei r conse
quences, for they lead straight to the absurd . That is to say that for
Whitehead, there is no choice. This, moreover, is what is affirmed by the
fourth category of explanation, i ntrod ucing the "principle of relativity."
   The principle of universal relativity directly traverses Aristotle's dictum,
"A substance is not present in a subject." On the contrary, according to
this principle an actual entity is present in other actual entities ( PR, 5 0 ) .
   We had to begin b y recalling this because this may b e what is most dif
ficult to accept in Whitehead ian metaphysics. We have, for better or worse,
become accustomed to think that two bodies can interact "at a distance,"
that is, qua distant, but we are reassured by the fact that d istance makes
itself felt (at least in the definition of the gravitational interaction ), and that
the interaction responds to a regul ar mathematical function. Here, the con
ceptual scandal is fully deployed, irreducible to a redefinition of space-time
as Einstein proposed it. If I feel something, this thing certainly enters into
the definition of my experience: it belongs to my experience, and it is not
forged by my experience . I sense it i nsofar as it testifies to something else.
I produce myself qua feeling that which is not me.
   "To feel," of course, insofar as it holds true both of an electron and of
a mathematician contemplating a sunset, cannot answer the ironic ques
tions that will arrive in throngs. Feeling is appropriate to every actual
occa sion, whereas the perceptions we m ight i nvoke as examples-a nd
especially those that are apparently most simple, the most apt to found
serious thought, the whiteness of that house I see out there, through the
window-refer to the occasion qua belonging to a highly sophisticated
social environment. The felt contrast between " here " and "over there,"
by which Wh itehead characterized the " perci pient event" in The Concept
of Nature, is by no mea ns generic. What is generic-and what this con
trast requires if nature is not to bi furcate-is that the " sophisticated
route " of occasions that gives meaning to the percipient event should no
where be reducible to a construction that bri ngs forth an ill usory " there "
for an experi ence that is in fact loca lizable, belonging only to the " here "
of perception. The vectorial character of feeling translates the " delocal
ization " of every " here."
   If the concepts constructed in The Concept of Nature are henceforth
defined as relative to a highl y sophisticated experience, beca use they
2 9 6    COSMOLOGY




designate the perceiving mind as ultimate, what will be taken as generic,
belonging to the ultimate general ities, is the statement that there is the
feeling of an "object " by a " subject." At the risk, of course, that "subject"
and "object " may find themselves sl ightly redefined .
   The philosophy of organism is the inversion of Kant's philosophy. The
Critique of Pure Reason describes the process by which subjective data
pass into the appearance of the objective world. The philosophy of or
ganism seeks to describe how objective data pass into subjective satisfac
tion, and how order in the objective data provides intensity in the subjec
tive satisfaction. For Kant, the world emerges from the subject; for the
philosophy of organism, the subject emerges from the world-a "super
ject " rather than a "subject." The word "object " thus means an entity
which is a potentiality for being a component in feeling; and the word
"subject" means the entity constituted by the process of feeling, and in
cluding this process [ . . . 1 the process is the elimination of indetermi
nateness of feeling from the unity of one subjective experience ( PR, 8 8 ) .
   We have indeed left behind the "flight o f experience " induced by eter
nal activity, for the contrast between potentia l i ty and actua lity no longer
presupposes an " underlying " acti vity. Every obj ect is defined as potentia l
ity, calling for determination: feeling, wel l and good, but how ? The atomic
character of becoming is, however, preserved . Once a n actual occasion
has produced its own determi nation, once it has satisfied a l l of its obliga
tions, it has simultaneously achieved and produced " its " specific satisfac
tion . All i ndeterminacy is con summated . The many have become one.
Whitehead calls this ful ly actua lized subjective unity " superject." The sub
ject becomes so that a superject may be.
   The many have become one . . . and is a ugmented by one. The being
world, a verita ble Lei bnizian monad, a producer-product enjoying the
adoption-of-a-position that has actua lized " its world," ca n no longer be
the syntactic subj ect of a process, since every process corresponds to a
becoming-determined. Definition, the soul of actua lity ( PR, 223 ) , has
been produced. Henceforth, being what it is, the occasion perishes qua
subject-superject, qua subj ective immediacy, to become a " that which " :
that which others will feel .
   This doctrine of organism is the attempt to describe the world a s a
process of generation of individual actual entities, each with its own ab
solute self-attainment. The concrete finality of the individual is nothing
else than a decision referent beyond itself. The "perpetual perishing " (cf.
Locke, II, X l V, 1 ) of individual absoluteness is thus foredoomed. But the
"perishing " of absoluteness is the attainment of "objective immortality "
( PR, 6 0 ) .
                                                F E E L I N G   O N E ' S   W O R L D   2 9 7




   Ti me, accord ing to Locke, was " perpetua l perishing," but Whitehead
goes back beyond Locke toward the Timaeus, where Plato concludes that
what is conceived by opinion with the help of sensations, and thus outside
of reason, is in incessa nt becoming but never really " is." And he happily
accepts this verdict.
    Completion is the perishing of immediacy: "It never really is " ( PR, 8 5 ) .
    Of course this borrowing ignores the Platonic intention, in a ca va lier
way. If what becomes " never rea lly is," what traditiona l ly designated the
subject, the sense of self, the immediacy of subjective presence to oneself,
never rea lly are either. It is therefore not a ma tter, as in Plato, of casting
doubt on the category of becoming, but of a ffirming that becoming as
such is indeed ungraspa ble, si nce it is the grasp itself that " ma kes things
become." What I can grasp, what I wi ll say " is," is nothing other than
what has become, what has achieved " satisfaction." It is bereft of mean
ing for itself, but it is henceforth " publ ic," avai lable for obj ectivation,
which will make it a n ingredient for new becomings.
    In other words, Whitehead here ta kes up as a metaphysica l principle
what cha racterized the relation of cogredience explored in The Concept
of Nature. Satisfaction marks the transition of the present to the past,
and this mea ns a radica l cha nge of nature. "That which" we feel belongs
to the past. But this past is not in flight, inaccessi ble. Quite the contra ry,
it is what will have to be felt. Like a book as soon as it is published, how
ever, it is inca pa ble of stipulating how it should be felt; it is a potentia lity
for feeling. One can i ndeed say " my past belongs to me," but this is a
ta utology. What has achieved " objecti ve immorta lity " belongs by defini
tion to whoever feels it. My past belongs to you as much as to me, al
though you do not feel it in the same way.
    In fact, it is wel l known that whoever endea vors to think of a n experi
ence as " truly hers" of course ipso facto makes it topple i nto the past. It
may then no longer have a ny present existence except as a term for an
anxious contrast, bringing i nto play the purely rhetorica l hypothesis,
suspicious or downright worri some, tha t its property is only an i ll usion.
And i f I ha ve to dea l with a genuine project of questioning " my " experi
ence, even this contrast can be eliminated, lea ving to what I claim as
mine only the a bstract position of a pretext, a reference. I will then em
bark upon an adventure of panic, as uneven as shooting the ra pids: the
stereotyped plea sure of confrontation, the antici pation of traps and reta li
ations, impatience i nspired by the feel ing of being the victim of the other's
bad fa ith or manipulative ta lents, the suspicion of an ungraspa ble misun
dersta nd ing, the fear of emerging victorious without having understood
what the other meant, and so on. All of that col l i des and becomes
2 9 8   C O S M O LO G Y




entangled i n a way tha t is so shaken up tha t I could very wel l say later:
"I couldn't see heads nor ta ils in it a ny more." Sometimes, moreover, the
only way to find one's bea rings is a bruta l brea k, an outright refusal, a
transition into action . For Whitehead, however, these ambiguous experi
ences testify to the fact that each experienced continuity is a produced
continuity, a verita ble miracle of resurrection of what was " dead "-that
is, " public "-ava ila ble for something other tha n itself, beyond itself.
  The concrescence, absorbing the derived data into immediate privacy,
consists in mating the data with ways of feeling provocative of the pri
vate synthesis. These sub;ective ways of feeling are not merely receptive
of the data as alien facts, they clothe the dry bones with the flesh of a real
being, emotional, purposive, appreciative. The miracle of creation is de
scribed in the vision of the prophet Ezekiel: "So I prophesied as he com
manded me, and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up
upon their feet, an exceeding great army " ( PR, 8 5 ) .
   The import o f the " inversion o f Kant's doctrine," which has here become
the " miracle of creation," can never be overemphasized . Kant's problem
was that of the " k nowledge " of what presents itself as an " object" for a
subject. As such, this problem was the heir of a long tradition of controver
sies, which, in the Middle Ages, caused the emergence of the notion of
"objective reality," not in the sense of "as it exists," but in the sense of " that
to which " thought refers. This problem, constantly relaunched, was that
of the relation between objective rea lity a nd the thing " in itself," that is,
its " essential " or " forma l " bei ng, a s conceived and crea ted by God . In
other words, the problem of creation was above all a problem of knowl
edge, forcing us to think of the rela tion between the creative Intellect and
man, the image of God, who knows " objectively," whereas God conceives/
creates. Whitehead adopts a convergent line of approach with rega rd to
this tradition: knowing is the name for a ( pa rticular) form of creation,
and what is created is always insepa ra bly creator a nd creature, making
what it emerges from its own.
   The fact that we have to do with a " miracle of creation" obviously does
not imply a contrast between " natura l " and " supernatura l ." Creativity is
the ultimate. To tal k a bout miracles is a way of reca lling this, of recal l ing
that nothing is capable of causing " naturally" or " by itself," that every ef
ficacy presupposes that "the many become one " and renders it explicit,
but without ever being able to explain why the many is capa ble of becom
ing one.
   As we have seen, among the "ca uses " of the process is the subject itself.
Determination cannot be assimilated to a consequence that could be de
duced from initial data : as a mathema tician, Whitehead knows that the
                                               F E E L I N G   O N E ' S   W O R L D   2 9 9




problems that were able to find this k i nd of solution a re part of the past
of mathematics, but that a genu ine problem, i n the present, impl ies a
face-to-face confrontation between mathematicians and thei r data.
Mathematicians, however disarticulated may be thei r thought in this con
frontation, are " purposive." Likewise, the subject is not only what deter
mines itself, but what aims at its own determination, its completion as a
superject. This means that the superject is not merely the end point of the
process but is "already present," as a final cause, as that whose prod uction
orients the progressive determination. The separation between subject
and superject is thus a simplification, and Whitehead will, moreover, make
freq uent use of the inseparable binome subject-superject.
   Prehensions are not atomic; they can be divided into other prehensions
and combined into other prehensions. Also prehensions are not indepen
dent of each other. The relation between their sub;ective forms is consti
tuted by the one sub;ective aim which guides their formation. This corre
lation of sub;ective forms is termed "the mutual sensitivity " of prehensions
[ . . I the prehensions in dis;unction are abstractions; each of them is its
 .



sub;ect viewed in that abstract ob;ectification. The actuality is the totality
of prehensions with sub;ective unity in process of concrescence into con
crete unity ( PR, 235 ) .
   Here, Whitehead uses the term " prehension," which, according to his
categories, is more general than that of feeling. A feeling is always positive,
including what is felt in a synthesis, whereas a prehension may be " nega
tive." What is prehended will then be eliminated from the unified complex
feeling in the course of determination . Yet what matters more general ly is
the i mpossibility of defining a prehension independently of the process of
subjective determination. Prehensions do not explain the unity that comes
into being, without being explained by it. No explanation is ever unilateral
in Whitehead, none can abstract from what the ontological principle de
mands: among the actual entities entering into explanation appears the fi
nal ca use that the entity in the course of constitution constitutes for itsel f.
All explanations therefore set in motion a set of reciprocal presuppositions
that designate what they all presuppose: creativity.
   Concrescence thus implies a twofold convergence: the subjective forms
(the " how" of feelings ) converge upon a superject, while the multipl icity
of data of these feelings converge upon one datum, the actual world of
the " satisfied " entity. Here again, Whitehead is thinking l i ke a mathema
tician, beca use for a mathematician, a wel l-defined function expresses
and implies a convergence. If a series di verges, it does not define a math
ematical object. When the mathematician becomes a metaphysician, how
ever, convergence ceases to be the condition for a defi nition and becomes
3 0 0   C O S M O LOGY




a process of determination; and the construction of convergence that
brings to existence a single, wel l-determined world, as " what is felt," is just
as much the one that brings to existence the " subject" for which there is
convergence, the subject who feels this world . Satisfaction and determi
nation coi ncide.
   In Science and the Modern World, Whitehead had made up his mind to
atomize becoming in order to make the possible exist in an irred ucible
mode, that is, i n order to relegate to a specialized abstraction what math
ematical physics regards as its great exploit: to reduce change to a func
tion of well-defined va ria bles. One of the ways of expressing the satisfac
tion that closes the process of the constitution of an actual occasion is
to say that each felt entity, functioning as a datum for a feel ing, belongs
henceforth and ultimately to a quite determinate, functional actual world,
to a community within which it has a wel l-determined function or role.
   Calculemus, Lei bniz had proposed, and here we may understand this
exhortation in its fully deployed sense. It is no longer di rected to rational
human beings, al rea dy constituted and gathered together by an active
" we," endowed with rights and duties, proposing to submit a situation to
a consensual calculation . The " miracle of creation " cal ls for a double
creation, strictly insepa rable, of the " we " and of what is to be calculated.
This is speci fied by categories of explanation XX, XXI, XXII, and XXIII.
   (xx) That to "function " means to contribute determination to the ac
tual entities in the nexus of some actual world. Thus the determinateness
and self-identity cannot be abstracted from the community of the diverse
functionings of all entities [ . . . I
   (xxi) A n entity is actual, when it has significance for itself. By this it is
meant that an actual entity functions in respect to its own determination
[...J
   (xxii) That an actual entity by functioning in respect to itself plays di
verse roles in self-formation without losing its self-identity. It is self
creative; and in its process of creation transforms its diversity of roles
into one coherent role [ . . . J
   (xxiii) That th is self-functioning is the real internal constitution of an
actual entity. It is the " immediacy " of the actual entity. A n actual entity is
called the "sub;ect " of its own immediacy ( PR, 2 5 ) .
   These categories of explanation by n o means j ustify that w e can make
a state of a ffa irs correspond to a function. They do, however, enable us to
understa nd that this is (approximately ) possible, as physics testifies, and
to connect this possibil ity to endura nce, both from the viewpoint of the
person speaking or a ttri buting and of the being to whom a role is attrib
uted, or of the state of a ffa irs to which a function comes to correspond.
                                               F E E L I N G   O N E ' S   W O R L D   3 0 1




To be able to attribute a role or to make a state of a ffairs correspond to
a function is essential to what we call explaini ng, interpreting, tel l i ng a
story; but a l l these exploits profit from a conti nuity they ca nnot j ustify.
Prior to us, it is our words and our organs that already capture, exhibit,
and select the invaria nts of a l l k inds, in relation to which their own func
tional role has been established , a role, moreover, that has no need of
"consciousness." As Emi le Meyerson poi nted out, the dog who catches
a stick thrown i n the air shows himself able to "calculate" the trajectory
which, si nce Gal ileo, mathematicians have learned to describe by a math
ematical function. In no case, however, will the identification of the two
meanings of " function "-the one that refers it to a continuous state of af
fairs, and the one that designates the role assumed by a prehension in the
functioning of an actual entity-be j ustified . " To function" in the sense of
categories XX, XXI, and XXII is absolutely not " to be defined by a func
tion," and the same is true of the " actua l worl d " of an entity, never to be
confused with a "common world " that would preexist its appropri ation.
  Just as Descartes said, "this body is mine "; so he should have said,
"this actual world is mine." My process of "being myself" is my origina
tion from my possession of the world ( PR, 8 1 ) .
   The " nexus " of actual entities that Whitehead ca lls the " actua l world "
is in no way a " state of affairs ." It has no enduring identity of its own, no
identity that does not come from its appropriation by a concrescent pro
cess. Does it even constitute " a " world independently of the taking posses
sion of " its" world by each entity ? As we sha l l see, this will be one of the
sites of transformation of Whitehead 's position. Let us recal l a lready,
however, that one of the formulations of the ontological principle specifies
that there is no rea l togetherness that is not a bei ng-together in the forma l
constitution of a n actual entity. And in fact, when, in the fourteenth cate
gory of explanation, Whitehead m ust render expl icit what the definition
he has given of the nexus qua third category of existence can possibly
mean ( " nexus," or " public matters of fact" ), he avoids using the term to
gether or togetherness. Instead, he has recourse to the neutra l and static
term set. We may think of a set as a "col lection" of objects that may well
be united only by the common feature of having pleased the collector.
   That a nexus is a set of actual entities in the unity of the relatedness
constituted by their prehensions of each other, or-what is the same
thing conversely expressed-constituted by their ob;ectifications in each
other (PR, 24 ).
   The " miracle of creation " is then the transformation of a " set" i nto a
" togetherness." Yet, as I will not ti re of repeati ng, the term " miracle"
permits no savings. We must now take up the question tha t rema ins
3 0 2   COS MOLOGY




pend ing, the question of what is requi red by this transformation of a set
into a togetherness so that what is " ulti mately" felt may not in any way
be assimilated to a result in the sense of physics ( summation ) or of logic
(deduction ) . Here aga in, it i s perhaps the example of physicists articulat
i ng their functions that may guide us. The question physicists address to
thei r subject-matter is not " what does the world look li ke," but " what
variables and how should they be articulated," what to ta ke i nto account,
and how. The question is that of " what" and " how."
   It is here, of course, that the eternal objects will be required . They are
defined very briefly ( the fifth category of existence) as " pure potentials of
specific definition." The categories of existence, because they precede those
of explanation, cannot " be explained ." They will genera lly be rendered
explicit by a category of explanation, in this case the seventh category.
   That an eternal object can be described only in terms of its potentiality
for "ingression " into the becoming of actual entities; and that its analysis
only discloses other eternal objects. It is a pure potential. The term "in
gression " refers to the particular mode in which the potentiality of an
eternal object is realized in a particular actual entity, contributing to the
definiteness of that actual entity ( PR, 23 ) .
   We wi l l encounter the question o f eterna l objects again and aga in.
What matters, already at this stage, is not to attribute to them the respon
sibi lity that Plato attri butes to his Ideas. The eternal objects are not deter
minant, but " potential for determination." They are what determi nation
requi res, the definition of the " how" of each feel ing, but no particular
" how" constitutes a privileged path allowing us to rise back up toward an
eternal object. The eterna l objects, as Whitehead repeats, " a re what they
are," and they tell no story about their ingressions ( PR, 256 ) : in other
words, they explain nothing, justify nothing, guarantee nothing, privilege
nothing, especially not intellectual operations in search of abstraction.
   Correlatively, the term " i ngression " is here again a primary term . This
does not mean that Whitehead wi l l not ask the question of which eternal
objects make ingression into which actua lity: quite the contrary. Yet the
question of a " mecha nism of ingression " is not to be asked, for this would
imply that ingression is explained on the basis of eterna l objects. Beca use
i ngression is ingression of an eternal object, it is mute. All reasons will
have to fit with statements that take actua l entities as thei r reason: actual
entities a re the only reasons.
   In The Concept of Nature, Whitehead had placed the object's ingression
into an event under the banner of a resolute refusal of all expl anation:
"The event is what it is beca use the object is wha t it is," but " objects are
what they are beca use events are what they are " ( CN, 1 44-1 45 ) . Here, we
                                                   F E E L I N G   O N E ' S   WO R L D   3 0 3




may say that the i ngression of an eterna l object has the consequences it
has because the actual occasion is what it is, but it must immediately be
a dded that this occasion is only itself because it is determi ned as it is de
termined . This is what is affirmed by the ninth category of explanation:
  That how an actual entity becomes constitutes what that actual entity is
[ . . j Its "being " is constituted by its "becoming." This is the "principle
 .



of process " ( PR, 2 3 ) .
   The process is rea lity, b u t rea lity i s not pure flux, it i s " realization," and
the process must be j ust as m uch said to be a " process of determ ination."
This is why eternal objects are required . One might be tempted to cal l
them " a bstract " beca use they a re sepa rate from a l l questions concerning
actua lity. And one can indeed do so, but on the condition that the term
" a bstraction " be d ivorced from the verb " to a bstract," and be connected
only to the adjectives " pure," " separate," " impassible." This is another
way of saying that the question of realization must be rad ica lly separated
from that of knowledge, and from a l l the d istinctions we produce be
tween a bstract and concrete knowledge. Whitehead confirms this when
he amuses himself by j uggl ing with the concepts we have inherited from
med ieva l philosophy, together with the link created by this philosophy
between categories of existence and ca tegories of knowledge.
  The notion of a universal is of that which can enter into the description
of many particulars; whereas the notion of a particular is that it is de
scribed by universals, and does not itself enter into the description of any
other particular [ . . . j both these notions involve a misconception. A n
actual entity cannot b e described, even inadequately, b y universals; be
cause other actual entities do enter into the description of any one actual
entity [ . . . j Thus every so-called "universal " is particular in the sense of
being ;ust what it is, diverse from everything else; and every so-called
"particular " is universal in the sense of entering into the constitutions of
other actual entities ( PR, 4 8 ) .
   The eterna l object i s exactly what it is, a n d a s such, it is unknowable,
unnamable. Th is is so, not in the manner of the God of negative theology,
by his eminence, but beca use the verbs " to know" or " to name " refer to
(sophisticated ) modes of feeling, a l l of which presuppose the determina
tion of the " how." I f eterna l objects have nothing to do with what we cal l
an abstraction, i n the sense o f an " a bstract characterization of a situa
tion," it is because they cha racterize nothing, but are requi red by the
" how" of each characterization. When physicists try to understand, won
dering how to articulate their function, that is, what varia bles to choose,
one will not ad dress eternal objects in order to understand what they are
trying to achieve, to j ustify the order they are trying to abstract from
3 0 4   COSMOLOGY




their data . Although every compa rison is da ngerous, however, the refer
ence to eterna l objects, whose ingression " contri butes to the defini teness
of an actual entity," ca n be more ana logica lly adequate when what is at
sta ke concerns physici sts trying to understa nd, to " rea l ize," the way i n
which thei r problem c a n ( perhaps) b e solved . F o r t h e adequate analogy is
the one tha t enables the celebration of a process of co-creation of physi
cists and of their function. Indeed , what is in play is the twofold trans
formation of a perplexed , hesitant being, and of a mass of dispara te,
partia lly redundant information, indeterminate with rega rd to its mean
ing, into a being who knows how to take each item of information into
account in a determinate way, the meaning of some of them being deter
mined by their articulation, by the " how " of thei r ta king-into-account,
and others being defined as ultimately insignificant.
   An eternal object, in abstraction from any one particular actual entity,
is a potentiality for ingression into actual entities. In its ingression into
any one actual entity, either as relevant or irrelevant, it retains its poten
tiality of indefinite diversity of modes of ingression, a potential indeter
mination rendered determinate in this instance. This definite ingression
into a particular actual entity is not to be conceived as the sheer evoca
tion of that eternal object from "not-being " into "being "; it is the evocation
of determination out of indetermination. Potentiality becomes reality;
and yet it retains its message of alternatives that the actual entity has
avoided. In the constitution of an actual entity:-whatever component is
red, might have been green; and whatever component is loved, might
have been coldly esteemed ( PR, 1 4 9 ) .
   A s is specified b y the principle o f relativity stated b y the fourth cate
gory of explana tion, " i t belongs to the nature of 'beings' to be a potential
for each 'becoming' " ( PR, 22 ) . What has happened has happened, and
will have to be felt as such. One may perhaps-Whitehea d does so
spea k of negative prehension with rega rd to beings, but this will not
mean exclusion, only indistinction, or reduction to insignificant noise.
When it comes to eterna l objects, however, the notion of negative prehen
sion will take on a decisive importance: by negative prehension, an eter
nal object may be eliminated. Even if its ingression had been determinant
in the constitution of what the concrescence inherits as " having to be
felt," it can itself be excluded from the synthesis that determines the way
in which this concrescence will satisfy the obliga tion. A component that
was loved can be inherited i n the mode of indi fference, and it will soon
be submerged by the grea t noise of the world .
   The actualities have t o be felt; while the pure potentialities can be dis
missed. So far as concerns their functionings as objects, this is the great
                                                F E E L I N G   O N E'S   W O R L D   3 0 5




distinction between an actual entity and an eternal ob;ect. The one is
stubbo rn matter of fact; and the other never loses its "accent " of potenti
ality ( PR, 239).
   Beca use the eternal objects may be " excluded from feeling," actual
worlds may diverge. The Leibnizian idea of a convergence among all
viewpoints towa rd " the same world," with each monad including, i n its
way, the tota lity of the world, had already been abandoned in Science
and the Modern World. For a decision to be concrete, it must not only
reflect a finite viewpoint, which would be the case if the decision bore
only upon what will be taken into account in a distinct way and what
wi l l be felt in a way that is merely obscure. It must be partia l, in the sense
of capable of eliminating the " how" that defined someth ing that is being
felt. The mirror must be broken and the metaphor of reflection aban
doned . It must be possible to decide that one doesn't want to know about
it, that one is not one's brother's keeper. In Science and the Modern
World, this possibil ity was ensured both by the discrimi nation concern
ing being a nd not-being ( the ideal situation) and by a l l the non sequiturs,
" this fa r but no farther," that affirmed the l i mited character of the prob
lematic horizon with rega rd to which a decision is taken ( God as the
principle of li mitation ) . And all of this referred to the triple envisagement
of eterna l activity. It henceforth perta ins to each entity to " explain itsel f"
with regard to what it takes into account, and with regard to the way it
wi l l eval uate what it takes into account. Convergence is the work of the
subject a s it becomes a superject while it appropriates " its world," which
did not preexist this appropriation qua " world " but qua nexus or set.
   The actual world is thus what is expressed, whose expression is the
subjective satisfaction, and it is categorica lly i mpossible to separate ex
pression and expressed, to conceive the expression in contrast to what is
expressed . This impossibil ity must even be stated twice. It derives, first,
from the fifth category of explanation of the Whitehead ian scheme, which
may recal l the Leibnizian principle of indiscernibles, accord ing to which
no two identica l viewpoi nts on the world exist, nor, therefore, do two
similar blades of grass.
   That no two actual entities originate from an identical universe [ . . . 1
the nexus of actual entities in the universe correlate to a concrescence is
termed "the actual world " correlate to that concrescence ( PR, 22-23 ) .
   To this impossibility, which is " poor " beca use it i s compatible with the
fact that there are " nearly simi lar " viewpoi nts, or nexus, another must be
added. In fact, it is the very possibil ity of "comparing" that is in question
when one disti nguishes the initial nexus, as a set, from the actual world as
a subjective " togetherness." The compa rison abstracts from the " private"
3 0 6   COSMOLOGY




cha racter of the subjective synthesis, designati ng what is compared in the
mode of objectivity, and therefore i mplying its " public " character, avail
able to be felt. In order to a ffirm the categorea l error consti tuted by any
eva luation about the way a n actua l entity has eva luated its world, White
head has recourse to a term that comes stra ight from the med ieval
tradition.
  I will adopt the pre-Kantian terminology, and say that the experience
en;oyed by an actual entity is that entity forma liter. By this I mean that
the entity, when considered "formally," is being described in respect to
those forms of its constitution whereby it is that individual entity with its
own measure of absolute self-realization ( PR, 5 1 ) .
    The distinction between " forma l " and "objective" belongs to pre
Cartesian philosophy and reflects the hia tus between the d ivine Intellect,
which makes conception and creation coi nci de, on the one hand, a nd the
human i ntel lect, to which "objective rea lity" corresponds, on the other.
Yet Whitehead, not without humor, takes this distinction from Desca rtes
at the very moment when Descartes, in the responses to the Ob;ections
that fol low his Meditations, tries to close the problem a nd to focus the
philosopher's effort upon "objective rea lity " a lone. Descartes, Whi tehead
a ffirms, expressed the very thesis of objectivation he hi msel f defends,
when he writes,
   Hence the idea of the sun will be the sun itself existing in the mind, not
indeed formally, as it exists in the sky, but ob;ectively, i.e. in the way in
which ob;ects are wont to exist in the mind; and this mode of being is
truly much less perfect than that in which things exist outside the mind,
but it is not on that account mere nothing, as I have already said ( PR, 76 ) .
   What neither Descartes nor the medieva l thi nkers h a d foreseen is
tha t the d istinction between " forma l " and " o bjecti ve" would be d i sen
gaged from the q uestion o f knowledge, to be extended to everything
tha t happens.
   Every actua l entity, once it has determi ned itself, wi l l be " objectified "
by others: its " being" wi l l be that it is to be felt. And i f this " way of be
ing" can be said to be " imperfect," this is because wha t will be objectified
is not the indivisible unity of the actua l entity for itsel f, its " forma l "
unity, causa sui. What w i l l b e objectified, cal led upon t o participate i n a
new process, is a n entity henceforth defi ned as a na lyzable, endowed with
a " morphology " tha t articulates as its " parts " all the feel i ngs that con
verged i nto a unique, nondecomposable satisfaction.
   The peculiarity of an actual entity is that it can be considered both
"ob;ectively " and "formally." The "ob;ective " aspect is morphological so
far as that actual entity is concerned: by this it is meant that the process
                                                F E E L I N G   O N E ' S   WO R L D   ) 0 7




involved is transcendent relatively to it, so that the esse of its satisfaction
is sentir i . The "formal" aspect is functional so far as that actual entity is
concerned: by this it is meant that the process involved is immanent in it.
But the objective consideration is pragmatic. It is the consideration of the
actual entity in respect to its consequences ( PR, 220 ) .
   A n entity will b e objective qua prehended by another entity, It itself has,
in one way or another, " satisfied its obligations" : nothing more ca n hap
pen to it; the consequences of what it has " made happen " concern entities
other than it, that is, the entities that will prehend it, The entity prehended
by others as a defined, obsti nate, esta bl ished fact imposing the q uestion
of its consequences, is not, a s Descartes sa i d, a " pure nothing." But its
consequences will have to be produced, and it is up to what prehends it to
prod uce them, to confer upon them thei r determinate identity, their prag
matic va lue.
   In other words, objective consideration does not initia lly center a round
the q uestion of k nowledge, even i f all knowledge is a l so pragma tica lly
ta k ing-into-account, It is generic: every actua l entity i n its process of con
stitution is obliged to ta ke i nto account what has ta ken place, what is
publicly i mposed a s having taken place but wh ich is, a s such, a signifi
cant, wa iting for the pragmatic significa nce others will confer upon it,
   In contrast, when Whi tehead " tel ls the story " of the way an entity de
cides for itsel f by itsel f, forma lly, proceeding to what he ca lls a genetic
analysis or division, he is cha racterizing a " private" process, This means
that such an analysis is obviously an a bstraction, and more precisely, it
abstracts from the fact that it cannot be carried out by a nyone. It consti
tutes an ontologica l impossibility beca use there exists no possible " hold "
on the process of concrescence. In fact, between Science and the Modern
World and Process and Reality, we ca n say tha t Whitehead has " simply"
switched a bstractions. Eterna l activity could only be characterized in
a bstraction from actua lity, which is a l so impossible. The problem, how
ever, was not that it is impossible but that the a bstraction did not inspire
any a ppetite for that from which it had abstracted : a fa iled fra ming of
the problem, Genetic ana lysis-j ust a s i mpossi ble-wi ll, for its part, be a
success i f it obliges the reader, and Whitehead himself, to thin k .
   In fact, the categories that dea l with concrescence a s such a r e ca lled
"ca tegories of obl igation." The point is neither to descri be nor to explain,
but to prod uce a set of constra ints that impose on thought a regime of
reciproca l presupposition. A " leap of the imagina tion " may answer these
categories, but it is a vertica l leap, conferring on word s the capacity to
evoke, not to designate, It is not tha t process " transcends " language, but
what is appropriate to it is the component of stammering in la nguage,
3 0 8   C O S M O LO G Y




the "well, what I mean is . . . " or the "how should I say . . " in which
                                                                   .



what hesitates is not a set of potential statements but the very word ing of
the words, their a rticulation, together with the " I " who " should say."
   The analogy is, of course, false from a twofold perspective. On the one
hand, stammering refers to a " route " of occasions, each one of which has
produced its own satisfaction for itself. Moreover, once "what one mea nt"
has finally been said, the rel ief, the conscious impression of success, trans
lates a message about the alternatives avoided, about the possi bi lity of a
stammering that aborts in a renunciation. Likewise, when physicists or
mathematicians construct a function that converges, it is a genuine achieve
ment aga inst the background of possi ble fai l ure, the conscious experi
ence that one has succeeded in constructing what is requi red for a func
tion to have a meaning. But the convergence as prod uci ng a unique,
well-determined functional world, as rea lized by the subject "who feels its
world," is not, for its pa rt, a " success," in the sense that it never " misses."
   No actual entity can be conscious of its own satisfaction; for such
knowledge would be a component in the process, and would thereby al
ter the satisfaction ( PR, 8 5 ) .
   I n n o case will an actua l entity, a s such, be able to become "conscious "
of the role it assigns to what it feels, of the way it " functions." " Becoming
conscious " is never "coincidence with oneself" but is always relative to a
de facto continuity. Achieving convergence, for the actual entity, mea ns to
perish from immediacy, and it cannot be sanctioned by any " becoming
conscious" which, as such, might be bequeathed to what fol lows it. Cor
relatively, consciousness, for instance, the feeling that one has more or less
succeeded in saying what one " meant," does not refer to any dynamic of
advent of the truth, but should rather evoke a mutation that affects its
social environment, characterized by a new d istribution between what is
" mine " and " not mine," a mutation that we do not yet have the means to
explore.
   Let us return to concrescence, the site of the process of convergence. It
cannot, for its pa rt, give any meaning to an experience of success. What
is more, it translates and renders expl icit the fact that creativity, White
head 's ultimate, is neutra l with rega rd to the d isti nction between cosmos
and " disordered " multiplicity. Whatever the individual satisfaction, it is
a lways an exempl i fication of creativity. However, one cannot stop here.
If incoherence is to be avoided, concrescence, as such, must provide the
mea ns for approaching the cosmic q uestion. In itself, the ambition of
metaphysica l neutra l ity to which it responds presupposes in effect, by
construction, a reference to the cosmos: it presupposes the possi bility of
correcti ng the awa reness of its excess subjectivi ty.
                                               F E E L I N G   O N E 'S   WO R L D   3 0 9




   As we saw when it came to characterizing evil, the destroyer of "greater "
things: all satisfactions cease to be equal from a cosmological viewpoint,
a viewpoint that makes a di fference between the creation of new contrasts
and the static chaos produced by the sempiternal clash between ways of
inheriting characterized by the reiteration of the nega tive prehensions of
what each ha s to deny in order to affirm itself. This cosmologica l view
point, like every genuinely cosmological viewpoint, whether it refers to
Stoic thought or to that of Leibniz, puts us to the test. It designates a kind
of truth access to which is at the sa me time a transformation of those who
accede. Adj usted to metaphysica l neutrality, the cosmologica l test may be
so described : people who hate the world that clashes with their aims or
hopes, hate their world, the one they have provided for themselves by
producing themselves as hateful, denying or relegating to irreleva nce all
that might have been felt as worthy of love. Yet in order to function, this
test must correspond to a possibility of feeling on the part of the person
who hates.
   In this process [of concrescence] , the negative prehensions which effect
the elimination are not merely negligible. The process through which a
feeling passes in constituting itself also records itself in the subjective
form of the integral feeling. The negative prehensions have their own
subjective forms which they contribute to the process. A feeling bears on
itself the scars of its birth; it recollects as a subjective emotion its struggle
for existence; it retains the impress of what it might have been, but is not.
It is for this reason that what an actual entity has avoided as a datum
for feeling may yet be an important part of its equipment. The actual
cannot be reduced to mere matter of fact in divorce from the potential
(PR, 226-22 7 ) .
   Without nega ti ve prehensions a n d the scars they leave, Whitehead's
system would be incoherent, since there would be an a rbitra ry discon
nection between neutra l metaphysics and the cosmological viewpoint. As
we have already seen, the ingression of eternal objects gave mea ning to
what, in a sophisticated experience, might be called " experience of the
possible " : " Potentia lity becomes reality; and yet it reta ins its message of
alterna tives which the actual entity has avoided ." Of course, one will not
say that a route of electronic occa sions, for instance, can take such a mes
sage into consideration. Here, we must distinguish between what is ge
neric and wha t matters. The message is generic, but it ca n matter only to
routes of occa sions that a re highly sophi stica ted , those for which modes
of experience dominated by the " subjective emotions" that we ca ll resent
ment, hope, despa ir, ha te, or trust have a meaning; those, therefore, for
whom the d i fference between chaos a nd cosmos counts. And it is also for
3 1 0   C O S M O LO G Y




these routes of occasions that the " scars " left by a feeling's struggle for
existence may matter. Their generic character makes it possible for na
ture not to bifurcate, and for consciousness not to be responsible for the
feel ing that something else was possible. They are required by the cos
mos, if the difference between convergence by elimination and conver
gence by new contrasts is not to i mpose itself like a " divine judgment"
fa ll ing upon indi fferent beings . A contradiction must be able to be felt as
a dead end , or as a defeat.
    In the Whiteheadian universe, then, one is never even with regard to
anything, although to consider oneself even is part of a perfectly legiti
mate way of inheriting. Of cou rse, all of Whitehead's work bears witness
to the possibility of tra nsforming sca rs i nto data , into contrasts that are
felt in the mode of an obligation. One must succeed in affirming together
what has been felt, and what this feeling has excluded in order to occur.
Underl ining the traces testifying to the insistence of wha t phi losophers
have nevertheless eliminated as negligible, in the na me of the coherence of
their system-typica lly the unexpected a ffirmative emergence, at the haz
ard of one of his discussions, of what a philosopher intends to exclude
constitutes for Whitehead a principle of reading in the field of the history
of philosophy. Th is is not to criticize the a uthor but to constitute the pro
tocol of his own underta king: to include and a ffirm together what seemed
doomed to contrad iction. However, for the very principle of this work to
be coherent with what it a ffirms, it had to be a uthorized categorea lly. For
speculative philosophy, which explodes the categories of empiricism and
rationalism by adding enough reasons to save all the facts together, to be
possible, negative prehensions had, by categorea l definition, to leave sca rs.
   If, however, the eternal objects and the scars left by what has been
avoided are required by the possi bility of a cosmos, they by no mea ns suf
fice to guarantee it. More precisely, they a re neutra l with regard to the
possibil ity that evil may be overcome. In fact, the message concerning
alternatives may add venom to the wounds; the decision to avoid may be
intensified by resentment and find itself stabilized by that resentment. As
for the possibility of inheriting in a way that integrates a feeling that has
as its datum what was an emotiona l tone, that is, a feeling of the contrast
between what has been and what might have been, it certa inly testifies to
a soph isticated experience, but it is not "good in itsel f." J ustice-dea lers ca n
be public da ngers: they ca n empower the "trick of evil," imposing the im
porta nce of a feeling at the wrong season, ma king the future of a society
hesitate between regression and the creation of new contrasts.
   More generally, the nine categories of obl igation ( the fifth of which
will be, as we wi ll sec, eli minated in the course of writing) only detail
                                               F E E L I N G   O N E ' S   W O R L D   3 1 1




what "obl iges " i nheritance, or the way a n entity produces itself by i nher
iti ng from the past. They a re neutra l with rega rd to a ny idea of " mora l "
obligation. The " atomic" character o f the entity i s respected : it is " its "
satisfaction that the entity pursues as its final ca use, not cosmic harmoni
zation. As we will see, even with rega rd to God, the atomic character of
this pursuit will be mai nta i ned . Albeit barely: Whitehead will have to avoid
that the "divine ordering " that "conditions creativity" be that thanks to
which an enti ty, while pursu i ng its own end, contributes to the best of
worlds, like a donkey urged along by a carrot. If he had fai led on this
point, God would have been, if not the creator, then at least responsible
for the cosmic order, like the person holding the ca rrot is responsible for
the donkey's progress.
    In other words, the difference between cosmos a nd chaos has no d irect
translation i nto the categoreal scheme . It will, however, take on a more
concrete mea ning when it comes to the crea tive advance itself, that is, by
and in the production of what ma kes a d ifference that matters, which
Whitehead henceforth calls " society."
                                                        C H A P TER N I NETEEN
