J ustifying Life?




         NA MUSEUM
     I
                      the crystals are kept under glass cases; in zoological
        gardens the animals are fed. Having regard to the universality of
      W reactions with environment, the distinction is not quite absolute.
It cannot, however, be ignored. The crystals are not agencies requiring
the destruction of elaborate societies derived from the environment; a liv
ing society is such an agency. The societies which it destroys are its food.
This food is destroyed by dissolving it into somewhat simpler social ele
ments. It has been robbed of something. Thus, all societies require inter
play with their environment; and in the case of living societies, this inter
play takes the form of robbery. The living society may, or may not, be a
higher type of organism than the food which it disintegrates. But whether
or no it be for a general good, life is robbery. It is at this point that with
life morals become acute. The robber requires justification ( PR, 1 0 5 ) .
   Only the " anti-specists," that new va riety o f sa int, c a n assign them
selves the goa l of teaching their cats to appreciate vegeta rian food . And
unless they have recourse to genetic manipulations, they will not be able
to transform the situation " i n general," but will have to address each cat,
one by one. The cat's mode of existence implies the death of mice and
birds, and that of the least cell impl ies the destruction of sophisticated
chemica l edifices. Life is robbery, and the robber requires a justification.
Not any specific robber, this cat eating this mouse, but the general prin
ciple that singularizes life, the link between order and destruction. Life
therefore impl ies the cosmologica l question.
  The d i stinction Whitehead proposes between crysta ls and " l iving
societies " corresponds to the contemporary distinction, associated with
                                                       J U STIFY I N G   L I F E ?   3 1 3




the work of Prigogine, between "equilibrium structures " capa ble of
mainta i n i ng themselves i ndefinitely, requiring only that the envi ron
ment maintain itself more or less as it is, and " d issipative structures,"
the price of whose existence is " dissipa tion " : " something" in the envi
ronment must be consumed to nourish the perma nent processes whose
structure expresses its articulation . Yet Whitehead does not i ntend to
ra ise the genera l question implied by this d i stinction : fo r him, a cy
clone, as a typica l d i ssipative structure, would not have requ i red a cos
mologica l j ustification . The cosmological question arises with rega rd to
" l i fe," for in this case destruction is not merely a fact. The history of l i fe
is, a mong other thi ngs, that of an active invention of means for locat
ing, grasping, seduci ng, capturing, trapping, and pursuing. A cyclone
does not seek out the most heavily populated zone to feed on the rav
ages it ca uses . It goes where it goes. To tel l the story of the evolution of
living bei ngs, by contrast, is to tel l the story of a n increase i n the cre
ation of ever more effective modes of destruction, inventing new preys
for new predators.
     That what is under discussion is the mora l order, and with it the "cos
mos," will be a shock for biologists . The celebration of the moral har
mony of nature is pa rt of their prehistory. Evolutiona ry biologists a re
proud of describing the history of living beings as essentially opportu
nistic, and therefore rebell ious to everything that might resemble the
unity of a proj ect, an intentiona lity, or even a measure capable of defin
ing progress. On this last point, Whitehead might perhaps speak of an
excess subjecti vity: a testimony, certainly, to a success of human con
sciousness-to have succeeded in not consti tuting itself a s the norm and
truth of the evolution of living bei ngs-but a testimony that is mute
about a l l that is impl ied by the very possibi l i ty of this success. A specula
tive position cannot, for its part, be content with the twofold, rather
abstract satisfaction of having esca ped both anthropocentrism and the
mora lity of nature. As always, when we have to do with speculative phi
losophy, the point is to be concrete, that is, complete. And therefore, to
render contrasts expl icit, whereas scientists, i n the name of evolutiona ry
history and the unity of one nature, accentua te resemblances.
     As an example of such contrasts, let us take the term "opportunity."
When used by biologists, it allows the successful denial of the need to de
scribe such-and-such a living being qua responding to a goal, or qua means
for the rea lization of a project. Yet to cha racterize evolution as opportu
nistic, if it is not one abstraction denying another abstraction, in this case
denyi ng the cha racterization of evolution as finalistic, ca lls for a whole
series of requisites. An opportunity does not exist without something
3 1 4   COSMOLOGY




capable of seizing it, that is, of inventing it qua opportuni ty, qua possi bil
ity " for" somethi ng new.
   "Opportunity," possibility " for" : these terms are not metaphysica lly
neutra l . They refer d i rectly to the question of the cosmos, and hence to
the question of God qua conditioning creativi ty. It is in fact the question
of the " divine ordering " that may wel l " require a j ustification ." However,
Whitehead makes it clear that this orderi ng by no means implies a " proj 
ect," a global vision, a final ized "order of nature." Hence the terminologi
cal choice on which I have a l ready commented:
   If we say that God's primordial nature is "vision," we suggest a maimed
view of the subjective form, divesting it of yearning after concrete fact-no
particular facts, but after some actuality. There is deficiency in God's pri
mordial nature which the term "vision " obscures [ . . . J "envisagement " is
perhaps a safer term than "vision " (PR, 33-34 ) .
    Here again, Whitehead may have been thin king aga inst Lei bniz, against
the image of a God able to " read " in the sl ightest state of a monad the
total series of states it unfolds in the course of time, thus bringing to exis
tence those monads whose harmonious totality will give meaning to a
particular world, the best of all possible worlds. In that case, life would be
j ustified without a ny particular question, together with the world, with
everything referring to a single unknown, that of the definition God has
given to the " best." Job's friends would be right.
    God yearns after concrete facts, whatever they may be: the future,
whatever its mode of existence in the divine " subjective form," will not
appeal to the realization of a particular possibility but to the concrete fact
as such: " some actuality " as causa sui, self-determining its own value.
Otherwise, God would have a position ana logous to that of Socrates,
who, in the Meno, waits for the slave to say to him, " Yes, Socrates, you
are right." That would be a caricature of the " yearning" Whitehead por
trays. Socrates is not yearning after an answer, whatever it may be; he is
waiting for the "yes " that will al low him to move on to the next stage in
his argument.
    Wi th the question of life as requiring j ustification, we a re thus begin
ning the maneuvers to approach a terrai n that did not exist prior to the
fl ight of speculative experience. What rema ined somewhat incoherent i n
Science and the Modern World w i l l also b e explored : on the one hand,
eternal activity had no need of obsti nate and destructive living beings; on
the other, organisms were defined as " l imited to being none other than
themsel ves," that is, as bei ng their own j usti fication. Coherence, this ti me,
must be satisfied in a positive way, without easy ways out or half
solutions. Thus, with regard to the way the di vine envisagement is defi-
                                                      J U STIFY I N G   L I F E ?   3 1 5




cient, the rather poor idea should be proscribed that God concei ves the
future " i n broad outli ne," and is therefore yearning a fter an actual i ty that
should specify what he conceptual ized only in a " vague " way. Such an
idea would i mply that Whitehead not only read Leibniz with the rad ical
lack of indulgence that a mathema tician may reserve for another mathe
matici an because they both share the same ideal of the wel l-framed prob
lem, but that he read him badly. For between a " vague " possible and a
determinate reality, what interposes itself is the multiplicity of uni verses
that diverge as radically as one may wish. For Leibniz, there is no opposi
tion between "Adam the sinner" and "Ada m who resists temptation,"
hence participating in the history of an eternal paradise, but a difference
so minimal that precisely only God's vision could discern them. A God
who coincides, in one way or another, with a mode of existence of the
future qua " partially indeterminate" would, by contrast, be the God of
a regular, stable uni verse, where Adam's role is robustly attributed , thus
turni ng "our experience of responsibility, of approbation or of disappro
bation, of self-approval or of sel f-reproach, of freedom, of emphasis"
into an i l lusory construction . The reason Whitehead can be so hard on
Lei bniz is that they both a ffirm the same kind of world, a world that
" bifurca tes everywhere," although they affirm it by di fferent mea ns.
  In Leibniz [ . . . I the bifurcations, divergences of series, are veritable
frontiers between worlds that are mutually incompossible; so that the
monads that exist include the totality of the compossible world that
comes into existence. For Whitehead (and for many modern philoso
phers), in contrast, bifurcations, divergences, incompossibilities, and dis
agreements belong to the same multicolored world, which can no longer
be included among expressive units, but merely does or undoes following
prehensive units and according to variable configurations, or changing
captures ( LP, 1 1 0-1 1 1 ) .
   The j ustification of life does not require a " h igher freedom" that would
see farther and wider than we. It requires "yearning" as such, a yearning
di rected both to wha t is done and to what is undone, in the " here and
now " of decision: thus and not otherwise. Here, moreover, Whitehead
meets Lei bniz once again, for whether Lei bnizian or Whiteheadian, the
solution proposed to the question of the world's mora l order will consti
tute a kind of " hammer-thought," accord ing to the expression N ietzsche
reserved for his hypothesis of the eternal return. Li ke this hypothesis,
the Whiteheadian sol ution will pay no attention to the preserva tion of
the particularities that are dear to us, which we associate with proj ects,
disappointments, and even with our maintenance in existence through
good and bad encounters. Yes, God " makes a difference," but for Leibniz as
3 1 6   C O S M O LOGY




for Whitehead, this di fference does not ratify the alternative between " be
ing authorized to hope " or " having the right to despa ir"; it d isplaces it.
  It is as if one told men: do your duty, and be happy with what will hap
pen, not only because you could not resist divine providence or the
nature of things (which may be enough to feel at peace, but not to be
happy) but also because you have to do with a good master. And this is
what might be called fatum christianum (Th, 3 1 ) .
    Yet how ca n one tel l Job he has a "good master" without unleashing
his fury ? How can one tell a woman whose child has been ea ten by a tiger
that the " robbery " to which she has fallen victim has a j ustification ? For
Whitehead, the d i fference made by the hypothesis of God cannot evoke a
secret harmony between a general j ustificatory principle and particu lar
circumsta nces. It ca nnot ask Job to trust in God 's j ustice, nor the woman
to understand the loss of her child. Rather, it passes between despa i r as
an eventual concrete fact- " I can no longer find any reason to hope " or
"life has made a hog out of me "-and the ratification that wou ld come
to justify it- " may the world that has betrayed my hopes be cursed! " or
"well, then, a hog I shall be ! "-what Nietzsche called resentment. It im
pl ies the rather strange possibil ity of not despairing of the world, even
when it crushes you or kills you.
   The primordial appetitions which jointly constitute God's purpose are
seek ing intensity, and not preservation. Because they are primordial,
there is nothing to preserve. He, in his primordial nature, in unmoved by
love for this particular, or that particular; for in this foundational process
of creativity, there are no preconstituted particulars. In the foundations
of his being, God is indifferent alike to preservation and to novelty. He
cares not whether an immediate occasion be old or new, so far as concerns
derivation from its ancestry. His aim for it is depth of satisfaction as an
intermediate step towards the fulfillment of his own being. His tenderness
is directed towards each actual occasion, as it arises.
   Thus God's purpose in the creative advance is the evocation of intensi
ties ( PR, 1 05 ) .
   " Evocation," the term chosen by Whitehead, i s interesting: spiritua lists
do not command the spirits they "evoke " : they only know how to call
them, how to invite their coming. Likewise, one does not command mem
ory, as Bergson showed when speaking of pure memory. Evoked memory
emerges when consciousness becomes a " med ium," passi ve and yet del ib
erate, the search not for a memory but for the way that memory a l lows
itself to be approached , as it vacillates between expansion and fl ight. In
both cases, the accent is placed not on a project but on a " here and now"
on which everything depends, both suspension and opening up to a pos-
                                                      J U S T I F Y I N G   L I F E ?   3 1 7




sibi l i ty of becoming. Yet although the term " evoke " is i nteresti ng, it does
not authorize any analogy. There is no analogy between divine experience
and those we ca n evoke; otherwise, it would lead us to what is obscene.
While the groans of human suffering rise up, an indifferent God feeds on
what, for him, corresponds to so many a nonymous intensities.
   And yet, God is indeed indifferent to what counts most for us: preser
vation. Divine eva luation is impa rtial and makes no d istinction between
a " new" occasion and an "old" one, deriving from a long ancestral line,
while it is this difference that is implied by our complaints and our
cla ims, our feel i ng of injustice and demands for justification. It i s our life
that is at sta ke and not some fundamenta lly anonymous " present," since
as soon as I think of it as " mine," it will have sli pped into the past, will
have become objectively immortal, availa ble for any objectifica tion. If
God is a " good master," it is not, as with Leibniz, because he has chosen
the best of all worlds; but the test is a nalogous, for what his tenderness is
directed to is deeply indifferent to us.
   Correlatively, the justification of life does not imply, or at least not d i
rectly, what was the centra l notion of Science and the Modern World: the
orga nism, whose success had to be defined as preservation or endurance.
Yet this will not stop Whitehead from continuing to spea k of his philoso
phy as a "philosophy of orga nism."
  In the philosophy of organism it is held that the notion of "organism "
has two meanings, interconnected but intellectually separable, namely, the
microscopic meaning and the macroscopic meaning. The microscopic
meaning is concerned with the formal constitution of an actual occasion,
considered as a process of realizing an individual unity of experience. The
macroscopic meaning is concerned with the givenness of the actual world,
considered as the stubborn fact which at once limits and provides oppor
tunity for the actual occasion ( PR, 1 2 8-1 2 9 ) .
     According t o this d istinction between microscopic a n d macroscopic,
the organism has lost wha t constituted its signification in Science and the
Modern World. For there, it played the part of a key that allowed the
question of the order of nature to be penetrated, in such a way that the d i
versity of cases was articulated to a unique definition. The orga nism a nd
a l l the definitions it authorizes depend on a success: the orga nism exists
insofa r as it succeeds in enduring, that is, also, in infecting its environment
with " patience." Yet the "microscopic " organism constituted by the actua l
entity no longer conj ugates "endura nce " and "success " at a l l . From now
on, the orga nism articulates an " indivisible process of rea lization," on the
one hand, which never fa ils because it always ends in what Whitehead
ca lls "satisfaction," and, on the other hand, "objective immortal i ty," what
3 1 8   COSMOLOGY




is given to be felt by others, an immorta lity bei ng i mpartially accorded
to everything that has satisfied its obligations, in whatever way, whether
trivial or innovative. As far as this " macroscopic " signification of the or
ganism is concerned, it seems to designate the role assumed by the environ
ment. Yet it is only the actual world of an occasion as objectified by the
ones that have to feel it. The dynamics of infection, in which the eontrast
between patience and impatience was played out in Science and the Mod
ern World, has thus disappeared. The environment is "given," simultane
ously limit and opportunity. It is no longer a " stake."
   The organism is thus no longer a nything more than a witness to the
past, and yet, by its stubborn survival, it translates a continuity that is
i mportant to Wh itehead. The " actua l entities" are " final real i ties" or "res
verae " ( the fi rst ca tegory of exi stence ) , as the orga nism was in Science
and the Modern World, beca use they, l i ke this organism, are a " unifying
hold i ng-together," and beca use, aga i n like the organism, this holding
together cannot be described in the abstract mode of Aristotelian logic, in
terms of a subject endowed with attri butes. What the subject "attri butes
to itself" belongs to it only in the very act by which, as it consti tutes it
self, it attributes it to itself.
   That which, in Process and Reality, "endures," a " mundane " success to
which God is indifferent, has as its new name " society " or " nexus enjoy
i ng a social order." This is no longer a nexus qua " set," that which is cor
related with every actual entity, where it is up to that entity to turn it i nto
" its" world. It is a much more limited set, which i ncludes actua l entities
having somethi ng in common.
  A nexus enjoys "social order " where (i) there is a common element of
form illustrated in the definiteness of each of its included actual entities,
and (ii) this common element of form arises in each member of the nexus
by reason of the conditions imposed upon it by its prehensions of some
other members of the nexus, and (iii) these prehensions impose that con
dition of reproduction by reason of their inclusion of positive feelings of
that common form. Such a nexus is called a "society," and the common
form that is the "defining characteristic " of the society ( PR, 3 4 ) .
   A n a bstract definition, t o s a y the least, b u t w e c a n understand its ab
straction i f we reca ll that the concept of society must succeed in what the
organism sought to accomplish: to unite under the same definition all that
" endures " in one way or another, whether electron or human person .
   Two things are remarkable in this definition, which, of course, enables a
rather clear relation with the eeo-ethology associated by Science and the
Modern World with entangled organisms. First of all, the "common form,"
felt positively by each member of the nexus. Then, the term " impose."
                                                     J U STIFY I N G   L I FE ?   3 1 9




    Form is the name Whitehead someti mes gives to the eternal objects, and
it is important, here, to remember that the eternal objects do not dictate a
particular mode for their ingression into an actual entity. Consequently, in
the case of a society, the " positive feelings of that common form" does not
mean that a form will be felt in the " same way " by each member. We thus
are not dealing with a "social form." The defining characteristic does not
in itself have the power to define: each occasion, as it includes positive
feel i ngs of the common form, has ensured the relevance of the defining
characteristic, but each can confer a distinct role on what is in common.
The only restriction is that this role must be positive. A society will not be
defined by the fact that a form exists upon which none of its members
confers a role. If one wished to define a " society " by a common positive
reference to the truth, for instance, it could therefore include liars, if they
know that they a re lying, but not those to whom the di fference between
the true and the untrue is completely indifferent. And a common indiffer
ence cannot be the " defining characteristic " of a society.
    The second remarkable feature is the link between ingression of the
common form and the notion of imposition . The eternal objects, pure
potentials, have no power to impose their ingression. If the fact that each
member of a society includes a common element of form is imposed upon
it, it is not imposed by a power associated with the form itself but by the
other members of society: we have to do with a successful dynamics of
infection.
    It is thus society that inherits the link between endurance and success.
Its endurance is not a right; there is no "common form " that i mposes
itself by itself on its members, but only the " fact" that the feeling of this
form succeeds in imposi ng itself, infecting each new entity. Each, there
fore, produces itself qua member of a society, because of its prehensions
of the other members of this society; without any justification to tran
scend this fact. People to whom the difference between truth and lie is
completely indifferent do not transgress anything, do not deny anything,
do not brea k with anything. This is so even if they have to dea l with
others for whom this indifference must d i ssimulate a transgression, a
negation, or a will to carry out a brea k, or even if it inspires on their part,
as the case may be, the worst i mpatience: to insist on being born at the
wrong season is the trick of evi l .
    Some commentators o n Whitehead have regretted that " societies " d i d
not receive the categoreal dignity o f the "res verae," or the actual entities
which, accord ing to the ontologica l principle, a re " the only reasons ."
Life would then find a quite si mple, even simplistic j ustification. It would
be the process thanks to which ever more important beings, and therefore
3 2 0   COSMO LOGY




reasons, would come i nto existence . . . i nclud i ng the State and the rea
son of the State ? The anti-Dreyfusards would be right: the State is justi
fied when it destroys the l i fe of a simple priva te person.
   Th is argument is a bit below the belt, I admit. But this is delibera te: the
point is not to denounce, but to cal l to the flight of experience. If societies
were to be res verae, all the terrai ns i n which one could land would be
come swampy: experience would be bogged down i n moral problems,
someti mes ca lling for operations of normative stabil ization and discrimi
nation. Such operations are the daily bread of sociology and pol itical
philosophy (what is a sect ? ) , but it does not perta i n to speculative phi
losophy to simpli fy a difficulty that constitutes the daily bread of special
ists. It is not up to it to propose to specialized undertak ings, tryi ng to
describe the variety of situa tions where wha t we have to dea l with " holds
together," concepts on which these undertakings could rely, or rest, in
order to define " the proper way of approach i ng the situation " ; all de
pend on what matters for them. The speculative aim is generic.
   For instance, let us take as an example the classic question in sociol
ogy: should a human society be defined as a collective aggregate of pre
constituted i ndividuals, or as a collective whole, the subject of its own
adventures ? For Whitehead, it is clea r that it is no simple aggregate, for
an aggregate is made up of pa rts whose properties a ppea r as susceptible
of being described a nd attri buted, at least at a first approxi mation, i nde
pendently of the situation of aggregation. Society as an aggregate would
presuppose that human bei ngs are defined by "consciousness" indepen
dently of the collecti vities in which they are born; that is, they would be
conscious in the same inevitable way as they breathe. Yet a human soci
ety is not a " whole" either, for i f it were, human beings, defined as " pa rts,"
would be intel ligible in terms of the kind of patience required for the
enduring success of that whole. This will seem to be an acceptable hypoth
esis only to sociologists who identify their knowledge with a disencha nt
ment or demythification of the illusions of freedom-at the risk that these
sociologists may have to define how their science protects them from the
common lot. Special ized branches of knowledge have no need for rei n
forcement of what is thei r perma nent tempta tion: to confer the power of
self-Iegi timatization upon some types of descri ption.
   The d i fficulty in defining a human society is obviously connected to
the fact that the project of definition matters to human bei ngs, as is the
case for a l l the questions they can ask themselves with regard to what
they are, to what they belong to, to wha t they know, to what they owe,
or to wha t they thin k . And therefore, to what j usti fies them . "Whitehead
ian sociology," beca use it ra ises the question of j ustification to its specu-
                                                      J U STIFY I N G   L I FE ?   3 2 1




lative, cosmological power, cannot ratify any particular j usti fication. I f it
were to construct a "good " definition of what matters, generic with re
gard to the specialized categories, a defi nition capable of specifyi ng what
j ustifies a society as such, this defi nition, whatever it might be, would
become a weapon and raise the question of its own j ustification, of what
j ustifies the destructions i t will ratify i n the name of what i s then " cosmic
progr ess." This is why Whiteheadian sociology will not involve defini
tions but " modes of thought," to take up the title of Whitehead's last
book . What Whitehead proposes is the contrary of ready-to-think: in
stead, thought pluralizes itsel f in va rious modes according to the way it
envisages the importance of the situation it is trying to characterize. To
penetra te is to create.
   To penetrate and to create, however, thought must be " equipped,"
and it is such an equipment that meta physics offers it qua " neutral,"
that is, qua refusing to privilege a " specia l ization " of importance, i n
order t o affirm creativity a s an ultimate. In Science and the Modern
World, Whitehead had thought that the notion of organism could
" eq u i p " thinkers, i nspiring thei r aesthetic a ppetite for the order of na
ture qua variety of successes, to be descri bed a s such . But the organism
gi ves no primord i a l mean i ng either to hesitation or to originality, or to
doubt, or to the possi ble, without which thinkers themselves are in
conceivable. The speculative equipment must enable resistance to a l l the
" soci a l reasons " that would relegate hesitation, doubt, and originality
to mere psychology. This i s why I choose to think, with Whitehead, that
a society is not a reason, i n the sense of the ontological principle, and
does not enjoy any tra nscendence with rega rd to the entities who are its
members. The " reason " of a n entity's social belonging refers not to " so
ciety " but to other actual entities as prehended by that entity. The social
nexus consti tutes a more or less dominant envi ronment for each entity
that uni fies itsel f qua one of its members. It is sometimes so dominant
that the entity might seem to be explained on the basis of its belonging,
which is the case each time we can defi ne a nexus as a unique l i ne of
inheritance.
  Such a nexus is called an "enduring object." It might have been termed
a "person," in the legal sense of that term. But unfortunately "person "
suggests the notion of consciousness, so that its use would lead to mis
understanding. The nexus "sustains a character," and this is one of the
meanings of the Latin word persona. But an "enduring object," qua "per
son," does more than sustain a character. For this sustenance arises out of
the special genetic relations among the members of the nexus [ . . . 1 These
enduring objects and "societies," analysable into strands of enduring
3 2 2   C O S M O LO G Y




objects, are the permanent entities which enjoy adventures of change
throughout time and space ( PR, 34-3 5 ) .
    What w e have t o dea l with, i n the sense that w e can, if not explain it,
then at least have the words to describe or cha racterize it, always refers
to nexus that " sustai n a cha racter," and that a re, moreover, able to main
ta in it throughout the adventure our i nterest ma kes them undergo . Yet a
character can always be transformed. The art of the Sophists, who had
recourse to all the syntactic and sema ntic subtleties that la nguage a llows
but also to that of the mathematicians, may be cha racteri zed as an explo
ration of transformations of character. The same holds true of contempo
ra ry models in biology and in ecology, which ta ke us further and further
away from the notion of " natural equilibrium" or the body's "wisdom "
towa rd the exploration of the unimaginable and precarious sophistica
tion of the roles, of the risky tinkering of functions, of the metasta ble
assemblage of coexistences. In contrast, when a society is described as a
"whole" made up of "parts," the description ratifies a sta ble assignation
of roles, with the parts being measured and eva luated according to their
service to the whole qua characterized by the function that a rticulates
them. Biologica l macromolecules are then defined by thei r role in the
metabolic concert, which enables the cel l to be a functional part of an
organ which . . .
    The Sophists were denounced as i mmora l, veritable public poisoners
who destroyed the ad herence the citizens owe to the va l ues of their soci
ety. Mathematicians are " a mora l " in the sense that they adhere to their
definitions only in a hypothetica l way, and owe loyalty only to the adven
ture of mathematics. Conseq uently, it is particularly stupid to praise the
" heroism" of mathematicia ns, if this term is to evoke the heroic sacrifice
to which the part must, i f the case may be, consent for the sa lvation of
the whole, i n the mode of the highest mora lity. Individual heroism re
sponds to a successful social infection.
   For example, consider the patriotism of the Roman farmers, in the full
vigour of the Republic. Certainly Regulus did not return to Carthage, with
the certainty of torture and death, cherishing any mystic notions of
another life-either a Christian Heaven or a Buddhist Nirvana. He was a
practical man, and his ideal aim was the Roman Republic flourishing in
this world. But this aim transcended his individual personality [ . . . ] In
this estimate, Regulus has not in any way proved himself to be exceptional.
His conduct showed heroism that is unusual. But his estimate of the worth
of such conduct has evoked widest assent. The Roman farmers agreed; and
generation after generation, amid all the changes of history, have agreed by
the instinctive pulse of emotion as the tale is handed down ( AI, 290 ) .
                                                      J U STI F Y I N G   L I FE?   3 2 3




     Regu lus was a hero, but through the exemplary value of his choice,
he i nspires a mode of thought that celebrates the enduring va l ue of an
ideal capable of i nspiring the sacri fice of those who henceforth ad here
to the role that is assigned to them. The immediate assent inspired by
his sacrifice may, of course, satisfy morality, but not a mode of thought
tha t ra ises to the cosmic power the need to j ustify, not to pra ise, the
" sacrifices " associated with ma inta ining l iving societies. And this is so,
even when it is an ideal that dema nds this sacrifice in order to survive.
The approva l i nspired by Regulus's choice belongs to the thought of the
orga nism, not to the one that asks the question of the " j ustification of
l i fe ."
     Quite different is the perplexed si lence inspired by the Original, and it
is i ndeed this type of silence Whitehead produces for those who have ap
proached his texts then moved away from them somewhat stunned, find
i ng neither the possibil ity of adherence nor the incitement to become
indignant and denounce. I have already risked, for Whitehead, the ca pita l
" 0 " that Deleuze reserved for those fictional characters, such as Bartleby,
through whom one discovers "the power of an impersona l that is by no
means a genera lity, but a singularity to the highest degree " ( CC, 1 3 ) . Here
the circle closes. The need to think " with Whitehead " rather than " a bout
Whitehead " is an example of the discrete efficacy that Whitehead himself
associates with originality, such that it can infiltrate and, in this case, turn
readers away from a reading that tries to " form an opinion " to which it
can adhere.
  Life lurks in the interstices of each living cell, and in the interstices of
the brain ( PR, 1 05-1 (6 ) .
   For Whitehead, origina lity is the j ustification o f the " robbery " that
cond itions the endurance of living societies. But no living society is origi
na l i n itself. Every social success must be said to be "tradition," or suc
cessful reiteration. Life, for its part, " is the name for origi nality, a nd not
for trad ition " ( PR, 1 04 ) .
   Th is contrast, however, does not imply an opposition, whether heroic
or patient. One will not oppose li ving societies and novelty, habit and
freedom, conformism and a utonomy. Rather, one will ask the question of
what social belongi ng ma kes possible. Is it not, in fact, this question that
Whitehead explores when he constructs concepts that put to the test the
rational ist tradition to which he himsel f belongs ? Living societies are not
opposed to life; they a re what " shelters " the interstices in which life l urks;
they constitute the environment needed by the " non-socia l " or " entirely
alive " nexus, which designate the ultimate social question : what may a
given society become capable of?
3 2 4   COS MOLOGY




    The characteristic of a living society is that a complex structure of in
organic societies is woven together for the production of a non-social
nexus characterized by the intense physical experiences of its members
[ . . . I there is intense experience without the shackle of reiteration from
the past ( PR, 1 0 5 ) .
    There is a typically academic snigger that consists o f pointing out the
l imits to a thought's origina lity, all that it has borrowed, or accepted, with
out questions. But the events of thought associated with the names of the
most "anti-social," or the most impatient thinkers, Nietzsche, Artaud, or
Foucault, are neither placed in doubt nor diminished by al l that they re
peat, at the same time as they i nnovate. For if originality needs uinterstices,
it req uires that with regard to which there is an i nterstice. Interstices do not
even have to be defined aga inst societies; they are just "to one side," as
" non-social nexus," correlated with experiences that are not adherence to
the past, that are not intelligible either on the basis of the defining charac
teristic of a society, or, of course, on the basis of the rejection of that char
acteristic. But Whitehead is not celebrating what is nonsocial as such as if
it were the j ustification of life. Originality is the justi fication of life.
   Life is a bid for freedom: an enduring entity binds any one of its occa
sions to the line of its ancestry. The doctrine of the enduring soul with its
permanent characteristics is exactly the irrelevant answer to the problem
which life presents. The problem is, How can there be originality? A nd
the answer explains how the soul need be no more original than a stone
( PR, 1 04 ) .
   For Whitehead, a soul that would have both freedom a n d endurance i s
a n unacceptable ontologica l setup, one of those setups that a re proposed
whenever too much confidence is accorded to an abstraction, accepted as
such in spite of the dramatic bifurcation it leads to, between what would
be free and what could be expla ined . One turns the soul into a " perma
nent characteristic," which means social conformity, and one attributes to
it at the same time what contradicts that conformity : freedom. The logical
contradiction, perfectly predictable, is transformed into a deep mystery.
   Yet the same problem arises for any living society, insofar as it is envis
aged from the viewpoint of the question that henceforth matters, that of
the origi na lity of its responses to its environment. The marvelous organi
zation of living beings, with their strata and their functional hiera rchies,
does not a nswer this question.
  We ask for something original at the moment, and we are provided
with a reason for limiting originality ( PR, 1 04 ) .
  One of the ma i n effects o f speculative thought is, in fact, t o infect all the
questions raised by living societies with the hesitations and uncerta inties
                                                      J U S T I F Y I N G   L I F E ?   3 2 5




that are the lot of what we cal l " sociology." For Whitehead, it is always
societies that we study. Everything is sociology, and human sociology,
with all its difficulties, merely exhi bits the questions, taken to their ful l
exacerbation, that other sciences c a n neglect, insofar as they can neglect
the question of originality, i nsofar as the way they study li ving societies
does not i mpose upon them what constitutes the " j ustification of life."
This is why Whitehead can no more tel l us what a society is than Spinoza
could say what a body is capa ble of. In both cases, "we don't know." We
only know that the two opposite extremes, " my body belongs to me " and
"I belong to my society," are both somewhat misleading simplifications.
  No one ever says, Here I am, and I have brought my body with me
(MT, 1 1 4 ) .
   I can, o f course, say " my keyboa rd," " my fingers," " my body," " my
tongue," " my text," and even " my reader," but the meaning of " my," mark
ing possession, is obviously different each time. They are all mine, how
ever, in the sense that they belong to " my " actual world, the one that re
quires the triggering of that chai n of events of an indescribable complexity:
to decide that there will be a " colon" here, i ntrod ucing as an example the
very situation in which, as 1 wrote, 1 make a whole world for myself of the
question of how to use my experience as an example. An instant later,
however, the reader on whom 1 have decided to "play this trick" has
evaporated . Reader, you may wel l have smi led or become annoyed, and, i f
the straw broke the camel's back, you will perhaps have closed this book
for good. That is no longer my problem, for it is the syntactic setup that
has concerned me, as 1 hesitate between " my sentence " and " the sen
tence." It is this setup that had to be tamed, but it has also become the
subject that now demands that " its author " show herself to be worthy of
what, by her decision, that author has placed herself in a position of ow
ing to it. Belongi ngs are not only multiple but fluid and constantly enter
ing into new assemblage. Between " that belongs to me " and " I belong to,"
the distribution never ceases being prod uced anew, while a subject,
amazed to have been able to experience this, that, and that, never stops
occurring and concluding. Li kewise, belonging to societies of d ifferent
types, endowed with different modes of endurance, is req uired to a l low
the production of that Ca rtesian a ffi rmation-so original- " I think,
therefore I am."
   Far from constituting a " defining characteristic," my feeling of being
" me," continuously, in a heterogeneo us world in which my attention
never ceases to vary, which the mutations of my i nterests, the permanent
transformations of the " here " of my perception, never cease to recom
pose, is thus in itself an "exploi t" req uiring that the " chains of reitera tion
3 2 6   COSMOLOGY




of the past" be constantly forged, tinkered with, and i mprovised . What
is woven in this way is the thread of what Whitehea d ca lls a " living
person."
   An "entirely living " nexus is, in respect to its life, not social. Each
member of the nexus derives the necessities of its being from its prehen
sions of its complex social environment; by itself the nexus lacks the
genetic power which belongs to "societies." But a living nexus, though
non-social in virtue of its "life," may support a thread of personal order
along some historical route of its members. Such an enduring entity is a
"living person. " It is not of the essence of life to be a living person. In
deed a living person requires that its immediate environment be a living,
non-social nexus ( PR, 1 07 ) .
    There is n o reason t o suppose that the kind of experience Whitehead
associates with the notion of " l iving person " is reserved to human beings.
In any case, it can designate a l l those li ving beings that have a sense of
duration, that is, for whom the notion of "specious present," which
Whitehea d borrowed from Wi lliam James, is relevant. Indeed, James's
emphasis on the pseudo-continuous character of an experience made up
of interva ls and connections designates precisely what Whitehead defines
as a thread of continuity, having a nonsocia l living nexus as its immedi
ate envi ronment. A thinker does not think twice, a cat does not l isten
twice to an interesti ng rustle in a bush, but when one block of the present
slips as such i nto the past, a thread of continui ty, which is that of a pro
cess of appropriation, is woven. For the new present, the past becomes
" its past," unless the strange experience of a hiatus should ma ke itself felt.
Thus, for instance, when I find myself at the wheel of my car on a habitual
road that was not at all the one [ had planned to ta ke. Has the threa d of a
" living person " that had been " me" been broken, without anything hav
ing come to commemorate it, that is, to canalize it into a repetition that
constitutes me as the owner of a memory ? "Where" was I d uring that
past, of which I cannot find the slightest memory ? Was [ payi ng atten
tion, or was I distracted, and did I avoid a near disaster ?
    Wha t I hope, in this case, is that the routines of my cond uct were such
that, in the case of somethi ng unforeseen, they would bring me back to
myself in time, that is, that the enti re social envi ronment that explains
what is meant by " driving a car" does not oppose "attention " to " rou
tine." [ hope, then, that the social routines of driving integrate that with
out which my distraction would risk bei ng fatal . This particular hope may
be misplaced, but it communicates with a more genera l question: how,
from the viewpoint of the " j usti fication of life," can we characterize social
order in the sense that it is required by origi nality but does not explain it?
                                                      J U STI F Y I N G   L I F E ?   3 2 7




    If we refer to that which, whether a work or the adoption of a position,
is qualified, in our j udgment, as " original," the relation between a society
and the " interstices in which life lurks " first brings the " patience " of soci
ety into the spotl ight. The "true professiona l " constitutes an environment
that is i mpatient with regard to its i nterstices. When a society mobilizes
for war, the interstices become imperceptible, and all originality is sus
pected of treason. Only a society that does not define the environment on
which it depends as a threat can tolerate originals. And the fact that a
state of emergency can, moreover, signify bracketing a large number of
"traditiona l " usages, may perhaps confer an important meaning upon the
term " tradition " : one might say that only a tradition is liable to cultivate
the interstices that make origi nality possible. And in that case, originality
itself cannot be defined as antisocial, nor as asocial either: originals, even
if they are sol itary, have fashioned for themselves a world of habits,
rhythms, objects, places, and distances that are carefully dosed with their
contemporaries. If one can nevertheless say that they do not " belong," it is
insofar as originals constitute thei r fellows, their contemporaries, as a n
"outside," which certai nly obl igates their own mode of existence, b u t ac
cording to a " how " that disconcerts any effort to make them a participant
in a " we" by which they could be explained, i ncluding in terms of impa
tience with our routines (the trick of evi l ) . A " how " that makes us feel the
misplaced character of any characterization of originals as " exemplary."
Whatever they fina lly may become, heroes, creators of epochs, openers-up
of the world, great reformers, simple visionaries, traitors, prophets, public
poisoners, martyrs, and so on, originality is not a virtue.
   The fact that original humans require a society that does not denounce
the person who escapes the " we" is an example of a general truth : for a
nonsocial nexus to have original consequences, it must survive, and this
requi res protection. This is thus what j ustifies life, j ustifies the robbery
that is the price of every living society. Such survival obviously has noth
ing to do with the question of the " survival of the sou\ ." Far from desig
nating the endurance of a l ineage that is faithfully reproduced, it may
evoke those experiences i n which we must become " passive" in order to
allow, within us and outside us, the prolongation of the process by which
a thought searches for itself, i n which what is often called an " i ntuition,"
fleeting and indecisive, takes shape, liable to evaporate at any moment, as
if a gap were inexorably closing. In such experiences, it may seem that the
universe itself holds its breath, which is perfectly correct from a White
headian viewpoint, for these experiences exhibit the j ustification of life.
They do not deny the social character of experience, but reflect a cha nge in
the mode of belonging. Everything we know, and can do, seeks to become
3 2 8   C O S M O LOGY




an environment for something possible, which is not ours, because it is
nonsocial, but whose eventual " social ization " depends entirely on " us,"
on the environment we constitute for it: a culture of interstices.
   The culture of i nterstices is not the privilege of personal experience . It
may also be a wa y of understanding ritual trances, divinatory uttera nces,
and the objects manipulated by therapists, which open a human col lec
tivity to an outside whose intrusion suspends ha bitua l social functioning.
However, interstices do not need to be deliberately cultivated . The fact
that I can evoke such experiences, the fact that I know, and can thi nk that
my reader knows, what it means, for instance, to cultivate the type of at
tention to which a memory appea ls, the fact that we can understa nd the
mode of evocation Bergson analyzed in Matter and Memory, all these
facts designate us as " conscious." But the i nterstices make themselves felt
j ust as wel l without any " becoming aware " : when a young child attempts
her first steps, risks her first words, and bursts out la ughing, when I learn
a new type of gesture, when I stammer while trying to get to the end of a
sentence, when I feel myself to be al ive in a new world.
   If life l urks i n the interstices of each living cell , one may say just as well
that the singularity of living societies, what j ustifies them as such, should
be cal led a "culture of interstices." What belongs properly to human soci
eties is the question ra ised by its interstices, at the risk that some social
answers to this question may turn aga inst their culture, for insta nce,
when professiona ls are honored because they know how to refuse hesita
tion and ad here heroica lly to their role, or when freedom is set agai nst
determination, good against evi l , order against d i sorder, subversive p u
rity aga inst recuperation. Words matter here, and the ones Whitehead
uses first put to the test the oppositions that poison us.
   Apart from canalization, depth of originality would spell disaster for the
animal body. With it, personal mentality can be evolved, so as to combine
its individual originality with the safety of the material organism on which
it depends. Thus life turns back into society: it binds originality within
bounds, and gains the massiveness due to reiterated character (PR, 1 07).
   " Slowdown " is a term that may be j ust as fitting for Whitehead as for
Bergson, to designate the socialization of the new-yet in di fferent ways.
Bergsonian elan vital is associated with a power that " falls back " or " be
comes bogged down," with intuition disguising itself as reasoning. The
slowdown associated with Whiteheadian life should rather be cal led
" percolation " : propaga ting from interstice to interstice until the flow it
self becomes recogniza ble, descri bable, social ized , no longer interstitial
but the thread of a living person . The sentence one begins while knowi ng
(more or less) how it wi l l fini sh, the self-assu rance of the person who
                                                         J U STI F Y I N G   L I FE?   3 2 9




" knows" how to wa lk or to read , the experienced behavior that was, 1
hope, mine, when 1 took a wrong turn while distracted .
   Correlatively, Whitehead will never oppose, as Bergson does some
times, the " pure " to the i nterested, the busy, or the preoccupied . Jesus
would have been one more visiona ry, destined, l i ke a fleeting d ream, to
sink into oblivion, if his words had not subsisted inside a story, an insti
tution that, to be sure, never ceased betra ying them, but a lso never cea sed
being j udged in the na me of this betraya l . Every social inheritance is a
betra ya l, in the sense of " recupera tion," but that which, as it makes soci
ety, inherits wha t was origina l, is transformed by what was betrayed, and
creates the possibility of new interstices.
   As fa r as " pure" originality is concerned, and the becoming that is i rre
ducible to all expla nation, they are, as such, neutra l . Especia lly if the con
cern for having to rema in pure comes to socialize them surreptitiously, if
the pleasure of being the only ones to be right and contempt for the herd
come to canalize them, they can be identified with what Whitehead calls
evil . But " pure" origina lity, or life as nonsocial, is first and foremost er
ratic, as is moreover amply attested, since Whitehead, by experi ments of
so-ca l led " sensory deprivation." When the " world " no longer provides a
la ndma rk, it is not that " I am another," as if th is other assumed the fea
tures of a " foreign " persona l ity, it is that without the possi bil ity of " there,"
able to prod uce the invaria nts of recognition, the sta ble differentiation
between " body " and " world " eva pora tes into the " non-socia l " sa ra band
of a frenzied experience, impossi ble to na rrate, a nd even impossible to
reconstitute by means of memory.
   The contrast between Whitehea d a nd Bergson is thus ra ther obvious,
and corresponds to the project announced as early as the preface of Pro
cess and Reality, to rescue the type of thought of Bergson, Ja mes, and
Dewey " from the cha rge of a nti-intel lectua l ism, which rightly or wrongly
has been associated with it" ( PR, xi i ) . Living societies, as the shelters for
interstices, undo every bina ry opposition that might be transformed into
a phi losophica l wea pon of war. The distinction between living societies
and life is not the one between intellectua l reasoning a nd intuition. The
effects of such a distinction are ra ther of a pragma tic type, and belong to
the revision of our modes of abstraction, with which Whitehead associ
ated philosophy.
   " Living societies " are conceptual a bstractions: we never have to dea l
wi th a living society as such, but rather with what requires that the social
order not be the l ast word . The slightest cel l , insofa r as its reactions to
externa l stimuli may be interpreted as adaptive-that is, as Whitehead
emphasizes, origina l-requires wha t the social order as such cannot give
3 3 0   C O S M O LOGY




meaning to. Even the worst professiona ls, the most insensitive with re
gard to what their j udgments elimi nate, may manifest a certa in original
ity with regard to the way they reject objections. One may, of course,
doubt this when one regularly hears physicists suggest that those who
do not mani fest the appropriate respect for the laws of physics, and thus
bel ieve that gravitation is a human invention, should throw themselves
out the window. Yet we know that if those whom they add ress burst out
laughing, and ask them if people confused doors and windows before
Galileo and Newton, they would adapt their arguments without, for all
that, cha nging thei r position. As Lewis Carroll's Red Q ueen said, it takes
all the running one can do to keep i n the same place. The fact that a liv
ing being can succeed i n maintaining itself i n a changing, uneven envi
ronment implies both a social order and interstices in which life lurks.
   The conceptual distinction Whitehead proposes between living society
and life thus does not confirm the opposition between repetitive, reproduc
ible order and invention. In the case of living societies, reproduction itself
requires invention, original approaches to an environment that is never the
same twice; in short, it constitutes a social adventure. But this distinction
matters when it comes to our modes of abstraction, and in particular the
contrast between the way we address living and nonliving societies.
   Today, it is no doubt the extremely sober version of this contrast pro
posed by Stuart Kauffman that fits best with the Whiteheadian difference.
The success of physics and chemistry, as he emphasizes, is to define what
they study as functions, involving a wel l-determined number of variables,
that is, also, to describe the set of behaviors studied as belonging to the
space of possibilities defined by these variables. The conservation of the
number of relevant varia bles is an operative constra int, which is at work
in the very definition of the object under study and the q uestions that will
be asked of it. Reciproca lly, it will be confirmed by the ded uctive cha rac
ter of the derived descri ptions and explanations, whether deterministic or
proba bilistic. When it comes to the biosphere and the evolution of l iving
beings, however, this constraint loses its releva nce. Indeed, what matters
henceforth is the expa nsion of the number of varia bles, that is, of the
number of aspects of a situation that may come to matter, and that a rel
eva nt description must ta ke into account.
   Kauffman takes up the term "exaption," created by Stephen J. Gould,
to designate the emergence of new meani ngs that come to associate them
selves with a preexisting feature. The classic example is that of "proto
wi ngs," whose adaptive role may have been associated with thermal reg
ulation. The emergence of wings ca n then be descri bed as a tra nsformation
of the mea ning of the air, which ceases to be a mere factor of friction, to
become a crucial ingredient of what we ca ll " l i ft." A new possible has
                                                       J U ST I F Y I N G   L I FE ?   3 3 1




been created, mod ifying the definition of the biosphere, for this biosphere
henceforth incl udes the multiple adventures of those beings who ha ve a
sta ke in flying.
  If I am right, if the biosphere is getting on with it, muddling along,
exapting, creating and destroying ways of mak ing a living, then there is a
central need to tell stories. If we may not have all the categories that may
be of relevance finitely prestated ahead of time, how else should we talk
about the emergence in the biosphere or in our history-a piece of the
biosphere-of new relevant categories, new functionalities, new ways of
making a living? ( I, 1 34-1 3 5 ) .
   The i nterest of the Ka uffmania n contra st is that it arises from a prac
tice that pushes as fa r as possible the possibility of reprod ucing i n biol
ogy the symbiosis with a forma l la nguage that cha racterizes physics.
Kauffma n is a special ist i n the beha vior of complex systems and i n pa rtic
ular of connectionist networks, whose ambition is to construct a bridge
between nonl iving and li ving things. This is why what is put on stage is
not a living order endowed with a n i ntrinsic, inventive dynamic, but a
pragmatic di fference between the mode of abstraction a ppropria te for
physics and chemistry and the one that is appropriate to livi ng beings
and the biosphere.
   More genera lly, every scientist, but a lso every novelist, is, in Whitehead's
terms, a " sociologist," for only societies can be cha racterized, only social
adventures can be recounted . This also mea ns that scientists, if they accept
the Whitehead ian proposition, should know that thei r description, and,
as the case may be, thei r expla nations, require the social endurance of
what they describe; in genera l, novelists are well aware of this. The d istinc
tion between nonliving and living societies reflects the di fference between
the pragmatic consequences of this knowledge. A living society may, of
course, lend itself to descriptions in terms of stable categories, which claim
to expla in its workings in a mode ana logous to the one that al lows the
modes of abstraction of physicists and chemists. Yet the sociologists whose
description depends on the endurance of " living societies" cannot have the
ambition of achieving the success of the physicist or the chemist, for what
they have to deal with ra ises, in the fi rst insta nce, the q uestion of the rela
tion that the social order ma inta ins with its own interstices.
   The primary feature of living societies is not a li mitation on the power
of our explanations, as it is the case, for i nsta nce, with a cyclone and its
somewhat unpred icta ble behavior. Quite the contra ry, they q uestion our
thirst for explanation, that is, our fa ith i n explanation as what would
suffice to define the attention they a re due. Indeed, the " sociologists"
who address such societies must learn to resist the temptation to expla in
their s tability in the terms tha t this stability ma kes releva nt. They ha ve to
3 3 2   COSMOLOGY




lea rn to pay attention to the interstices, even i f what l urks in the inter
stices has no significant consequences as long as the social order main
ta ins itself. And when it comes to those who ca l l themselves sociologists,
that is, who address human societies, they must know that expla ining
their sta bility will merely ratify the categories and justifica tions produced
by th is society itself when dea ling wi th what threa tens its sta bility.
   Th us, where we might be tempted to descri be a static distri bution
between wha t ma tters and what does not matter, for instance, when we
descri be a society called " tra ditiona l," which perpetuates itself in a way
that is a pparently unchanged through a cha nging envi ronment, perha ps
we have to dea l with a positive culture of interstices, with the adventure
of a regime of origi nal and permanent renewa l , that ceaselessly re-creates
what will be descri bed as a relation of " tra ditiona l " belonging. As for a
disciplined a rmy, which is mea nt to obey like a single man in a terrifying
environment, it ca nnot be explained by the sold iers' obedience to orders,
or by tra ining that would make them the pa rts of a single body. Here,
novelists and fil mma kers a re better guides, as they echo the testimonies
of soldiers at the front, and experiences that never cea se creating inter
stices: doubts, nostalgias, a feeling of a bsurd ity, questions dea l ing with
life and death, l ucid ity with rega rd to the stupidity of the orders they
must obey, even if those o rders signify their proba ble dea th. " Enrolled "
humans may wel l think more than those who busy themselves with their
daily affa i rs. If the army " holds," it is to the extent that, in one way or
another, these interstices lack the power to propagate themselves and to
enta il " origina l " behaviors, especia lly disobed ience or desertion . It is pos
sible tha t what " ma kes" a soldier, what prevents him from such " betray
als," but also often from objecting and denouncing when he sees his broth
ers in arms commit what he knows to be a crime, ca nnot be expla ined by
the values inculcated by the a rmy, nor by tra ining. The sta bility of the
society known as an army might depend on that which, brought into be
ing by the unimaginable situation in wh ich a l l sold iers find themselves,
prevents the interstitial thoughts of each one from having consequences:
"you don 't abandon your buddies."
   Correlatively, i n the case of a " social catastrophe," when the sold iers
flee in panic, every man for hi msel f, or when the modes of reprod uction
of a tradition cea se to function, the question will not be one of external
causality, of which the catastrophe would be the effect, but of a society 's
relation to its own interstices. Obviously, this is not to deny the outside
world, but to demand that we do not spea k of externa l " causes ." One
should not spea k of " socia l " causes either, for to spea k of a " socia l " ca use
is to confer on a society the power to explain its own end urance. The poi nt
                                                       J U S T I F Y I N G   L I F E ?   3 3 3




is then to try to tel l stories, for only stories a re ca pa ble of giving mea ning
to the way in which what seemed separated ceases to be so, in which
what seemed to have the power to explain loses this power, in which
what was required, what seemed to go without saying, reveals its role, in
which what seemed i nsignificant becomes important.
   Among " l iving societies," those that interest Whitehead most d i rectly
are certa inly those one might call our " mental habits." This is why, for
him, the pa radigmatic " social science " was education, with its crucial ele
ment: the transmission of the abstractions without which we cannot
think. These abstractions may be transmitted either as " living val ues,"
va l ues that incite curiosity, the appetite for contrasts, in short, original
responses to the situations of this world , or as " dead va l ues," usually in
citing complia nt submission and the inhibition of what questions that
compliance. Perhaps one of the most intense experiences that turned
Whitehead i nto a philosopher was the power of these abstractions that
demand submission. Spea king of the ind ustrial revol ution, he writes,
  Ultimate values were excluded. They were politely bowed to, and then
handed over to the clergy to be kept for Sundays [ . . . J The workmen
were conceived as mere hands, drawn from the pool of labour. To God's
question, men gave the answer of Cain- "Am I my brother's keeper? ";
and they incurred Cain 's guilt (SMW, 203 ) .
   Whitehead does not denounce; he i s terrified, for those who have given
this answer, who have looked at the conseq uences of the ind ustrial revo
l ution with a " stone-blind eye," are not only the capta ins of ind ustry
there was something in it for them-but a lso, as he emphasizes, the " best
men " of the time. And, for insta nce, those honorable, d isinterested, gen
tle, and educa ted men with whom he dined in the evening at the high
ta ble of his college. They are the men we know wel l today, and who we
feel rea lly do incur the guilt of Ca in: that guilt that is first tra nslated by
an inabil ity to accept the interstices of imagination and doubt. Or, more
precisely, it i � what they make us feel, when they infect us wi th the feeling
that if they were to face up to that guilt, they would collapse.
   Mental habits, insofar as what l urks in the interstices that they harbor
ca n be said to be " danger" for them, thus intensify the question of good
and evil dea lt with in Religion in the Making, and taken up aga in in Pro
cess and Reality with the trick of evi l . These honora ble men, who " never
doubted," reflect the insta bility of evil, for they held fast only by inhibit
ing, in them and around them, that which would make them doubt. As fa r
as the good in a cosmologica l sense is concerned, it is what prevents us
from defining a society on the basis of its mode of order. It is impossible to
exclude what, for Whitehead, is the parad igmatic cosmic event: that evil
3 3 4   C O S M O LO G Y




be overcome, that is, that what was felt as into lera ble be accepted,
ca nal ized, admitted to infect its social environment, mak ing it capable
of original responses.
   Wh itehead's cosmologica l perspective corresponds to the fa ith in prog
ress that Wi lliam James, in The Moral Philosopher and Moral Life, pro
poses to moral philosophers. For James, these phi losophers must defend
themselves aga inst the temptation of trying to define a system of mora l
obligations that should be accepta ble to a l l . Like Whitehead ian sociolo
gists explaining the stability of a living society, mora lists could not help
but confer the force of law upon some of the categories of their own so
cial environment. It can even be said that, j ustifying the elevation of an
ideal to the highest status, whence the rest can be deduced, they might
contribute to the trick of evil, that is, ratify the sacri fice of other ideals,
demand ing other obligations.
  If we follow the ideal which is conventionally highest, the others which
we butcher either die or do not return to haunt us; or if they come back
and accuse us of murder, everyone applauds us for turning to them a deaf
ear ( MPM L, 203 ) .
  James thus seems t o condemn mora l phi losophers t o relativism, t o the
admission that all moral ideals are of equal val ue. Yet th is is not so, and
the position James proposes, like that of the evol utionary biologists in the
sense of Stuart Kauffman, and like those of the sociologist in the White
head ian sense, demands an attention to the interstices. For James, this first
means to accept that the question is tragic. Philosophers should be able to
resist the temptation to j ustify the sacrifice, the excl usion of other idea ls.
They should accept that the victims haunt the interstices of their adher
ence to an idea l . They should accept to let their experience throb with the
complaint of those who were sacrificed in the name of what they define as
mora l .
  This is not, however, the same th ing as taking sides with the excl uded,
for we are not in the doma in of the j ust and the unj ust, but of the tragic:
every definition of what is j ust and good prod uces victims. And it is
against a tragic background that James defines his trust in a mora l prog
ress that cannot be reduced to relativism. Mora l philosophers who trust
this progress will si tuate themselves in the midst of an adventure, in
which it may ha ppen that new ways of satisfying an idea l , original ways
that demand fewer victims, become soci ally accepta ble or even obvious.
Philosophers cannot foresee such events, for they are not the prod uct of
a tolerant relativism, of a general affirmation that no aspiration should
impose anything upon anybod y. They are " cosmic" events in Whitehead's
sense, in which an evil is overcome, in which an apparently insupera ble
contradiction becomes a contrast.
                                                    J U S T I F Y I N G   L I FE ?   3 3 5




   The knowledge that such an event is possible, transforming the judg
ment of moral philosophers themselves about what is envisagea ble and
what is not, implies an empiricism that is on alert. Philosophers should
be attentive to the action of " thinkers " at work in their time, who create
new moral " facts," and to original ideals that appea r in the interstices but
gradually modi fy social j udgment, making it normal for it to accept what
it was proud of rejecting.
  Everywhere the ethical philosopher must wait on facts. The thinkers
who create the ideals come he knows not whence, their sensibilities are
evolved he knows not how; and the question as to which of two conflict
ing ideals will give the best universe then and there, can be answered by
him only through the experience of other men (MPML, 20 8-209 ) .
   Yet philosophers who know how t o wait for those other people, who
wi l l teach them what thei r own ca tegories doomed them to excl ude,
a re not mere specta tors. I f they a re hea rd, if their words-themselves
interstitial-a re a udible to the soc iety to whose va l ues they adhere, they
may contribute to the event, to the social ization of the novel sensibility.
Trust in the possible, the humor of a relation that does not try to j ustify
what seems obvious to us, and does not disqualify it, for that matter, as
arbitra ry, but situates it in the midst of an adventure that no justification
will constra in, can transform the relation between our modes of a bstrac
tion and their interstices. Ever si nce he became a philosopher, Whitehead
did nothing but work for such a transformation .
   This is what we will see now, with a new flight of experience toward the
territory Whitehead first explored when, in The Concept of Nature, he
questioned the specious cla rity of perceptive experience, in which leaves
are green, the sky is bl ue, and my body is " here."
                                                          C H A P T E R TW E NTY
