The Adventu re of the Senses




         HE RISE OF ANIMAL,        and then of human, consciousness is the
           triumph of specialization. It is closely connected with the evolu
           tion of clear and distinct sensory experience. There is abstrac-
tion from the vague mass of primary feelings, and concentration upon
the comparative clarity of a few qualitative details. These are the sensa.
   Unless the physical and physiological sciences are fables, the qualitative
experiences which are the sensations, such as sight, hearing, etc., are in
volved in an intricate flux of reactions within and without the animal body.
These are all hidden below consciousness in the vague sense of personal
experience of an external world. This feeling is massive and vague-so
vague that the pretentious phrase, namely, personal experience of an exter
nal world, sounds nonsense. A particular instance can be explained more
simply. For example, "I see a blue stain out there " implies the privacy of
the ego and the externality of "out there." There is the presupposition
of "me " and the world beyond. But consciousness is concentrated on the
quality blue in that position. Nothing can be more simple or more abstract.
And yet unless the physicist and physiologist are talking nonsense, there is
a terrific tale of complex activity omitted in the abstraction (MT, 1 2 1 ) .
   Whitehead never tires o f returning t o the grey stone o r the blue sta in,
and to the error of the philosophers who have accepted them as starting
points that are both simple and assured . He never ti res of describing and
undoing the trap always set for philosophers by the search for a starti ng
point, a ble to dictate the way it must be taken into account. The question
is not wha t these phi losophers affirm when they proclaim "I (here) see a
blue stain (there)" ; it is everything they deny when they act "as if" this
                                    T H E   A D V E N T U R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 3 7




were the fai thful account of thei r i ncontrovertible experience. As i f there
were not, in addition to a " state of affa irs " over there, for an " I " over
here, at the very least an ingredient tha t requires precisely wha t they in
tend to deny. This ingred ient is "ca usa lity," to which the blue stain gi ves
no meaning, whereas it matters for both physicists and physiologists .
  [ . . . J The "make-believe " character of modern empiricism is well
shown by putting into juxtaposition two widely separated passages from
Hume's Treatise: "Impressions may be divided into two kinds, those of
sensation, and those of reflection. The first kind arises in the soul origi
nally, from unknown causes." And " If it be perceived by the eyes, it must
be a colour . . ."



   The earlier passage is Hume's make-believe, when he is think ing of
his philosophical principles. He then refers the visual sensations "in the
soul" to "unknown causes." But in the second passage, the heat of argu
ment elicits his real conviction-everyone's real conviction-that visual
sensations arise "by the eyes." The causes are not a bit "unknown," and
among them there is usually to be found the efficacy of the eyes. If Hume
has stopped to investigate the alternative causes for the occurrence of vi
sual sensations-for example, eye-sight, or excessive consumption of
alcohol-he might have hesitated in his profession of ignorance. If the
causes be indeed unknown, it is absurd to bother about eye-sight and
intoxication. The reason for the existence of oculists and prohibitionists
is that various causes are known ( PR, 1 71 ) .
   The freedom for Hume, and for so ma ny other philosophers, to act as
though the difference between " seeing something" and " hallucinating"
depended on their verd ict. The freedom for prohibitionists and oculists to
quietly testify to this difference, whatever the phi losopher may say. And the
freedom, as well, for those who wonder how to tell someone they need
glasses or how to ask someone to stop d rinking. For Whiteheadian causal
ity-we see " by the eyes "--does not, like the causes defined by experimen
tation, constitute the answer to a well-defined question. It refers to that
" bod ily life" that Whitehead, in The Concept of Nature, had associated
with the " here " of the percipient event, a life associated not with the knowl
edge of scientists but with a feeling that is most often vague.
  The first principle of epistemology should be that the changeable, shift
ing aspects of our relations to nature are the primary topics for conscious
observation. This is only common sense, for something can be done
about them. The organic permanences survive by their own momentum:
our hearts beat, our lungs absorb air, our blood circulates, our stomachs
digest. It requires advanced thought to fix attention on such fundamental
operations ( MT, 2 9 ) .
3 3 8   COSMOLOGY




  It is thus not a matter of choosing between two accounts of experience
that are j ust as a bstract: that of purificatory empiricism, which acts as
though causality could be eliminated from our experience like a parasiti
cal belief, and that of science, which acts as if experience could be defined
on the basis of a chai n of causes. The point is to aft rm them both as
abstract and therefore highly interpretative, that is, a lso, to construct a
more complete interpreta tion.
  If we desire a record of uninterpreted experience, we must ask a stone
to record its autobiography ( PR, 1 5 ) .
    The description bereft o f interpretation aimed a t by the empi ricists is
chimerical : a pure testimony to the excess subjectivity that can affect con
scious experience, denying its selective character while pushing selection
to the extreme. What Whitehead chooses to underline, and to interpret
speculatively, is the interpretative choice from which our experience has
issued . We do not know how a bat, armed with its sonar, or a dog, capable
of track ing by smell , perceive " their" world . We can identify the features
they d iscrimi nate, but we can only drea m of the contrast between " that
which " they perceive a nd what they are aware of. All we " know" is that
their experience is, like ours, highly interpretati ve, and that, like ours, it
has solved an extraordinarily delicate problem: to give access, in a more
or less reliable way, to what it is important to pay a ttention to. For White
head, what we know in this way suffices to engage speculative interpreta
tion. The point is to think of an experience in which what is at stake is
" real istic," that is, must propose an interpretation that is not adequate,
but reliable with regard to what matters . This crucial element will com
municate in a privi leged way with the class of eternal obj ects Whitehead
names " sensa ."
    Here, Whitehead prolongs the " logica l " hierarchization of objects to
which he ha d proceeded on the basis of perceptive experience a lone in
The Concept of Nature. He had shown that sense objects do not presup
pose any other type of object, whereas a l l other types of objects presup
pose sense objects. Li kewise, the eterna l objects Whitehead calls " sensa "
(i ndependently of whether or not they communicate with an experience
that is " sensi ble" for humans, or even for any inha bitant of the earth)
form the " lowest category," because their realization does not require any
particular other eternal object. In this sense, the sensa are "simple."
    Beca use the ingression of a sensum does not require that other eternal
objects make ingression a t the same time, the sensum is also that which
does not require a particularly sophisticated process of concrescence in
order to make ingression. Colors can enter i nto complex contrasts, make
a child happy and d rive a painter mad, but sensa can also make i ngres-
                                    T H E   A D V E N TU R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 3 9




sion i nto "simple physical feelings," i nto societies characterized by the
thread of a " reproduction " in conformity, as privileged by physics . In
other words, among all the ways of " feeling," those i n which the sensa
make ingression have the peculiarity of always being able to be taken
into account, whatever the concrescence may be.
   The singularity of a sensum is therefore the fact that it can play a role
that is rather analogous to that of a trading currency among the mem
bers of a human society. A four-year-old child will, of course, not make
the same use as you or I of a ten-dollar bill, and the possession of such a
bill will take on a completely different significance for him and for me, or
for a j obless person a nd a multimil lionaire. Yet each person to whom the
bill is transmitted can make use of it, and neither age nor socia l status
presents an obstacle to its circulation from seller to buyer. From an ab
stract viewpoint, one may say it is " same" bill, whoever its possessor, and
in a way that is much more relevant than if one speaks of this book in the
hands of a reader or of a four-year-old chi l d .
   The reactivation o f a sensum from occasion t o occasion does not mean
conformity of experiences between "electromagnetic" societies and a per
son contemplating a sunset. But the sensum's simplicity, the a bsence of
presupposition that characterizes its mode of ingression, allows the satis
faction of the demands associated with the experiences whose " realism" is
at stake. Realism demands that the blue of this coat designate, in one way
or another, this coat as an " active condition." I am not hallucinating. You
can tel l it how you will, but I demand that what I cal l "coat" shall be actu
ally implied in my perception. This does not mean, however, that I de
mand that the color I perceive be what is common to the coat and to my
perception, that the coat be " i ntrinsically blue." Nor do I demand that
what I perceive as a coat explain the sensation " blue." I do demand, how
ever, that this color I perceive have a respondent different from me. It is
precisely this demand that is satisfied by the ingression of a sensum. This
ingression does not explain either this coat that exists on i ts own account,
or the complex a nd entangled set of societies presupposed by "I who am
looking a t it." In fact, it is because this ingression cannot be invoked as a
"cause " in any particular explanation that the ingression of this sensum
can be what my perception owes to this coat: the sensum is a " same," in
definitely available for all significations, and of which each disparate soci
ety, both the "coat " and " myself," must, on i ts own account, prod uce the
signification. It is the paradigmatic transmissi ble, since its reprod uction,
from occasion to occasion, does not require a ny other eternal object.
  The realization of a sensum in its ideal shallowness of intensity, with zero
width, does not require a ny other eternal object; other than its intrinsic
3 4 0   COSMOLOGY




apparatus of individual and relational essence; it can remain just itself,
with its unrealized potentialities for patterned contrasts. A n actual entity
with this absolute narrowness has an ideal faintness of satisfaction, dif
fering from the ideal zero of chaos, but equally impossible. For realiza
tion means ingression in an actual entity, and this involves the synthesis
of all ingredients with data derived from a complex universe. Realization
is ideally distinguishable from the ingression of contrasts, but not in fact
( PR, 1 1 5 ) .
   Every contrast is, according to the eighth category o f existence, " a
mode o f synthesis of entities in a si ngle prehension." If the chaos White
head evokes here corresponds to the ca tegorically impossible hypothesis
of a " vacuous " satisfaction, the hypothesis of a satisfaction l imiting itself
to the real ization of a sensum corresponds, for its part, to an a bstract
idea, a pure mental exercise. In other words, what is at stake in the sen
sum is not to privilege " pure " transmission : its real ization can play the
most different roles in the most diverse contrasts. Qua available without
constraint to participate in various contrasts, and free in itself with re
gard to every contrast, the sensum does not communicate with the em
piricist censorship that would ask us to restrict ourselves to the "common."
It satisfies the demands of the freest empiricism, the one that intends to
accept at the same time, and to place on the same plane, a l l the experi
ences that can oblige us to think.
   As we reca l l , colors, sounds, and smel ls not only inhabit experience
as perception, " that gray stain there," but they also communicate with a
completely different version of "empiricism." For the painter or poet of
Science and the Modern World, color haunts time, but is not in time; it
surges forth somewhere, but does not stay anywhere. It does not emerge,
does not occur, it is there or is not there, and, when it is there, it does not
orient toward the past nor toward the future, and it is perceived in a way
that affirms itself as independent of the person perceiving: it stands up on
its own.
   The goal of art, with the means of its materials, is to tear the percept
away from the perceptions of objects and the states of a perceiving sub
ject, to tear the affect away from affections like the passage from one
state to another. To extract a block of sensations, a pure being of sensa
tion [ . . . 1 Memory plays a minor role in art (even, and especially, in
Proust). It is true that every work of art is a monument, but here the
monument is not what commemorates the past, it is a block of present
sensations that owe their own conservation only to themselves, and give
the event the compound that celebrates it. The act of a monument is not
memory, but fabulation ( Q Ph, 1 5 8 ) .
                                     T H E   A D V E N TU R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 4 1




   The fact that we can, according to the expression of Deleuze and
Guatta ri, tea r the percept away from perception, that is, as Whitehead
wou l d say, produce a n experience dominated by sensi ble contrasts qua
sensi ble-the shimmering of colors celebrated by Shelley in Science and
Modern World-is what obl iges the artist's fa bulation, and must oblige
the philosopher's, but in very different ways.
   For Whitehead, the " act of a monument " certainly matters, in a way
that specifies a rt, but in a more generic way what matters is to liberate the
green from abstraction, to refer it to the multipl icity of contrasts a nd ex
periences that make it intervene: whether this contrast is itself sensi ble, for
the painter creating a complex, sensi ble composite, or for Shelley celebrat
ing the forest; whether it belongs to a perception-this green leaf--or
translates a doubt-I was sure that your eyes were green; whether it be
comes an object of comparison-what green should we choose for the
door, this one or that one?--or intervenes in a philosophical thought that
defines it as a " secondary quality."
   Of course, we are much more civilized than our ancestors who could
merely think of green in reference to some particular spring morning.
There can be no doubt about our increased powers of thought, of analy
sis, of recollection, and of conjecture. We cannot congratulate ourselves
too warmly on the fact that we are born among people who can talk
about green in abstraction from springtime. But at this point we must
remember the warning-Nothing too much (MT, 3 8 ) .
   Congratulations become excessive when they make the poet responsi
ble for the patterned , sonorous harmony of the nightingale's song, that
song a bout which we know that the nightingale that prod uces it is also
the first to enjoy it. What we should rather congratulate ourselves warmly
for is the way i n which animal experience, then human conscio usness,
have privileged and given a n eminent role to the ingression of the
" simple" eternal objects that enable sensible a nd perceptive experience to
bear witness to the actual solidarity between disparate actual entities .
What we shoul d celebrate is the way each new appa ratus for detection,
each new prosthesis, comes to increase this sol ida rity.
   It pertains to what Whitehead calls the " categories of obligation " to
specify how a process of concrescence is "obl iged " by its " causes," by
what it inherits a nd by its fi nal accomplishment. Yet it is interesting to
emphasize that once an apparatus for detection is prepared, this relation
between obligation and cause finds a direct exemplification. Such an ap
paratus is not, like a thermometer for instance, a physical process set up
and ca li brated in order to exhibit a functiona l relation that takes on the
role of a measure. Its ela bora tion is intended to ensure it a sensibil ity that
3 4 2   COSMOLOGY




is extremely selective to " what must be detected," that is, to what can be
designated, in a reliable way, as the " cause " of the signal it will emit. The
final accomplishment, for its part, obviously refers to the person who
carries out the elaboration . An apparatus that has finally been perfected
may be defined as " synthesizing" what was previously d isjointed : such
beings as electrons or rad ioactive pa rticles, which its perfecti ng presup
posed but to which, once it is perfected , it testifies in a reliable manner,
and human specialists who have become a ble to detect the presence of
these beings . It is then inseparable, in the same sense as a n organ, from an
experience that it does not explain but that designates i t as i ts respon
dent: no longer a coat, or a tiger ready to leap, but what was previously
" unobservable." In other words, the perfecting of a n apparatus for detec
tion has as its goa l to transform the " what it detects " i nto ingred ients of
human reasoning and action.
   Although such an apparatus impl ies only physical processes, the as
semblage of these processes cannot be completely described by physics, a
science that is a l l the more relevant when what it describes exhibits its
conformity. The assemblage, for its part, exhibits i ts final ity; it is made to
produce a " sa me " that did not exist prior to its selective a bstraction . As
such, it prolongs the i nvention of sense organs, conferring an eminent
role upon the sensa . And a s such an organ, it is si lent with regard to the
diversity of the adventures that require it, i ndependently of which it
would not have come into existence, but to which it pertains to produce
the signi fication of what it testifies to.
   In a sense, one could say that the research of artists and of technicians
prolongs the animal invention of organs a long divergent paths. Artists
seek to bring to existence new sensations for the eyes or the ears, sensa
tions that a re, of course, much more complex than red or sweet, but ca
pable, like red or sweet, of testifying in a fleeti ng way to eternity. Those
who prepa re an apparatus of detection, in contrast, create new organs
for sensible experiences that have nothing particular in themselves
there we go, it's sizzling but that may intervene, as culmina tion or de
                          -



nouement, in unprecedented a nd intense i nterpretative adventures . Only
experimenters can waltz a round singing in their laboratory because a
detector has emitted the expected signa l . And from that point of view,
detection here involves, but cannot be reduced to, what Whitehead, fol
lowing Bergson, calls " sense-reception."
  The more primitive types of experience are concerned with sense
reception, and not with sense-perception. This statement will require
some prolonged explanation. But the course of thought can be indi
cated by adopting Bergson 's admirable phraseology, sense-reception is
                                     T H E   A D V E N TU R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 4 3




"unspatialized " and sense-perception is "spatialized." In sense-reception
the sensa are the definiteness of emotion: they are emotional forms trans
mitted from occasion to occasion. Finally in some occasion of adequate
complexity, the Category of Transmutation endows them with the new
function of characterizing nexus ( PR, 1 1 3-1 1 4 ) .
   The " unspatialized sense-reception " discussed by Bergson i s by no
means a typica l case of primitive experience, in the sense that such an
experience might be associated with an electron, or any other being de
scri bed relevantly in terms of conservation or conformity. It is at the heart
of the practical sphere of " psychophysics," on which Bergson comments
at length in his Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness. Bergson 's
(critical ) interest responded to the ambition of this field, that is, the a rticu
lation between the " objective," quantitative measure of a sensible signal,
and the " subjective" evaluation of the intensity of that signal . Such a n
articulation obviously requires an experimental setup in which maximum
homogeneity is realized, in which no difference can i nsinuate i tself that
refers to an interpretation, an interest, a doubt. This is why the experi
mental setup is dominated by passivity: it confers, as it were, upon the
" subject " the role of detection appa ratus for the scientist. The experimen
tal subject " bears witness " to the intensity of the sound, the pain, the l ight,
in an experimental context that is actively opposed to perceptive experi
ence. The testimony concerns a sensation, for instance in terms of the
threshold at which it manifests itself to consciousness, the threshold of
saturation after which quantitative d ifferences will no longer be sensible,
and the estimation of the variations of intensity between these two thresh
olds. Like the invention of detection apparatuses, the " psychophysical
measure" is thus a triumph of abstraction, providing itself with the means
to name, i f not to descri be, components of experience that are usually
" what goes without saying." Yet to describe this apparatus in a concrete,
and therefore complete way, we must add that it presupposes the docility
of a " witness " who accepts to submit to this kind of experiment. J ust as
the technica l detection apparatus presupposes an assemblage whose final
ity is foreign to the assembled physical processes, the psychophysical ap
paratus cannot relate the objective measure of a signal and the subjective
testimony to its intensity without exhibiting what is foreign to such a rela
tion : the fact that the subject agrees to submit to a situation that is new
for a human. Like technical detection, the psychophysical experience is
creation, i mplying that scientists equip themselves with a new prosthesis.
   What, then, of the experiences that can indeed be under the banner of
an " unspatia lized reception," those, for instance, that I have already attrib
uted to insects, when, specu latively denying them percepti ve experience,
3 4 4   COSM OLOGY




I spoke of " detection" with rega rd to them ? The analogy with technical
detection has the i nterest of emphasizing that the category of " sensible
reception " defined by Whitehead covers an immense social variety. From
this viewpoint, there is no opposition between the processes studied by
physics or chemistry, as long, of course, as they are technically articulated
and stabilized enough to play a role in detection, and those physiologists
discover when they study the functions of selective capture accomplished
by a n organ. I n none of these cases, however, should " primitive experi
ence " evoke the idea of an " automatism." For Whitehead, we certainly do
not have any access to the type of enjoyment of occasions belonging to
nonliving societies, to which we delegate detection and the production of
a selective signal, but every experience is productive, enjoying the i nten
sity it produces. The ma in di fference between appa ratus and organs is
that la boratory apparatuses a nd prostheses exhi bit their dependency on
issues of knowledge and rel i a bility that can be formulated i ndependently
of their functioning. If the experience i n question is to be " primitive " as
such, it must not exhibit such a dependence.
   This is why if one can, as I have already risked doing, conceive the
experience of a butterfly or a fly as " detection" rather than as " percep
tion," it is by taking the term in its ful l sense. The sense in which, when
experimenters exclaim "there we go, it 's sizzling "; their experience is not
dominated by a contrast between a " here " and a " there" of a perceptive
type. The experi menter is affected in a way that is first a nd foremost
"emotional ." " Detection" ought therefore to evoke rather the accentua
tion of what we l ive as " presence," giving rise to an i rreversible, uncon
trollable mutation of experience. We need only think of a feeling of fright
or disgust, or else an attack of the giggles, and perhaps we can approach
what a butterfly " feels " when it detects the odor of its fema le: to speak of
" detection " implies that what is detected " makes a sensation " i n a way
that may be closer to a " trance " tha n to the identification " here" of some
thing that is " there."
   We now come to sense-perception, tha t is, to spatialized experience,
implying a contrast between " here" and " there." Whitehead associates the
emergence of this contrast with the sixth category of obligation, which
defines " transmutation."
   When [ . . . l one and the same conceptual feeling is derived impartially
by a prehending sub;ect from its analogous simple physical feelings of
various actual entities in its actual world, then, in a subsequent phase
of integration of these simple physical feelings together with the derivate
conceptual feeling, the prehending sub;ect may transmute the datum of
this conceptual feeling into a characteristic of some nexus containing
                                     T H E   A D V E N TU R E   O F   TH E   S E N S ES   3 4 S




those prehending actual entities among its members, or of some part of
that nexus. In this way the nexus (or its part), thus characterized, is the
objective datum of a feeling entertained by this prehending subject [ . . . I
This category is the way in which the philosophy of organism, which is
an atomic theory of actuality, meets a perplexity which is inherent in all
monadic cosmologies. Leibniz, in his Monadology, meets the same diffi
culty by a theory of "confused " perception. But he fails to make clear
how "confusion " originates ( PR, 27).
   The category of transmutation, sixth of the nine categories of obliga
tion, implies, because it requires the notion of " conceptual feeling," the
fourth category, the "ca tegory of conceptual eval uation." Unl ike transmu
tation, which corresponds to a possibility ( the prehending subject " may"
derive), this fourth category is generic. It concerns every actual occasion,
from the most si mple to the most sophisticated . At the initial phase of
every process of concrescence, there is " conceptual eval uation ."
  From each physical feeling there is the derivation of a purely concep
tual feeling whose datum is the eternal object determinant of the definite
ness of the actual entity, or of the nexus, physically felt ( PR, 2 6 ) .
  . Let us recal l that both physical feelings ( that is, feelings i nitiating the
concrescence, which have actua l entities as their data ) and conceptual
feelings ( feel ings of a n eternal object) belong to genetic analysis, and as
such do not communicate with a ny experience. In particular, a concep
tual feeling. (or conceptual prehension ) has nothi ng to do with an intel
lectual experience. Like the eternal object of which it is the feeling, it
" tells no story." It is " evaluation " in the sense that it is the feel ing of the
eternal object, i n its capacity to be rea l ized qua determi ni ng the how of
a physica l feeling. Elsewhere, Whitehead asks ( PR, 3 3 ) that it be under
stood in an a bsol utely neutral way, without admitting the slightest con
notation suggesting a thought or an i ntel lection. This must be the case,
since conceptual feeling belongs to the initial phase of any concrescence
and will a lso designa te the d i vine feeling of eterna l objects .
    Transmutation, as defined by the sixth category of obligation, is not an
intellectual operation either. What is transmuted is the datum of a concep
tual feeli ng, which leads to a new mode of i ngression for the eternal ob
ject, whose feeli ng has been i mpartially derived from a multitude of physi
cal feelings. There is no need to think that the eternal object whose mode
of i ngression is transmuted is always a sensum. What can be affirmed, in
contrast, is the particular importance, from our animal viewpoint, of the
application of the category of transmutation to the sensa to which our
sense organs testify. Correlatively, the simplicity of these eternal objects
known as the sensa is particularly appropriate for transmutation, for their
3 4 6   C O S M O LO G Y




conceptua l feelings, which do not require the feeling of any other particu
lar eternal object, lend themselves to the impartial derivation presupposed
by tra nsmutation. Whether the blush that infuses your cheeks is of shame
or of anger, it is always such a colored nuance, offering a contrast with the
rest of your face.
   If transmutation is not specifically l inked to perception, it is certainly a
condition for perception. Only i f it has issued from a transmutation can
what is felt be felt " there," that blue stain enteri ng into contrast with
other colors in the midst of a colored world, or the great roar of that wave
crashing, there, against that rock. Or it may not be, like the confused mul
titude of little noises produced by the droplets presumed to compose that
roar, which I do not perceive " there," but which no doubt confer a defi
nite character on the emotion inspired by the roar of the wave or that
slightly diffuse pa in i n my head. Transmutation ma kes spatialization pos
sible, but does not operate it.
   The transmutation that conditions a perception certainly has detection
as its own condition: it requi res selective organs to give mea ning to the
simple physical feeli ngs from which it is possible to derive, in an i mpar
tial way, one and the same eternal object, one and the same sensum. For
Whitehead, however, it first constitutes the paradigmatic example of a link
between social success and simplification . We are amazed that the fl ight
of a butterfly can testify to the presence of a single "odoriferous " mole
cule, but Whitehead, for his part, celebrates a s a much more sophisti
cated exploit the fact that we smell "an odor " or that we hear "a noise."
   The examination of the Category of Transmutation shows that the ap
proach to intellectuality consists in the gain of a power of abstraction. The
irrelevant multiplicity of detail is eliminated, and emphasis is laid on the
elements of systematic order in the actual world ( PR, 254 ) .
   The simplification produced b y transmutation is not in itself synony
mous with intelligibility, as is attested by the difficulty in naming a pain,
but it conditions the " that which " of perception, marking the threshold
where, for us, experi ence will be exhi bited not only as selective but a lso as
" original," exhibiting the " miracle of creation." It fact, it opens onto all
the experiences in which the questions raised in The Concept of Nature
assume meaning, those questions that all designated " mind " as ultimate.
   We must, however, insist on the fact that transm utation does not by
any mea ns open specifically upon consciousness, even though the con
scious experience of a world of things existing at the same time as we do
i mpl ies transmuted feeli ngs on a massi ve scale. Nor does it characterize
exclusively all the experiences that end up as loca lized perception. A " so
norous environment " does not designate its source, and a rabbit, i f it
                                    T H E   ADVENTURE   O F   T H E   S E NS E S   3 4 7




bolts a t the sl ightest " worrisome " noise, switching to a desperate mode
of exi stence in which it will be said to be " wholly in its fl ight," may be
dominated by a " there " experience rather than by a felt contrast between
here and there-it hasn't taken the time for that. Its mode of endurance
had as its component an acute sensitivity to the highly specialized con
trast " everything's OK/danger! " and the how of the transmuted sensation
is then ca lled " flee." Habit, instinct, intuition, reflex: many names-some
pejorative, some laudatory-have been given to the variety of behaviors
that attest no hesitation with regard to what is felt, and this is so whether
these beha viors come before any learning (closing one's eyes if a moving
obj ect approaches them quickly ) , or are the fruit and crowning moment
of a process of learning ( to k now how to drive or read ) . Whitehead
would ca ll them all " i mportant," social successes proper to the bodily l i fe
and to the immense variety of experiences of which it is and becomes
capable, successes that, as the case may be, will be the soci al environment
proper for receiving other feelings that are even more complex.
  Our intuitions of righteousness disclose an absoluteness in the nature
of things, and so does the taste of a lump of sugar (MT, 1 2 1 ) .
    For a dog, smells may testify a s much a s colors to the loca l ization that
makes verification possible. As far as many human beings are concerned,
there is something a bsolute a bout smell and taste, which lea ves no room
for the slightest hesitation . Yet the cry "That's not right! " also testifies
to an absolute intuition that makes experience tip over. It has nothing to
do with being made explicit: I judge that this experience, such as I per
ceive it, does not correspond to the definition of a j ust situation. The
contrast between detection and perception is thus not the only one. Mul
tiple contrasts inhabit a l l human experiences. Even a mathematician,
a fter years of furious work, may be moved to tears when evok ing a suc
cessful demonstration.
    Between " bolting without ask i ng for verification " and " asking for it,"
taking the time to pay due attention to what is worrisome, for i nstance,
by turning one's head toward the source of the worrisome noi se, the dif
ference is important, and sometimes lethal . For humans, however, the
d ifference can also become very important between "asking for a verifi
cation " and " wondering how one should ask for it," and i t is here that
consciousness comes i nto play.
    How do you know that somethi ng is or is not j ust? A sel f-administered
doubt, a situation of open controversy, a fleeting change in the i nterlocu
tor's physiognomy, it matters l ittle: what may disappear is the " trust" that
constitutes the common feature between the experience of the bolting
rabbit and that of the rabbit turning its head . A predator is a predator,
3 4 8   COSMOLOGY




and " i ntuition " is absol ute, even i f it has proceeded to a verification. As
for the d isappearance or effective questioning of the a bsolute character
of an " i ntuition," they are neutral in themselves: they may be deplored
when our doctri nes sap our trust in " what we know," but they are re
qui red to tell the d i fference between the professional, l i ke a predator,
who " never doubts," and Leibniz wondering how his perception of the
great roa r of the surf can be generated by a nondenumerable multipl icity
of sma l l noises .
   The possibil ity included in the question "how do you know that's
;ust ? "-that the intuition o f what is j ust may be challenged-has the
eventual efficacy of brutally transforming the assertion " it is j ust" i nto an
example of a theory that could be false, and the subj ect who inherits this
transformation can say good bye to any resemblance to a rabbit.
   The general case of conscious perception is the negative perception,
namely, "perceiving this stone as not grey." The "grey " then has ingression
in its full character of a conceptual novelty, illustrating an alternative. In
the positive case, "perceiving the stone as grey," the grey has 'ingression in
its character of a possible novelty, but in fact by its conformity emphasizing
the dative grey, blindly felt. Consciousness is the feeling of negation: in the
perception of "the stone as grey," such feeling is in barest germ; in the per
ception of "the stone is not grey," such feeling is in full development. Thus
the negative perception is the triumph of consciousness. It finally rises to the
peak of free imagination, in which the conceptual novelties search through
a universe in which they are not datively exemplified (PR, 1 6 1 ) .
    I f the rabbit turning its head testifies t o the possibility that a noise may
not signify a predator, this does not mean that it is conscious, in the sense
that Descartes is conscious when he meditates " I see a piece of wax there "
( o r a nything else ) . The confrontation between the w a x and an "extended
substance " that no perceptual data exemplifies belongs to the summits of
free imagination, like the multitude of tiny noises made by drops, envis
aged by Leibniz. The difference, for Whitehead, does not consist i n the
superiority of consciousness over the feeli ng that we can attribute to the
rabbit or over ourselves in most of our experiences. It testifies to a trans
formation of what is at stake. One of the ways to express the difference is
to recal l that the piece of wax does not really interest Descartes: for him,
it is an "example." His experience is dominated by the question of having
to construct a description of it that resists any possible challenge. One
must refuse to the piece of wax everything whose " objective reality " could
be denied . On the contrary, Lei bniz's experiment is dominated by the pos
sibil ity that we may refuse to the world the obscure multiplicity hidden by
our clear perception of the roar of the surf.
                                    T H E   A D V E N TU R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 4 9




   From pedagogic goodwill ( ,'I 'll explain it to you ") to worried specula
tion ("he's going to judge me on the basis of my explanation "), it is,
moreover, not certa i n that i t is always j udicious to leave behind the
doma i n of taste and colors, of trust i n the nature of things, for that of the
adventure of arguments, as is attested by the doctrines that have made
nature bi furcate. The brutal ity of the passage from i mpersona l obvious
ness, "that is just, " to the personal position, "that is what I felt, and now
I have to explain myself," opens the door to what was and remains one
of Whitehea d's grea t concerns, the construction of reasons that, in order
to resist cha llenges, ma ke a c lea n slate of what we nevertheless k now.
This is why consciousness is placed under the banner of novelty, not of
any possibility of tra nscendence. And i f it has something to do with the
question of truth, it is i n terms of " a ttention to truth " (PR, 275 ) : new
risks, new origi na l possibili ties of experience, new contrasts .
   Attention to truth is pri mary with regard to " truth val ues." It refers
rather to the conscious mobil ization of the question of " due attention."
We shall return to this poi nt when we undertake to explore the positive
power of la nguage, which can be a n i ngredient of every social envi ron
ment in which such a question may be ra ised . What needs to be empha
sized here is that attention to truth does not found, for consciousness, any
claim to a privi leged access that would enable us to disqua li fy the experi
ence of the rabbit turning its head. A habitual gesture does not " lack " any
thing, but it is different from a conscious gesture, runs other risks, translates
other urgencies than those, presupposing language, of having to account
for what one " means." The fact that the rabbit, when it turns its head or
bolts, is not equipped for the abstract " how can one recognize a preda
tor ? " does not, ultimately, deprive it of much, as Wittgenstein, moreover,
showed i n a pretty way: most of our discursive definitions try to " follow"
what we " know," and i f a definition contradicts this knowledge, it is the
definition that wi l l be modified .
   Language was developed in response to the excitements of practical ac
tions. It is concerned with the prominent facts. Such facts are those that
are seized upon by consciousness for detailed examination, with a view of
emotional response leading to immediate purposeful action. These promi
nent facts are the variable facts-the appearance of a tiger, of a clap of
thunder, or of a spasm of pain [ . . . 1 But the prominent facts are the super
ficial facts. They vary because they are superficial; and they enter into
conscious discrimination because they vary. There are other elements in
our experience, on the fringe of consciousness, and yet massively qualify
ing our experience. In regard to these other facts, it is our consciousness
that flickers, and not the facts themselves. They are always securely there,
3 50   C O S M O LO G Y




barely discriminated, and yet inescapable. For example, consider our deri
vation from our immediate past of a quarter of a second ago. We are
continuous with it, we are the same as it, prolonging its affective tone,
enjoying its data. A nd yet we are modifying it, deflecting it, changing its
purposes, altering its tone, re-conditioning its data with new elements.
   We reduce this past to a perspective, and yet retain it as the basis for
our present moment of realization. We are different from it, and yet we
retain our individual identity with it. This is the mystery of personal iden
tity, the mystery of the immanence of the past in the present, the mystery
of transience. All our science, all our explanations require concepts origi
nating in this experience of derivation. In respect to such intuitions, lan
guage is peculiarly inadequate ( AI, 2 1 0 ) .
   Ca n you identify the grey o f that stone that you have j ust mentioned i n
this color chart ? Even color ca n be taken u p aga i n in an experience that
testifies to the " mystery of persona l identity." What I have just mentioned,
I suddenly discover to be rather different from a simple perception. This
color, suddenly belonging to the past, does not have much to do with the
shades presented i n the pa int-seller's color chart. When I mentioned it, it
was as if present, preserved, the imma nence of the past i n the present of
my experience. But when summoned to define itself i n a public way, it
becomes mine, a nd j ust as much slips into the past, for it is in contrast
with the evoca tion of an experience qua past that I feel that none of the
shades presented i n a way that a llows them to be compa red quite does
justice to that one, unique and incomparable, that I had loved . But this
conscious hesitation will proba bly be hard to remember when I face the
wa ll once pai nted : it is its color.
   Inadequacy does not mea n denunciation. The point is not to achieve a
" neutra l " consciousness or to oppose the purity of sense evidence, or the
" mystery " of what is a lways there, to hesitant, fea rful, perplexed, or pas
sionate negotiation. Quite the contra ry, it is the i nterest of this negotia
tion, the mutations of experience it brings a bout, that matter, that resitu
ate consciousness, not at all as an avenue to the truth but as the product
and vector of an ad venture.
   In fact, Whitehead is fa r more interested in the adventure of free imagi
nation than in the veraci ty of j udgment. Freedom of imagi nation is not
indifferent to the question of truth but presupposes it i n a n origina l way.
To say " once upon a time," or " let's pretend," or even " let there be " (an
idea l tria ngle) presupposes critical judgment, since these utterances indi
cate the need for its inhibition . " I maginative rationa l ization" a lso implies
the provisional bracketing of the question of the " true." Let us suppose
we can construct a coherent language, equally adequate whatever the
                                      THE   A D V E N TU R E   O F   THE   S E N S E S   3 5 1




experience may be, and let us reserve for the appl ica ble cases the atten
tion to truth req uired by its verification. If speculative philosophy con
cerns the contrast between " true " and " false," it is only via the detour of
that genuine triumph of free imagination that Whitehea d associated with
meta physics, defined as a " d ispassionate consideration of the nature of
things." There is nothi ng indifferent about such an absence of passion,
for it deli berately suspends " what we k now well," that is, what our vari
ous ways of spea k i ng-the one that is a ppropriate for describing me, the
one that is appropriate for describing this keyboard-define as i mpor
tant. Artificially, experimentally, through the imperative of coherence, it
demands that la nguage take cha rge of the experiences compa red with
which it is most i nadequate. This is why "attention to truth " i n the sense
of speculative philosophy does not presuppose critica l consciousness, but
the critica l experience of consciousness. It does not presuppose becoming
awa re of the finitude of experience, but becoming aware of its social and
therefore partial functioning. William Ja mes had suggested mak ing con
sciousness a " function." Whitehea d associates it with a socia l novelty,
which, fa r from defining human experience, " fl ickers " i ntermittently.
   Plura l ism. The sensible, the i ntell igi ble, the problematic, a l l designate
moda lities of sense-experience which, a lthough they a re put on the same
pla ne, m ust be carefully distinguished . The experiences that exhibit in a
domina nt way the releva nce of the category of transmutation- "Sweet! "
" Run a way !"-must not be idea lized, beca use they esca pe a l l hesitation,
nor "overcome," beca use they escape all reason . We must reca l l that they
testify not to the "concrete " but to what is carried out by tra nsmuta tion:
a bstraction.
   Apart from transmutation our feeble intellectual operations would
fail to penetrate into the dominant characteristics of things. We can only
understand by discarding ( PR, 25 1 ) .
   However, the truth of the adventure of the senses is not the abstraction
of transmutation. Already in The Concept of Nature, Whitehead empha
sized the i mporta nce of what we ca l l synesthesia, and which he ca lled
" conveyance of one sense-object by a nother." That fla nnel coat that is
not a blue patch, which I sense i n the mode of " wear" or " touch." The
fact that I ca n be led to admit that ali i see there is a blue form designates
me as vulnera ble to the imperative of havi ng to give an account of my
experience: that is, not as a human being in genera l, but as belonging to
a social adventure, in which the questions that were created by philoso
phy have been taken up by the school i nstitution that accustoms people
to deny, or to pretend to deny, what they are aware of, although they
cannot j ustify it.
3 5 2   C O S M O L O GY




   The blue flannel coat was appropri a te fo r Whitehea d 's project i n
The Concept of Nature, centered a s it was around nature a s what w e are
awa re of in perception. The coat allowed the affirmation that what we are
aware of is not a blue form. But the tri umph of the adventure of the senses
is not that I know that I could touch this coat that is here. What The Con
cept of Nature could only allude to is the experience of presence, the pres
ence that affects us, makes us feel, much more than we perceive it.
   In The Spell of the Sensuous, David Abram suggests associating this
presence-presence of the word, presence of thi ngs-with a convergence
of the senses that places what Whitehead ca lls conveya nce under the ban
ner of the event.
    When the local tomcat comes to visit, I do not have distinctive ex
periences of a visible cat, an audible cat, and an olfactory cat; rather the
tomcat is precisely the place where these separate sensory modalities join
and dissolve into one another, blending as well with a certain furry tactil
ity. Thus, my divergent senses meet up with each other in the surrounding
world, converging and commingling in the things I perceive. We may
think of the sensing body as a kind of open circuit that completes itself
only in things, and in the world. The differentiation of my senses, as well
as their spontaneous convergence in the world at large, ensures that I am
a being destined for relationship: it is primarily through the engagement
with what is not me that I effect the integration of my senses, and thereby
experience my own unity and coherence ( 55, 1 25 ) .
   When I associated the functioning o f a detector with the ability to de
tect a being's presence, I dared to make a comparison with the experience
of a butterfly " detecting" the odor of its female, which means that I de
nied the butterfly the experience descri bed by Abram, that of sensing its
female "as present." The fact that experimenters do not feel the presence,
attested by their detectors, of radioactive atoms or neutrinos is the cor
relate of experi mental practice, whose success is the crea tion of relations
with beings that do not belong to "our" worl d . Yet to refuse the experi
ence "of what is not me " to the butterfly is obviously much more risky,
and only has mea ning in order to try to give all its importance to the
plurality of animal experiences against the hiatus between humans and
animals. Some day, perhaps, for instance, i f neurophysiology succeeds in
associating an aspect of the brain with the achievement constituted by
conveyance, we sha ll lea rn more about the contrast between our experi
ence and that of butterflies. Yet whatever scientists and philosophers may
say, we know, even i f we cannot j usti fy it, that the world is present for a
cat, as it is for Thomas Nagel's famous bat.
   The fact that David Abram took a tomcat as a n example is neverthe
less significant. Many of us have little experience with bats but wi ll pro-
                                     T H E   ADVENTU R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 5 3




test i f we a re told that we know nothing about what it is like to be a cat.
Scientists will then denounce the temptation to a nthropomorphize, to
imagine, i n particular, a reciprocity of attention, a cat that looks at us
as we loo k at it. I nstea d , The Spell of the Sensuous ra ises the question
of the rarefaction of such a n experience i n the midst of a world hence
forth dominated by signs that claim a purely i ntel lectual efficacy. A world
in which the livi ng and expressive presence of cats is an exception.
   Direct, prereflexive perception is inherently synaesthetic, participatory,
and animistic, disclosing the things and the elements that surround us
not as inert objects but as expressive subjects, entities, powers, poten
cies. A nd yet most of us seem, today, very far from such experience.
Trees rarely, if ever, speak to us; animals no longer approach us as emis
saries from alien zones of intelligence; the sun and the moon no longer
draw prayers but seem to arc blindly across the sky. How is it that these
phenomena no longer address us, no longer compel our involvement or
reciprocate our attention? If participation is the very structure of percep
tion, how could it ever have been brought to a halt? To freeze the ongoing
animation, to block the wild exchange between the senses and the things
that engage them, would be tantamount to freezing the body itself, stop
ping it short in its track. A nd yet our bodies still move, still live, still
breathe. If we no longer experience the enveloping earth as expressive
and alive, this can only mean that the animating interplay of the senses
has been transferred to another medium, another focus of participation
(55, 1 30-1 3 1 ) .
    The transformation of experience described by Abram corresponds to
the experience of what, fol lowing Whitehead, I have called the "solitary
consciousnesses," and to its mute, disenchanted world. It is what the bifur
cation of nature turned into the only rational starting point for inquiry. But
the originality of Abram's proposition, which places it within the White
headian tradition, is to reject this idea of disenchantment, with all its con
notations of a truth to be assumed by a humanity that has left its illusions
behind. The enchantment of presence has not disappeared, but it has been
d isplaced. In a dominant way, "our world," the world of most of this
book's readers, is a world " to be read." Isn't reading a text, inseparably, to
see it and to hear it, to feel it as a " presence " different from us ? Don't phi
losophers, who refuse even to a cat the reciproca l attention that its pres
ence nevertheless suggests, address a text as if that text " wanted " some
thing from them ? Aren't they forced to feel and to think " with " that text?
   The fact that, as Abram suggests, read ing inherited the achievement of
synesthetic col laboration, and therefore belongs to the ad venture of the
senses, impl ies that the solitary consciousness does not mark the i rrevers
i ble tri umph of the i ntellectual over the sensible. It would be insepa rable
3 5 4   COSMOLOGY




from an event, from the stra nge fact that written words, made up of al
pha betic signs abstracted from any allusion to the world, have a power
over us, spea k to us, and make us feel in a way that captures our ability
to feel " with." Those who write, but also those who rea d, would then be
under the sway of a " spel l " that comes before awareness beca use it con
cerns the senses . To consider oneself sol itary would then be of the order
of what Whitehead would have ca lled a cultura lly bred exaggeration, a
consequence of what would be, in the first instance, an etho-ecological
mutation .
   It is moreover, the question of this mutation that Whitehead addressed
when, in Science and the Modern World, he ca l led for an education that
provides a ha bit of art, that is, the habit of enjoying living, expressive va l
ues, values which, he affirmed, a re in the world, rather than mere prod
ucts of our imagination. Abram gives this affirmation a ra dical expres
sion, since he dema nds that what we know when we speak of the magic of
a work of art, of a poem, or of a landscape be taken l iterally, to the letter.
   If trees seldom speak to us, literate people, can we accept that written
texts do without claiming it is "only a metaphor" ? The solitary conscious
ness will snicker. Yet what is meant by the demand for a " litera l " under
standing if not the attribution to the written sign of a power over us ? We
shall certainly not learn how to cope with this power by affirming that it is
"only a metaphor." What demands to be understood litera lly is not sepa
rable from the experience of " sheer disclosure" aroused by a text, since it is
aroused by a presence upon which our senses converge. This is attested by
the adventures of mathematics, of poetry, and also of philosophy, all the
adventures in which one does not feel oneself to be the master of what one
writes, but where writing forces one to think, to feel, and to create. And the
very writing of Process and Reality not only belongs to this adventure but
affirms it. When Whitehead writes that all the concepts that will be defined
in it appea l, silently, to a leap of the imagination ( PR, 4), he testifies to his
experience as a writer but also warns his readers that they will have to
make themselves available to the efficacy of the text, or else close the book.
   In this perspective, the idea, current among contemporary phi loso
phers, that it is la nguage that has sepa ra ted us from thi ngs, is one that
could only be conceived by those who have the benefit of the powers of
thought, ana lysis, memory, and conjecture that have been contributed by
writing. Only the spell of writing ma kes intelligible the idea a discursive
world closed upon itself, in which the meaning of all words could be ex
plained by reference to other word s. And when the thesis that there is
no such thing as a " perfect dictionary" is celebrated as a major event of
thought, the power of the spell is not broken, but rises to new i ntensi ty.
                                    T H E   A D V E N TU R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 5 5




  The account of the sixth day should be written, He gave them speech,
and they became souls (MT, 4 1 ) .
    Writing i n this way the account of the day when humans (after most
animals) were created would mean giving to wri tten words the poetic
power to lead us back to wha t, for Whitehead, is specifically human: the
power of spoken words over our experience. H umans are those whom
words can inspi re, or bewitch, enrage, or kill. This is why the tale of the
sixth day should not tel l the story of man's creation in the image of God,
but of the efficacy of spoken language, which is " received " by every hu
man offspring. And the souls humans became are not, primordially, ratio
nal ones. " Men are the children of the Universe, with foolish enterprises
and irrational hopes " (MT, 3 0 ) . The adven ture of reason itself is a some
what mad adventure.
    This is why the adventure of the sensa is not over. Hasn't one of its
prolongations, in the course of the somewhat mad history known as phi
losophy, been the somewhat irrational hope that the data of the senses
might define a " pure " perception ? It is in this capaci ty that " blue" was
engaged by David Hume in a speculative adventure, which was to be
taken up and prolonged in Process and R eality in a mode that would
certainly have surprised Hume himsel f. I refer to the thought experiment
involving the " case of the missing shade of blue."
    Like all phi losophical thought experiments, this case corresponds to a
highly artificial si tuation, conceived to ill ustrate a phi losophical abstrac
tion, and unlike thought experiments in physics, it does not communicate
with any conceivable experi mental invention . Hume imagi nes a person
familiar with all colors except a shade of blue, which she has never en
countered . Suppose she is presented with a color chart featuring a l l the
tones of bl ue, except that shade: she would, Hume supposes, perceive a
"gap," a hiatus, discontinuity, or lack. The question is whether her imagi
nation wi l l enable her to fill that gap, and to positively imagine the shade
of blue she has never seen.
    If Hume's question is valid for Whitehead, it is because Whitehead has
accepted as a constraint, in order to think of any concrescence, the thesis
that i ntegration draws all of its resources from its primary phase, con
ceived in terms of " physical feelings " and the conceptual feelings that de
rive from them . He even baptized th is constraint " Hume's pri nci ple," as
i f he were repeating-in a slightly modified form, of course-Hume's
central thesis that all our simple ideas, when they first emerge, are derived
from simple impressions.
  Conceptual feelings and simple causal feelings constitute the two main
species of "primary " feelings. All other feelings of whatever complexity
3 5 6   COSMO LOGY




arise out of a process of integration which starts with a phase of these
primary feelings. There is, however, a difference between the species. A n
actual entity i n the actual world o f a subject must enter into the concres
cence of that subject by some simple causal feeling, however vague, triv
ial, and submerged. Negative prehensions may eliminate its distinctive
importance. But in some way, by some trace of causal feeling, the remote
actual entity is prehended positively. In the case of an eternal object,
there is no such necessity. In any given concrescence, it may be included
positively by means of a conceptual feeling; but it may be excluded by a
negative prehension ( PR, 2 3 9 ) .
   That which, for Hume, served to question the pretentions of experi
ences to go beyond " empi rical " data has become a n experimental con
stra int for Whitehead . More preci sely, " Hume's principle" is that thanks
to which the extent of the ontologica l principle, what it imposes and
what it forbids, will be able to unfold and measure itself against the de
mand of adequacy. The primary phase col lects all the ca uses that can be
invoked for concrescence, except the ca use that the latter will constitute
for itsel f. Its characterization, marked by the distinction between physi
cal or "causa l " feelings and conceptual feel ings, gives a good translation
of the distinction between the "ca use "-what will, in one way or another,
function as a " reason "-and the open question of how it will cause, or of
what determination it will become the reason .
   Initial physical feel ings, feel ings having actual entities as their data, are
limited to reproducing themselves: what has been felt is to be felt again.
This is the " power" proper to objective immorta lity. The way it will fi
nally be felt, however, is pa rt of the subjective decision . The eternal ob
jects that are the data of the initial conceptual feelings may be eliminated
by negative prehension . Conceptua l feelings, because they enter into the
heritage without obl iging it, thus reflect the problematic dimension that
is generally concea led by the notion of cause: to cause, of course, but
how? No cause has the power to prescribe the way it will cause. What
has been felt in this way might be felt otherwise, or might find itself be
reft of any distinct importance.
   Whoever says constra int also says " putting to the test." Ultimately, it is
adequacy that will j udge. If " Hume's principle" were to lead to explana
tion by elimination, it would have to be a bandoned, but it can be a ban
doned only a fter what it authorized has been ful ly deployed first. And it
is therefore here that the " case of the missing shade of blue" assumes its
speculative importance, for this case raises the question of " what was not
felt," and more precisely of an " unreal ized eternal object " in the primitive
phase. How, without infringing the ontologica l principle that prescribes
                                     T H E   A D V E N T U R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 5 7




that actual entities are "the only reasons," could such an eterna l object
make ingression ?
   This question should not make us think that, independently of the pos
sibility, sti ll in suspense, of such an i ngression, there wo uld only be a
more or less selective transmission without true originality. If Whitehead
had thought this, he would have thought like a poor mathema tician, re
ferring the essential aspect of the difficulty to a unique and obscure ques
tion after having defined as a " regular," unproblematic so l ution a rather
uninteresting case in which creativity is only exemplified under the a spect
of a possi bility to neglect, not to ta ke into account. Good mathemati
cians do not refer everything that ca uses problems to one vast undiffer
entiated category: they learn to discern the difficulty, that is, correlatively,
to enlarge the class of " regular" solutions as broadly as possible. This is
what Whitehead has done, by distinguishing between pure physica l feel
i ngs and " hybrid " physica l feeli ngs in the gamut of physica l feelings.
   In a "pure physical feeling " the actual entity which is the datum is ob
;ecti{ied by one of its own physical feelings [ . . . I in a "hybrid physical
feeling " the actual entity forming the datum is ob;ecti{ied by one of its
own conceptual feelings ( PR, 245-24 6 ) .
   Thanks to hybrid physica l feelings, " Hume's principle" a l ready autho
rizes by itself a grea t va riety of cases connecting " i nheriting" and "creat
ing." As Whitehead remarks ( PR, 246 ), the entities for which hybrid feel
ings are important designate societies for which the notion of energy,
conserved and transmitted, loses not its va lid ity but its relevance. The
function i ng of a living body conserves energy, of course, but a decompos
ing cadaver conserves it j ust as wel l . A bacterium swimming up a gradi
ent of sugar concentration combines a movement with a contrast ( more
or less suga ry ), and it is this contrast as such that, together with its social
repercussions, "explains " the movement for the biologist. I n genera l, the
originality of living beings with rega rd to thei r environment, attested by
living societies, requires that the subjecti ve form acquired by conceptual
feelings i n the course of a n i ntegration (an intensive eva l uation, which
Whitehead calls "a dversion" if it is positive, and " a versio n " if there is
attenuation or elimination) may be felt as such. Si nce the most typica l
manifesta tion of original ity is partiality, that is, adversion or aversion,
the feeling of these subjective forms is part of what may crucially matter.
Furthermore, for sophisticated experiences, what may come to play a
role are " the sca rs " of what an entity's heritage has avoided, the subjec
tive emotion associated with what might have been but is not.
   Nevertheless, hybrid p hysica l feelings do not solve the q uestion of
unrealized eterna l objects any more than this question is sol ved by the
3 S 8   C O S M O LO G Y




category of transmutation, implying an initial phase in which the same
conceptual feeling may be derived impartially from the feeli ngs of multiple
entities. What i s new i n transmuted feeling is the mode of ingression of
the eternal object, but not the eterna l object itself. The fact that the same
eternal object is i mpl icated is essential to rea l ism-the green of this leaf
does indeed belong to the leaf-but this is precisely what cannot be the
case with the missing shade of blue, first percei ved insofar as it is lacki ng,
and then, eventually, experienced for itself.
   Th is shade of blue i s certa inly not a spectacular case of conceptual in
novation. Just as the sensa have as their primary i nterest the possibil ity of
a transmission indifferent to the disparate character of social environ
ments, so the sensum corresponding to that shade has as its only interest
to give a simple i l l ustration, debatable as such, of the question of the en
try into the world of a new eternal object, not real ized in the transmi tted
heritage.
   But this question is crucial for Whitehea d, since it is connected with
that of relevance. I f a nonrealized sensum can make ingression into expe
rience, it is because the order of the color chart makes its a bsence "glar
ing," because its i ngression responds in a relevant way to what is felt as a
" lack ." In Whitehead's thought, relevance is closely linked to the cosmo
logical question. Novelty, in the cosmologica l sense, is always " relevant
novelty." Therefore, wherever blue is " missing," God is not far, for God is
precisely that thanks to which what has been realized is plunged i nto the
possi ble, that thanks to which realization is not the last word .
   The things which are temporal arise by their participation in the things
which are eternal. The two sets are mediated by a thing which combines
the actuality of what is temporal with the timelessness of what is potential.
This final entity is the divine element in the world, by which the barren
inefficient disjunction of abstract potentialities obtains primordially the ef
ficient conjunction of ideal realization. This ideal realization of potentiali
ties in a primordial actual entity constitutes the metaphysical stability
whereby the actual process exemplifies general principles of metaphysics,
and attains the ends proper to specific types of emergent order. By reason
of the actuality of this primordial valuation of pure potentials, each eternal
object has a definite, effective relevance to each concrescent process. Apart
from such orderings, there would be a complete disjunction of eternal ob
jects unrealized in the temporal world. Novelty would be meaningless, and
inconceivable. We are here extending and rigidly applying Hume's princi
ple, that ideas of reflection are derived from actual facts ( PR, 40) .
  The author who wrote these lines could not raise the problem of the
missing shade of blue, since this problem did not exist for him. In fact, this
                                     T H E   ADVENTU R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 59




author was quite close to the one who, in Science and the Modem World                     ,


had defined the ideal situation as implying all the eternal objects. For him,
the "prima ry phase " issued from an " ordering"-here, at last, is the "di
vine ordering"-implying a relation of relevance defined for all eternal
objects. The fact that in other passages of Process and Reality Whitehead
accepts the problem of the missing shade of blue thus i ndicates the meta
morphosis undergone by the "cosmotheological " economy of Process and
Reality in the course of its writing. For there to be a problem, the divine
ordering, whatever its role may be, must no longer have an answer for
everythi ng, that is, the i nitial phase of a concrescence must contain feel
ings of all the actual enti ties ( the principle of relativity), but its conceptual
feelings must be li mited exclusively to eternal objects that have been real
ized . Hume's principle, far from being a ble to be "extended and rigidly
applied," then begins to ra ise the problem of what it excludes.
   We do not know what determined Whitehead's transformation on this
point. Perhaps it was a dynamic li nked to the increasing importance he
gave to the constraint of having to resist the slope of "great explanations "
and their power to explain anything and everythi ng. The fact that the
"divine element in the worl d " can be responsible for the relations of rele
vance of all the eternal objects with regard to each process of concres
cence, constitutes such an explanation. At the limit, the ontological prin
ciple did not yet need, on this hypothesis, to be formulated, for it would
not have entailed any constrai nt: divine actuality satisfies it every time.
   Correlatively, the divine ordering ra n the risk of crushing the actuality
of what is temporal . I f eternal objects have recei ved thei r degree of rele
vance prior to a ny subjective decision, the essentia l point has been de
cided. The idea that occasional becoming is "cause of itself" threatens to
be a mere hypocritica l witticism. In fact, it would rather be akin to a
si mple a ppropriation . The subject comes into existence where a perspec
tive is already proposed, and this perspective includes unrealized possibles
" ordered as a function of their relevance " by primordial evaluation. In
other words, what is proposed to the subject a l ready designates the way
in which it will, eventually, be able to prod uce releva nt novelty.
   In fact, i f what one inherits is already unified, the question of how one
inherits is about as open as that of how to function for a functionary: there
are ways to sabotage, to cheat, to let oneself be corrupted, to commit faults
with incalculable consequences, in short, to poison one's envi ronment, but
not to play its meaning over again. Unity demands conformity. The rela
tion between individuals and thei r language, it will be noted, is quite dif
ferent. They inherit it, of course, and learning it fashions, one by one, each
of the human offspring who accomplish that incredi ble tour de force of
3 6 0   COSMOLOGY




learning to speak . But it does not have a unity such that it would assign a
role to human beings, si nce it also enables them, to a certain extent, to ask
the question of this role. Is it not, moreover, this possibility of questioning
that is req uired by speculative philosophy itself, as also by all the adven
tures in which people risk something other than their body?
   The risk Whitehead faced can be stated on the basis of the contrast
between language and grammar, i n the sense that the latter demands con
formity and claims to define the normal usages of a language. If one ad
heres to such a claim, each particular utterance becomes a simple case,
and each locutor can be j udged . Likewise, concrescence could be assimi
lated to a mode of real ization of a preexistent possible and j udged on the
basis of the way this possible will be realized, the way the concrescence
wi ll prod uce, qua realized novel ty, that whose perti nence has al ready
been ideally defined .
   The clarity with which I have j ust defined this risk is the retroactive
product of the iti nerary that led Whitehead to a ffirm the occasional be
coming as " cause of i tself," and the ontological principle as restrictive.
These affirmations probably did not preexist in thei r capacity as con
stra ints, but i ssued from the flight of experience, and probably coincide
wi th the tipping point where Whitehead separates himself from his refer
ence to an "eternal activity " and adopts creativity as an ultimate. And it
is probably along multiple paths that the difficulty " percolated," quietly
insi sting through the silence cast over unformulated objections. Be that
as it may, the case of the missing shade of blue allows us to follow a story
in which the conseq uences of this " becoming aware " are played out.
   Thus, Whitehead will first answer the question of the missing blue by
the fifth category of obligation, the " category of conceptual reversion."
This category authorizes a second source of conceptual feelings, not con
tained within the initial phase. New eternal objects could make ingression
if their di fference with obj ects already realized is relevant. This relevance,
Whitehead specifies, is determi ned by the " subjecti ve aim," by the concres
cent subject qua aiming at its own sel f-determination. The divine order
ing, qua implying the relevance for experience of all eternal objects, has
already absented itself. No doubt, moreover, the categories of obli gation
were born from this mutation, for they answer the challenge of rendering
explicit what "obliges " a concrescent process in a way that excludes all
preliminary determination.
  Thus, the first phase of the mental pole is conceptual reproduction,
and the second phase is a phase of conceptual reversion. In this second
phase the proximate novelties are conceptually felt. This is the process by
which the subsequent enrichment of subjective forms, both in qualitative
                                    T H E   A D V E N T U R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 6 1




pattern, and in intensity through contrast, is made possible by the posi
tive conceptual prehension of relevant alternatives. There is a conceptual
contrast of physical incompatibilities [ . . . I But it does limit the rigid
application of Hume's principle. Indeed Hume himself admitted excep
tions [ . . . I This "aim at contrast " is the expression of the ultimate cre
ative purpose that each unification shall achieve some maximum depth
of intensity of feeling, subject to the conditions of its concrescence. This
ultimate purpose is formulated in Category VllI ( PR, 249 ) .
   The eighth categoreal obl igation, which deals with " su bj ective inten
sity," states that the subjective aim is at the origin of the evaluation (ad
version and aversion ) of conceptual feeli ngs, a nd that what i s ai med at,
what gives its ulti mate meaning to the creation of the subject by itself, is
the intensity of a feeling. It is thus the subject's a im, bringing into exis
tence a contrast, a new possibil ity of i ntensity, that satisfies the ontologi
cal principle. The fact that Whitehead refers expl icitly i n this regard to
Religion in the Making in a note gives a good ind ication of what is at
stake. Conceptual reversion makes possible the transformation of de
structive oppositions i nto positively felt contrasts. And the very experi
ence of the person who, faced by the " lack of a shade," i magi nes the
missing shade, i s an a bstract example of a properly cosmic event, when
the future possibility of a still-inconceivable contrast intervenes a s a de
termining factor in the experience of a destructive confl ict.
   Everything thus seems to be taken care of. Except that the category of
reversion not only signifies a " limit" to Hume's principle but raises an
other problem, much more serious. The eternal objects, which must be
indifferent to their own ingressions, here run the risk of exhibiting them
selves as nonindifferent, partial, correlated, and even endowed with the
abil ity to cause their own i ngression. For what does " relevance" mean i f
not a relation of intrinsic proximity between eternal objects ? B u t i f this
relevance is no longer med iated by God 's divine ordering, i f it intervenes
in one of the categoreal obligations that determine what every concres
cence can and should do, doesn't this proximity become intrinsic ? This
would mean that the real ized eterna l objects themselves explain and give
rise to feelings of unrealized objects. In that case, however, eternal objects
would no longer be a multiplicity, but should be characterized as togeth
erness, that is, endowed with intri nsic relations. They thus risk acquiring
the ideal power that the ontologica l principle expl icitly denies them.
Eterna l objects do not have the power to make a d ifference by them
selves, even if only by relations of proximity : no ideal proximity can be
invoked as a cause or explanation for the creation of a " but then . . . "
implying a relevant association. For eternal obj ects would then say some-
3 6 2   COSMOLOGY




thing, i f not a bout themselves then at least a bout their relations of prox
imi ty. They would no longer be " pure potentia ls." But if eterna l objects
" say " anything at all a bout their ingressions, the enti re problem is turned
upside down . No ha lf-measures a re possi ble, and they will be in com
mand. Whitehead has thus moved from the Charybdis of an overly deter
minant God to the Scylla of insistent eterna l objects.
   And suddenly, at the end of a paragraph, the problem and the solu
tion are made expl icit a t the same time, when Whitehead announces a
rearrangement of the categories of obligation .
  The question, how, and in what sense, one unrealized eternal object can
be more, or less, proximate to an eternal object in realized ingression
that is to say, in comparison with any other unfelt eternal object-is left
unanswered by the Category of Reversion. In conformity with the onto
logical principle, this question can be answered only by reference to some
actual entity. Every eternal object has entered into the conceptual feelings
of God. Thus, a more fundamental account must ascribe the reverted con
ceptual feeling in a temporal subject to its conceptual feeling derived, ac
cording to Category I V, from the hybrid physical feeling of the relevancies
conceptually ordered in God's experience. In this way, by the recognition
of God's characterization of the creative act, a more complete rational
explanation is obtained. The Category of Reversion is then abolished, and
Hume's principle of the derivation of conceptual experience from physical
experience remains without any exception ( PR, 249-250) .
   Th is is n o doubt Whitehead's most fa mous insertion, because i n its
case his procedure leaps to the eyes. The category of conceptual rever
sion , whose abolition he announces, will con tinue to be used imperturb
ably in the pages that follow. Whitehead will l imit hi msel f to adding, a
few pages before, the reasons for which what has j ust happened to him,
the necessity that an actual occasion ( physically) " feel " God, was obvi
ously necessary . . . retroactively.
   The limitation of Hume's principle introduced by the consideration
of the Category of Conceptual Reversion [ . . . 1 is to be construed as
referring merely to the transmission from the temporal world, leaving
God out of account. Apart from the intervention of G od, there could be
nothing new in the world, and no order in the world. The course of
creation would be a dead level of ineffectiveness, with all balance and
intensity progressively excluded by the cross currents of incompatibil
ity. The novel hybrid feelings derived from God, with the derivative
sympathetic conceptual valuations, are the foundations of progress
( PR, 247).
                                    T H E   A DVENTU R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 6 3




   David Hume would no doubt have been rather surprised that " the case
of the missing shade " finds its solution in a feel ing directly derived from
God. As fa r as we a re concerned, to speak with Leibniz, while we might
have thought that we had a lmost reached port, here we are thrown back
on the high seas, and even into a stormy ocean . For it is one thing to link,
as was the case i n Religion in the Making, the theme of progress, or the
possibil ity that evil may be overcome, with a cosmology i mplicating God.
It is quite another to attribute to an actual entity a " hybrid feeling" de
rived from God, and more precisely--otherwise we would rediscover a
new version of the bifurcation of nature-to attribute such a hybrid feel
ing to every actual entity.
   It is a lways hard, especially with Whitehead, to know to what extent
creators are aware of the problems that they have not yet provided them
selves with the means to solve. Did Whitehead tel l hi mself " this will
do fine l i ke that," or " that ought to be enough " ? Did he know, when he
evoked the divine ordering, that a shadowy zone remained, loading down
his own future with " I shal l have to go back to that " ? The fact that his
later books preserved the conceptual construction of Process and Reality
does not, moreover, prove that he was not feeling other silent, insistent
dissatisfactions, felt scars of negative prehensions. Fatigue can mark the
end of an adventure: it is up to others, if possible, to prolong it. Neverthe
less, the " hybrid feel ing of God," a triumph of the ontological principle, is
calling for new conceptual articulations. In Christian theology, God's prov
idential function never did get along very wel l with his eternity, and White
head criticized lame theologico-metaphysical compromises too strongly
not to finally tackle the problem. Once he has fi nished with what Lewis
Ford has called his " final revisions," God will be endowed with a conse
quent nature, that is, a " physica l " pole derived from the temporal world:
we will come to that at the end of our itinerary. As far a s the process of
concrescence is concerned, it will undergo, and it is to this that we turn
now, a transformation that will definitively drive away the specter of a
unification that could be cal led the realization of an ideal possibility.
                                                  C H A P T E R TW E NT Y - ON E
