Actuality between Phys ics and the D i v i ne




     'F  WE SUBSTITUTE THE TERM        "energy " for the concept of a quan
     ! titative emotional intensity, and the term "form of energy " for the
     I concept of "specific form of feeling," and remember that in physics
"vector" means definite transmission from elsewhere, we see that this
metaphysical description of the simplest elements in the constitution of
actual entities agrees absolutely with the general principles according to
which the notions of modern physics are framed ( PR, 1 1 6 ) .
  When i t comes to Process and Reality, we must be careful a t every
step. The absolute agreement with the general principles associated with
modern physics that is clai med here refers us directly to an ancient hope,
ceaselessly rei nvented. In The Concept of Nature, Whitehead proposed
the relation between the electron a nd its field as a simplified but i mpor
tant example of the ingression of an object into an event. The insepara
bility of the electron, characterized by scalar quantities such as energy,
mass, and charge, and its field ( vectorial and delocalized ) constituted a
typical example of the way physics itsel f denounces the misplaced con
creteness of simple localization. Whitehead, at the time he was wri ting
his Gi fford lectures, the text of which, somewhat modified, would finally
become Process and Reality, apparently thought he could mainta i n the
terms of an agreement he had long envisaged.
   It is on the basis of this obstinate continuity that one can understand
the importance of the conceptual transformation I set forth in the con
text of the case of the missing shade of blue. Thi s transformation could
certai nly not be i nspired by the physicists' electron, for no situation
studied by physics seems to req uire the ingression of unrealized eternal
                   ACTU A L I TY   B E T W E E N   PHYSI CS   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 6 5




objects. The fl ight of speculative experience, reassembling the notion of
actuality from top to bottom, had as its starting point the extremely so
phisticated actual entities with regard to which the question of con
sciousness arises-for insta nce, philosophers asking the question of the
hiatus in the color chart of blues. Yet Whitehead intends to produce an
interpretation applicable both to thin kers and to electrons, to novelty
and to conformity. The electron must therefore be d ragged i nto the up
hea val provoked by the thin ker. The question can then be asked of
whether the upheaval in question has finally destroyed what Whitehead
attributed so much value to : the agreement of his metaphysics with the
genera l principles of physics. The text is si lent on this subject: Whitehead
allowed the passages expressing the importance of this agreement to re
ma in, but, here as elsewhere, he seems to have left it up to his readers to
" fil l in the blan ks," at their own risks and peri ls.
    Rather curiously, a path can indeed be constructed that maintains,
throughout all its conceptua l tra nsformations, Whitehead 's ambi tion of
a metaphysics that generalizes physics while bringing to l ight the partial
and selective character of its successes. This path, which I sha l l take, will
proceed by way of what is called " second generation " quantum formal
ism, which many commentators have a ffirmed raises " explicitly meta
physica l " problems, concerning the very existence of a " real i ty in itself."
In fact, Whitehead's si lence with rega rd to the speculations i nspired by
quantum forma lism, which however began at the very time when he was
writing Process and Reality, is rather remarkable. He never commented
on the theses according to which it is henceforth i mpossi ble to speak of
"objective" physical rea lity, definable independently of the measuring op
eration, even independently of the mind of the person for whom measure
ment has significance. We can understand this if we reca ll that he did not
like to criticize, for the great alternatives deployed by these speculations
are so ma ny variations on the theme of the bifurca tion of nature. Either
this bifurcation is solved by an absolute triumph of the " secondary quali
ties" over the " primary qualities "-this is what is celebrated by those who
have opted for the radical negation a l l " physica l reality," the only " object"
of quantum mechanics then designating the results of the measurements
that we c hoose to ca rry out. O r else it is resolved by the a potheosis of
dualism: quantum rea lity would then be theoretica l ly wel l defined, via
Schrod inger's equation, for instance, but defined qua unknowa ble, with
knowledge, for its part, referring to us, to our " becoming aware," assimi
lated to so many fragmentations of what cannot be fragmented, produc
ing answers tha t are purely relative to the mode of questioning that condi
tions them. Or else again , as Whitehead predicted would be the case every
3 6 6   C O S M O L O G Y




time mind and nature intervened together, speculation makes the whole
powder magazine explode, si nce measurement would then signify the
conscious mind's power of direct intervention upon matter.
    Here it is i mportant to recal l that the disti nction Whitehead ma kes as
early a s Science and the Modern World, between the mental and the
physical, does not offer any analogy with what the i nterpreters of quan
tum mechanics distinguish as " mind " and "matter." Whiteheadian " phys
ical feeling" i ncludes the feel i ngs of everythi ng that has obtained i mmor
tal objectivi ty, be it an "electronic" occasion or an occasional thought. In
other words, we must accept that among what constitutes a heritage for
the electronic occasion, there are a lso the physicist's feel i ngs. The differ
ence between the practice of the physicist and that of the psychologist
consists i n the fact that an electronic occasion cannot create a relevant
i ntegration between what the enduring society to which it belongs offers
to its feeling, a nd what is felt a bout it by the physicist. Unlike the relation
of double capture constituted, for i nsta nce, by an operation of taming or
seduction, the relation of k nowledge between physicist a nd electron des
ignates its terms as dominated by mutually i ncompatible modes of feel
i ng. The stubborn end urance of the material societies that maintain the
thread of their conformity has nothing to do with the physicists' doubts.
But the physicists' questions, taking advantage of this conformity, j ust as
much ignore what could testify to " mental pole" of the occasions whose
" routes " they study, relegati ng, if need be, what escapes this conformity
to the unknowable: it is impossi ble to expla i n why a n unstable radioac
tive nucleus breaks apart at one moment rather than at another.
   The privilege of physics, when it comes to understanding the " physical
pole," that is, the first phase of a process of concrescence, thus does not
designate physics as a " science of matter" as opposed to mind . Instead, it
can be claimed that it designates physics as highly selective, since the ar
ticulation it risks between experi mental research and mathematica l cre
ation makes full use of the conformity of i nheritance of the processes it
selects. The i nventive, relevant, and rigorous definition of physico
mathematica l notions is what interested Whitehead in The Concept of
Nature, and it is the adventure of this definition that I will use as a guide
to unfold the radical nature of the transformation that will a ffect the
" physical pole" of the actual enti ty. This transformation will enable cre
ativity to be defined as the ultimate, actua lity as causa sui, a nd the onto
logical principle as restrictive. First, however, we must begin (aga i n ) with
the beginning, that is, what Whitehead was thinking i n 1 927.
  The first phase is the phase of pure reception of the actual world in its
guise of objective datum for aesthetic synthesis. In this phase there is the
                  ACTU A L I T Y   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I C S   A N D   THE   D I V I N E   3 6 7




mere reception of the actual world as a multiplicity of private centres of
feeling, implicated in a nexus of mutual presupposition. The feelings are
felt as belonging to the external centres, and are not absorbed into the
private immediacy. The second stage is governed by the private ideal,
gradually shaped in the process itself; whereby the many feelings, deriva
tively felt as alien, are transformed into a unity of aesthetic appreciation
immediately felt as private [ . . . 1 in the language of physical science, the
"scalar " form overwhelms the original "vector" form: the origins become
subordinate to the individual experience. The vector form is not lost, but
is submerged as the foundation of the scalar superstructure ( PR, 2 1 2 ) .
   In physics, forces a n d fields, which are vectorial, designate the inter
dependent character of a rea l ity, in which everything that occurs refers
to something else. As for energy, it is a scalar quantity, and is required by
measurement: every act of measure i mplies an exchange of energy. In the
correspondences Whitehead is suggesting here, physics, confronted by
diverse experi mental situations and the power and constraints of mathe
matics, has therefore created a distinction that can be genera l ized . In this
general ization, what physics cha racterizes as an individua l , defined as
loca l izable by the role it plays in energetic exchanges, will designate " in
dividuals qua feel ing their world," or concrescence qua ta king a determi
nate position with regard to what it has received or, more precisely, com
i ng into existence qua this taking of position, and therefore insepa rable
from what has become " thei r " world.
   The characterization of concrescence that results from this general iza
tion could have been produced by the a uthor of Science and the Modern
World, or more precisely by the author who, having finished writing Sci
ence and Modern World, would have undertaken to render explicit the
aspects left in the dark, and in particular the link between realization as
"a gathering of things in the unity of a prehension "-a cavalier general
ization of Berkeley's thesis-and the theme of the atomic nature of the
world of becoming. Such a link had only been risked from the viewpoint
of the envisagement of eternal objects, that is, from the viewpoint of pos
sibilities of value, whereas the question of "event-related processes," and
hence of va lue, had remained unexplored . All that remained would be to
conceive of that val ue, the way the " scalar" form " overwhel ms" the i nitial
" vectorial " form.
   It is impossible to deal with the " physica l pole " (vectorial ) without
dealing at the same time with the divine. For here, of course, we encounter
the objection I had raised with rega rd to the " triple envisagement" pro
posed in Science and the Modern World, that is, the possibility of reduc
ing Whiteheadian concrescence to what Gilles Deleuze calls " realization ,"
3 6 8   COSMOLOGY




as opposed to " actua lization." To what extent is private a ppropriation not
reducible to a selection in the midst of what is a lready potentially well
defined ? To what extent is the contrast between " possibility of value,"
corresponding to an idea l situation, and " va l ue," an actual taking of a po
sition, not reducible to the passage to existence of a possible that lacked
only existence ? The term " energy " is, from this viewpoint, highly compro
mising. It is precisely the great success of rationa l dynamics to have a rticu
lated "energy " and "di fference in potentia l " in a complete a nd coherent
way. Every measurement is, of course, i ntimately linked, directly or i ndi
rectly, to a n exchange i n energy, but i n dynamics " actual energy," as it can
be measured through scalar effects, bears witness in a way that is com
plete and without remai nder to the vectorial potential of which it is the
real ization. This is what makes dynamics the ideal to which physicists re
fer when they call themselves " realists."
   To i l l uminate the situation a s it presented itself to Whitehead in 1 927,
let us address a nother fragment from the same period of composition.
Here, Whitehead comments on the selective character inherent i n the pro
cess by which multiple feelings are transformed into a unique aesthetic
appreciation.
   Again the selection involved in the phrase "selective concrescence " is
not a selection among the components of the objective content; for, by
hypothesis, the objective content is a datum. The compatibilities and in
compatibilities which impose the perspective, transforming the actual
world into a datum, are inherent in the nature of things. Thus the selection
is a selection of relevant eternal objects whereby what is a datum from
without is transformed into its complete determination as a fact within.
The problem which the concrescence solves is, how the main components
of the objective content are to be unified in one felt content with its com
plex subjective form. This one felt content is the "satisfaction," whereby
the actual entity is its particular individual self; to use Descartes ' phrase,
"requiring nothing but itself in order to exist." In the conception of the
actual entity in its phase of satisfaction, the entity has attained its indi
vidual separation from other things; it has absorbed the datum, and it
has not yet lost itself in the swing back to the "decision " whereby its ap
petition becomes an element in the data of other entities superseding it.
Time has stood still-if only it could ( PR, 1 54 ) .
   In fact, what emerges i n this text is that there a re two " moments " of
selection. The first, which transcends the actual entity, is here relegated to
the " na ture of things " : it is the compatibil ities a nd the i ncompatibilities
inherent in this na ture of things that determine what the " perspective "
of the concrescence wi l l be. In other word s, this perspecti ve will concern
                   ACT U A L I T Y   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I C S   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 6 9




what is a l ready defined as unifia ble, a ppropria ble, which corresponds
to the notion of a n idea l situation envisaged i n Science and the Modern
World. A certa i n "ordering " has ta ken place, i ncompati bilities have al
ready been eliminated . A " datum" is proposed, and, to characterize this
da tum, we rea d elsewhere ( PR, 1 50 ) of " settlement," which designates
both an "esta blishment," an " agreement" between parties, a nd a " deci
sion " solving a problem, founding a new depa rture. The matter is closed .
In short, what the entity " finds " is not a multiplicity but a ma tter that is
already settled, a heri tage offeri ng the " rea l potentiality" that the data
that make it up be felt i n a unified way, as a datum.
   The final stage, the "decision," is how the actual entity, having attained
its individual "satisfaction," thereby adds a determinate condition to the
settlement for the future beyond itself. Thus the "datum " is the "decision
received," and the "decision " is the "decision transmitted." Between these
two decisions, received and transmitted, there lie the two stages, "pro
cess " and "satisfaction." The datum is indeterminate as regards the final
satisfaction [ . . . I The actual entity, in becoming itself, also sallies the
question as to wha t it is to be ( PR, 1 50 ) .
   We ha ve once again t o dea l with the problem left in suspense b y the
underlying eternal activity of Science and the Modern World. The "divine
ordering," i nherent in the " na ture of things," corresponds to the envis
agement of the " idea l situation," with rega rd to which entities wi ll have
to choose " by addition of the future " what they a re to be . The " triple
envisagement " has thus simply become the way in which God, envisaging
the tota lity of eternal objects, settles the dea l that will be a l lotted to the
entity. It is on the ba sis of this dea l that an entity must decide what it will
be, i n somewhat the sa me way that gamblers decide what their play wi ll
be on the basis of the ca rds they have been dea lt, a l l of which are com
patible with the rules of the ga me. Here, therefore, datum is not the sin
gular of data, the datum of a particular feeling, to be unified with the
others. The datum is the hand dea lt, a l ready cha racterized by a form of
togetherness which the actua l entity will have to a ppropriate.
   The contrast between vector and sca lar, as i nvented by physics, would
then be wha t is genera lized by the difference between the possibility of
va lue a nd va l ue. Before moving from this observation to the possi bi lity
of going further, whose necessity it confirms, it is appropriate to think, with
Whitehead, a bout why this genera lization seemed so promising to him.
   It is first i mportant to emphasize that we have to do here with an
" imaginative rationaliza tion," for Whitehead did not ta ke up this contrast
as such from physics. I nstead, by mea ns of the example of the electron
and its field, Whitehead has given centra l importa nce to what ra tiona l
370    COS M O LOGY




dynamics al lowed to be omitted when it identified energy and potential
(energy) difference, the tra nsition from potentia lity to actuality. Yet it is
precisely thanks to this identification that the dynamic designation seems
to designate an " obj ective" world defined as intrinsica lly measura ble, ex
plaining by itself the sca lar quantities in terms of which physicists carry
out their measurements. Correlatively, by accentuating the i rreducible
contra st between sca lar description and vectorial description, Whitehead
adopts a position with regard to what became a critical problem for
physicists, with the quantum model of the atom proposed by Niels Bohr.
Bohr's atom articulates two types of components, whose heterogeneity is
now exhi bited : a dynamic type of descri ption (and therefore vectoria l )
o f the " stationary states," and a sca lar characterization o f the energetic
exchanges to which this atom is liable when it " changes sta tes " in a way
that dynamics cannot descri be ( the famous " q uantum jump " ) . White
head's genera lization thus does not obey physics, but has as its starting
point a physics in crisis: in one way or another, physicists know that,
when interrogating an atom, they can no longer recount its adventures as
if they were the simple description of a well-defined being, endowed with
strictly functiona l behavior.
    In my commentary on the triple envisagement, I emphasized that its
defect was that it did not i nspire any appetite for the question of actual
ity. I was right, but this reason needs to be reformulated: Whitehead
thought he knew how to solve this question, and the a ppetite that his
text did not inspire may perhaps reflect his tranquility in this rega rd . He
had, in fact, made the opposite choice to the one that was to be made by
the physicists who, inheriti ng this first quantum physics, would come
later to spea k of a rea l ity " i ndeterminate independently of measurement"
(a measurement thanks to which the overl y embarrassing quantum leaps
were to be " overwhel med " by the fascinating question of measurement) .
For Whitehead, i ndetermi nacy b y n o mea ns cha racterizes " rea lity," a s
opposed t o the determination brought a bout b y measurement. What we
address has always alrea dy determined itsel f, " thus and not otherwise,"
as a stubborn fact. If one can speak of indeterminacy, it is in reference to
the i mpossibi l i ty in princi ple, for every determinate fact, of determining
how it will be taken i nto account; that is, in the voca bulary of Process
and Reality, to the need for a decision with rega rd to the initial datum.
   As fa r as physics is concerned, the viewpoint proposed by Whitehead
is deeply relevant. If we follow him, we will say tha t quantum physics
" does what it can," continues to decipher the regularities it can, while the
new experi menta l appara tuses that have ena bled it to " reac h " atoms
have enta i led the loss of the deceptive limpidity of dynamics. Indeed,
                   ACT U A L I T Y   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I CS   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 7 1




these apparatuses, because they place measurement under the banner of
detection, detach " scalar quantities " from their dynamic explanation. We
do not demand that a measurement by detection be explai ned i n the
same terms as what it characterizes. We ask it to designate its respondent
in a reliable way: it is an electron that is detected . But detection itsel f, a
selective and finalized operation, is by no means sufficient to define the
behavior of what is detected; it can only define it as responsi ble for its
own detection . It ca ptures sca lar quantities, but these w i l l have to be
articulated with " vectorial reasons," a nd no longer deduced from these
reasons. In other words, whereas classical dynamics might seem able to
describe what the behavior of a dynamic system is " i n itself," qua obey
i ng wel l-determined i nteractions, the physics of detectors imposes upon
physicists a difficult referral from the "consequences," a ttested by the
appa ratus, to the description of the detected entity " i n itself," formaliter
in the sense of Whitehead, for whom this referral wi l l therefore never
succeed in reestablishing deduci bility.
   When, i n April 1 925, Whi tehead decided to atomize time, he was able
to propose a n i rreducible di stinction between the atomic, private charac
ter of the process of formal determi nation of an entity a nd the con
structed , social, as we will say henceforth, character of a l l continuity.
This amounts to rendering explicit why, i n agreement with Bohr's atomic
model, the difficult referral envisaged by the physicists is in fact i mpossi
ble. A qua ntum leap, characterized by a difference that is energetic, that
is, scalar, does not " ta ke any time" i n the physical, conti nuous sense of
the term . As an "atomic i ndividual event," it is i ndivisible, unana lyzable
in terms of a succession of i nstants.
   The actual entity is the enjoyment of a certain quantum of physical
time. But the genetic process is not the temporal succession: such a view
is exactly what is denied by the epochal theory of time. Each phase in the
genetic process presupposes the entire quantum, and so does each feeling
in each phrase [ . . . I The problem dominating the concrescence is the
actualization of the quantum in solido ( PR, 2 8 3 ) .
   With this description o f a " quantum " that is i ndivisible a n d yet exten
sive, in the sense that, as we sha ll see, it atomizes an extension that it
presupposes and confirms, Whitehead has raised to a metaphysica l power
the characterization William James proposed of the specious present (a
cha racterization that had i nterested Niels Bohr to the highest degree ) .
The specious present i s a l ways evaluated from t h e v iewpoint of its
completion-it will have been of such-and-such a thickness-since every
characterization " d uring" this interva l would constitute an i nterference
tha t would force the present to topple i nto the past. To express it in a
3 7 2   COSMO LOGY




wa y tha t evokes relativity: concrescence i n the forma l sense, a s long as it
is not completed, as long as it has not produced its own position, corre
sponds to an " elsewhere." It does not belong to the past of any other en
tity, a nd no other qua ntity ca n take it i nto account.
  Physical time makes its appearance in the " coordinate " analysis of the
"satisfaction " ( PR, 283 ) .
    Physical time does not ma tter only to our objective descriptions o f the
world . The la tter a re a lways social, a lways presupposing a twofold en
durance. As Bergson sa id, we must wa it for the suga r to melt, and this
wa iting i mplies the continuity of an a rticulating relation, presupposing
the endura nce of Bergson, who wa its, and that of what he ca lls " suga r,"
which is ca pa ble of existing in a crysta lline form or of testifying to its
liquid existence by the sugary ta ste ta ken on by tea . Yet these descrip
tions require an i mporta nt cosmologica l fea ture: the fact of a solida rity
between the world and ourselves i n the unison of "at the sa me time." Si
multa neity testified to this solidarity in The Concept of Nature, and it is
wha t perception exhibits i n a n a bstract mode by proposing to us an
externa l world "out there " perceived by me " here." We must also ask this
sol ida rity for an i nterpretation of the releva nce of physica l laws and the
interactions these laws involve. Wha t Whitehea d ca lls the coordinate
analysis of satisfaction must thus ensure the a dequacy of his philosophy
with the unison expressed by the " a t the sa me time," and enable the j us
tifica tion of the ( relative ) relevance of physica l laws, not, once a gain, be
cause physics is the " funda menta l science of ma tter " but beca use it has
pushed to the fa rthest point the risks associated with the explanation of
the solida rity to be i nterpreted .
   Science is either an important statement of systematic theory correlat
ing observations of a common world, or is the daydream of a solitary
intelligence with a taste for the daydream of publication. But it is not
philosophy to vacillate from one point of view to another ( PR, 329).
   Coordina te a na lysis a ssocia tes " time" and, more generica lly, "exten
sion " not with objectification in genera l but with the way an undivided
sa tisfaction will be divided by what will become its consequences, with a
pa rticular aspect of that objectification. I n terms of " coordinate divi
sion," the " position occupied " by a n entity is considered (is the object of
a feeling) a pa rt from how it is occupied. This is reflected by the adjective
"coordinate," which evokes a homogeneous characterization, the situa 
tion of each element being entirely defined by its relation to the others.
Wha t an entity has u ndivided enjoyment of is thus felt in an a bstract,
i mpa rtial mode as the " situation " of that entity, defined by its relations to
other equa l ly situated entities.
                   AC T U A L I TY   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I C S   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 7 3




  When we divide the satisfaction coordinately, we do not find feelings
which are separate, but feelings which might be separate ( PR, 284).
    The adoption of a position, when it is felt in the abstract mode that
only corresponds to the way in which the felt entity has situated itself, is
placed under the twofold banner of separabil ity and potentiality. Each
entity felt in this mode is felt qua situated in the place where it is, and in
such a way that it might have been elsewhere. Qua felt in the mode of co
ordinate analysis, entities can "propose " to or " i mpose " upon the entity
that is feeling them a way of situating itself that ratifies its belonging to
what Whitehead ca lls the "extensive continuum."
    For Whitehead, to be situated i n the midst of the extensive contin
uum by a unified feel i ng of the coordinate relations that have a l ready
been accepted and confirmed by the entities belongi ng to the nexus that
i s to be made " its world " designates the most generic social belonging.
The extensive conti nuum itself is noth ing other than the i mpartial a r
ticulation of a l l situa tions, that is, of a l l possible viewpoints on each
other, an expression of the solidarity of a l l these viewpoints, of their
belonging to a si ngle "community." As an expression of an accepted
solidarity, that is, a solida rity taken up as an i ngredient of their identity
by all actu a l entities ( i ncluding, in a nother way, by God ) , the extensive
continuum is " rea l ." In itself, however, it has no power to impose itself,
and exists only a s it is confirmed . It is " rea l " only to the extent that it is
prolonged, from decision to decision . Coord inate analysis objectifies the
standpoint that the entity is supposed to occupy within the nexus, but it
is up to this entity to rati fy its situation in the continuum, that is, its
belonging to the nexus. This is why Whitehead makes the continuum a
" real potentiality," that is, makes it re lative to a n actua l entity, or for a n
actual entity. By " a tomizi ng " the conti nuum, every adoption o f a posi
tion will carry out what the conti nuum cannot account for : the di ffer
ence between the past, which it has i n herited, and the future, which wi l l
i nherit from i t .
   Actual entities atomize the extensive continuum. This continuum is in
itself merely the potentiality for division; an actual entity effects this divi
sion [ . . . 1 with the becoming of any actual entity what was previously
potential in the space-time continuum is now the primary real phase in
something actual. For each process of concrescence a regional standpoint
in the world, defining a limited possibility for objectifications, has been
adopted. In the mere extensive continuum there is no principle to deter-
mine what regional quanta shall be atomized [ . . . 1 the factors in the actual
world whereby this determination is effected [ . . . 1 constitute the initial
phase of the "subjective aim." This initial phase is a direct derivative from
374    COSMOLOGY




God's primordial nature. In this function, as in every other, God is the
origin of novelty, aiming at intensification ( PR, 67).
   In other words, i f God, as is the case so far, i s he who proposes to each
entity its initial " datum," it is also God who proposes to it the standpoint
that will characterize it, the way it will atomize the extensive conti nuum.
Here, God is a n " orga n " in that, l i ke any organ, he is associated with a
socia l endurance a nd wi th its pa rticular mode of ca na lization, but he is
the organ of " novelty," aiming at i ntensification, for belonging to the ex
tensive conti nuum as proposed by the canal ization constitutes the condi
tion for a n actua l occa sion to provide this intensification . God is thus
what ma kes possi ble an adventure marked by solidarity, a cosmologica l
adventure, rather tha n the fra nk chaos of free-for-all positions.
   In fact, Whitehead wondered whether he should attribute to the soli
darity derivi ng from belongi ng to the extensive continuum the character
of a meta physica l genera l i ty or that of a " socia l fact," as for all belonging.
But we have here a limit on speculation: although it may not be meta
physically excluded for a process of concrescence to " escape " extensive
socia l canalization, refusing the proposed socialization, it is, by contrast,
impossible to i magine th is case, si nce such a case would exclude all the
stabilities presupposed and required by the intensification associa ted with
i maginative experience .
  Some general character of coordinate divisibility is probably an ulti
mate metaphysical character, persistent in every cosmic epoch of physical
occasions [ . . . 1 but [ . . . 1 it is difficult to draw the line distinguishing
characteristics so general that we cannot conceive any alternatives, from
characteristics so special that we imagine them to belong merely to
our cosmic epoch. Such an epoch may be, relatively to our powers, of
immeasurable extent, temporally and spatially. But in reference to the
ultimate nature of things, it is a limited nexus. Beyond that nexus, entities
with new relationships, unrealized in our experiences and unforeseen by
our imaginations will make their appearance, introducing into the uni
verse new types of order ( PR, 2 8 8 ) .
   Whether the extensive continuum i s metaphysica l o r cosmic, it ca nnot,
in any case, be confused with the spa tio-tempora l relations rendered ex
plicit by physica l laws. The releva nce of these laws presupposes a world
in which the intervals of space and time matter, while the coord ina te
character of situations within the extensive conti nuum does not, as such,
provide either measura bility or dimensiona lity. In other words, in the
positive sciences we never have to do with relations that ca n be reduced
to the conseq uences of " situations " in the midst of the extensive contin
uum. The latter is impartial articulation, whereas every position, including
spatio-tempora l position, is partial and refers to more specialized societies.
The various societies that designate solidari ty as spatio-temporal have
endura nce i n common. And as soon as i nteractions appea r on the scene
that articulate space and time in a specific way, we have to do with posi
tions marked by pa rtiality. If physica l laws must i nvolve dista nce, i t is
beca use all dista nces have henceforth ceased to be equivalent. This is
what physica l interaction affirms: distance matters.
     Before going further, however, a pause is necessary, for contemporary
physics invites us to go one step farther with regard to the relation of
contrast proposed by Whitehead between the extensive conti nuum and
physica l laws. This is the opportunity for a twofold test: of the social
conception Whitehead proposes of " physica l rea l ity," and of the contem
porary physica l scenarios that have the ambition of i ntroducing the gen
esis of differentiated interactions on the basis of what would, like the
extensive continuum, be the very embod iment of i mpa rtiality.
     Physicists today invoke the hypothesis of a primordial field character
ized by a perfect symmetry, that is, by perfect impartiality. The symmetry
of scale that characterizes this field i mplies the genera lized equivalence of
a l l the "situations" it allows to be defined . This is certa inly a physica l
field, i nhabited by particles and i nteractions, but a l l the interactions in it
have the infinite range that contempora ry physics associates with parti
cles of zero mass ( l i ke the photon ) : in their cases dista nce, that is, loca l
ization as well, does not matter. And the a nalogy with the extensive con
tinuum becomes even more captivating with the reason the physicists
give for the appea ra nce of d i fferentiated i nteractions, that is, also the
reason why " material societies" exist. It would be the result of an event
of " symmetry brea ki ng."
     Whitehead was right to trust the i nventiveness proper to physics. In their
own way, physicists, too, henceforth affirm that physically differentiated
particles are inseparable from a "socia l," that is also, "epochal," fact. For
"symmetry breaking" corresponds to a twofold correlative definition: that
of differentiated " actors," which endure, perpetuate themselves, and pre
serve their identity through what happens to them, and that of the partial
character of their respective behavior, of what makes a difference for them,
and of what difference they make for others. Physics thus describes the
appearance of " partia l " actors, inseparable from the role they play in the
"society " without which they would not exist. Defined in this way, these
actors and thei r behavior can be assimi lated to "collective effects," insepa
rable from the global event that constituted the symmetry breaking affect
ing the primordial field . We are very far from the localized entities that
Whitehead denounced as the " fallacy of misplaced concreteness " !
     Did physicists " discover" the extensive conti nuum? I f this were the
case, Whitehead 's cosmology would be finished, because, for them, there
376    COSMOLOGY




is no need of God . Symmetry brea king is expla i ned on the basis of the
sa me kind of laws that a l low the continuum to be cha racterized . Impa r
tia lity seems to be able to engender pa rtiality " by itself," tha t is, by
" sponta neous" brea king. Physics would i ndeed ha ve become " the" fun
da menta l science, which is indeed what ma ny who participate in this
adventure believe. This is attested by the speculative presentation tha t
turns the work of contemporary physics i nto the accomplishment of the
Pythagorea n drea m, the ascent towa rd mathematica l-aesthetic pri nci ples,
the symmetries of which everything we have to dea l with would be mere
deformed reflections.
    Th is specula tive presentation, which tra nsforms the adventure of phys
ics into an epic, a l so a l lows us to gra sp where the d ifference l ies between
extensive continuum and primordial fiel d . It is no coincidence that we
hea r of deformed reflections. In fact, what physicists expla in is by no
mea ns a " symmetry brea king" but rather a " symmetry hiding." They do
not explain how impa rtiality can genera te pa rtiality, how a new " socia l
fact " h a s come i nto existence. They expla i n how impartiality c a n b e both
preserved a nd hidden by a reorga niza tion of the primord ial field .
    For physicists, the conservation of symmetry is j ust as precious as the
hidden cha racter of this conservation. Certa inly, without the la tter there
would be neither physics nor physicists, only the impartial ity of perfect
symmetry, which excl udes a ny loca l a dventure . Yet this dra matizing
tremolo is a subproduct of the physicists' adventure, where perfect sym
metry wa s not a ssociated with questions like " why is there something
ra ther tha n a symmetrica l nothing ? " The issue was rather the ma i nta in
ing of a successful trick, " renorma lization," in situations where it should
fa i l . Both the primordial field and the " hiding of symmetry " of which it is
the theater ha ve the primary interest of elimi nating the poisoning impos
sibil ity of " renorma lizing," that is, in fact, the impossibil ity of defining,
certa i n interactions of finite ra nge (or, equiva lently, of defining the mas
sive med iating pa rticles that the physics of fields a ssociates with these
i nteractions ) . Symmetry, as both conserved a nd hidden, eliminates the
obstacle ba rring the way to the technique of definition by renorma liza 
tion, as it w i l l a pply t o the hidden zero mass/interaction of i nfinite ra nge
hidden " real ity."
    The physicists' proposition is thus indeed a n exploit: they ha ve, one
might say, succeeded in ha ving their cake and eating it, too: in ma i ntain
ing the genera l validity of their technique of definition, a nd in " expla in
ing " the a ppa rition of the experimenta lly defined interactions, which pres
ent obstacles to this technique. Yet this proposition a nswers a problem
prod uced by their own formalism. Wha t is saved is an a udacious setup,
inseparable from the adventure of quantum field theory.
                   AC T U A L ITY   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I CS   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 7 7




    It is not a matter of " debasing " physics. Whitehead's God also re
sponds to problems raised by the audacious setup that constitutes the
scheme. The point is to affirm the positive d ivergence of the adventures
and thei r respecti ve importance so as not to fal l into the very trap to be
avoided . Nature bifurca tes enthusiastica lly, and the powder keg blows up
i f symmetry breaking hides the truth of its conservation. This, moreover,
is what is a ffi rmed by some speculative physicists: no longer the common
world a lone, but also so-ca lled physica l rea l i ty would be mere manifesta
tions of hidden primordial symmetries . . .
    The affirmation of divergence is not a defensive one. It is rather a de
manding one. Facing the enticing similarity between a physica l and a
metaphysical construct, the point is not to suspect that physicists have
trespassed and to conclude that they must be led back to thei r own terri
tory, but to connect the constructs to the respecti ve problems to which
they were an answer. This demands pa ying due attention to " technical
detai ls," with the trust that i f there is a n enticing similarity it is a bit like
the case of the ra bbit jumping out of the magician's hat: somethi ng is
concea led. Not that physicists would wi l l fully trick us. Ra ther, they them
selves are captiva ted by the beauty of the answer, and may easi ly forget
about the req uisites of their question . In this case, indeed, the question of
the " i nstability" of the primordial field, leading to the symmetry brea king
event, requires ( technical deta i l ) a definition of the field energy tha t al
lows such a question, a defini tion that is slightly di fferent from the one
that enters i nto the definition of a field. No big dea l, but the possi bility of
symmetry brea ki ngs is now i ncluded in the descri ption of the " pri mor
dial fiel d ." No surprise, then, that the physicists have no need for God i n
order to have partiality "emergi ng " from i mpartiality. Their field i s not a s
i mpartial as the extensive continuum. I t descri bes an impartial situation,
including the possibility of a partiality.
   The d ivergence between Whitehea d 's metaphysica l description and so
ca lled " physica l rea lity" concerns aesthetic appra isals and the questions
they entail. Whitehead emphasizes " novelty," the appearance of new modes
of partia l ity, as a cond ition for avoiding the bifurcation of nature. Theo
retica l physics privi leges impartiality, and creates highly i nventive ways
to i nterpret " apparent" partial ity as in fact deriving from something
" more funda menta l," that is, more i mpartia l .
   A n angry man, except when emotion has swamped other feelings, does
not usually shake his fist at the universe in general. He makes a selection
and knocks his neighbour down. Whereas a piece of rock impartially at
tracts the universe according to the law of gravitation.
   The impartiality of physical science is the reason for its failure as the
sale interpreter of animal behaviour. It is true that the rock falls on one
378    COSMO LOGY




special patch of earth. This happens, because the universe in that neigh
bourhood is exemplifying one particular solution of a differential equa
tion. The fist of the man is directed by emotion seeking a novel feature in
the universe, namely, the collapse of his opponent ( MT, 2 8-29).
   Physics is not alone i n privileging impartial explanation, making it the
only " rationa l " path, as confirmed by the progress of knowledge. When
biochemists discovered seemi ngly pa rtia l opera tions of detection a mong
living cells and between such cells, such as activation, reception, inhibi
tion, and so on, didn't they successfully " explain" this pa rtiality in
physico-chemica l terms ? It was the result of biochemical molecular inter
action, nothing more ! This, of course, leads stra ight to a bifu rcating
nature, at the risk of red uci ng biochemists themselves to a complicated
concert of physico-chemical i nteractions.
   Avoiding the bifurcation of nature thus means thinking of impartiality
as a pa rticular l imit case, and the (partial ) question of values as the generic
question. Such was Whitehead's position when he began to write Process
and Reality. And it is in these terms that one may think of the question of
the divine "orderi ng." Each entity is not proposed only one situation in the
midst of the extensive continuum. Its initial datum incl udes " possi bil ities
of va lue," that is, possi bilities whose realization will ensure both sol idarity
and partiality. When biologists identify biochemical operations with
physico-chemical interactions like all the others, they are not wrong, for
the molecules in abstracto are not different. What is di fferent is thei r
" role," as related to their belonging to a living society, and the questions
biochemists wi l l have to invent in order to identify them .
   It is also here that we find, in a new way, the question of conceptual
transformation that was to mark the composition of Process and Reality.
The danger of the divine ordering may be related to the divergence between
physics and metaphysics I have just proposed . Yet physicists construct their
descriptions in such a way that what is defined as responsible for something
will indeed enable an explanation of this something (which is not the case
at all in other sciences! ) . But isn't Whitehead's God " spoon-feeding " con
crescence? God, therefore, or more precisely the " nature of things " qua de
cided upon by his inexora ble evaluation, would find itself to be what is
primarily responsible. This divergence conceals a threatening convergence,
as the link between explanation and responsibility is common. This may
not be shocking when it comes to electrons or biomolecules, but the point is
also to think of the partial and vehement lament of Job.
   The agreement Whitehead sought wi th physics risks turni ng against
him, for his conception, physical in its inspiration, admits for the mo
ment, between the datum a nd the actua lity, only the kind of hiatus, ulti-
                   ACTU A L I TY   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I C S   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   37 9




mately rather poor, that he himself had noted between the vectorial field
and the electron, characterized by sca lar quantities: the pri vate appro
priation of the datum . A poor figure of actuality, threatening to restore
the figure of a God who is the " soul " of the world, the creator of a l l pos
sibility of " taking" a partia l or in novati ve position-the position would
not be ta ken in that case, but rather " adopted ."
   I must now live up to my commitment, and explore what can be contrib
uted to this difficulty by the conceptual transformation that turned physics
upside down with the quantum formalism "of the second generation ."
   Th is formalism has, in fact, exacerbated the hiatus between vectorial
and scalar, by opposing the conti nuity of a " functional reality " to the dis
crete character of measurements, and i ntroducing the need for a "choice "
of measurement. It has, in other words, given measurement a " decisive
role," indicating a completely new a rticulation between the scalar quali
ties issuing from this measurement, and the " vectoria l real i ty " with re
gard to which measurement is carried out. And to say " decisive role" is
obviously to open up the possi bility of conceiving an actuality whose
va l ue might not be the ratification of a previously settled choice. To risk
this possi bility, however, one must, of course, be situated as close as pos
sible to physico-mathematica l tech nical innovation, that is, as far as pos
sible from controversies over the interpretation of formalism.
   In fact, the very possi bility of attri buting a " decisive role " to measure
ment is associated with the introduction of the new physico-mathematical
notion of an "operator." Paying d ue atten tion to this notion guarantees
us against any untimely intrusion of speculation, for the relevance of op
erators has today been generalized to a l l physico-mathematical laws. I
will therefore concentrate on th is genera lization first, before introducing
the singularity of quantum mechanics.
   Whereas the formulation of the usua l physical laws defined their object
as inseparably uniting the two features necessary to sati sfy physicists
observable ( sca l a r ) definition and functional ( vectoria l ) definition-the
intervention of the notion of operator in the formulation of these laws
presupposes that these two features be treated separately. Scalar q uanti
ties, defi ning possible observations, a re henceforth relative to the action
of an operator on a function, which means that the " functional bei ng" to
which measurement as an operant q uestion is addressed is not defined
"in itself" in the terms of the answer. The general character of the hiatus
that Whi tehead emphasized is thus i nscri bed within the formal ism itself.
The " physical rea lity " i ntrod uced by the language of operators is no lon
ger what is to be descri bed " i n itsel f," but what " answers" the operant
q uestion .
3 8 0   COS M O L O GY




    It is not surprising that controversies over the interpretation of quan
tum mechanics have attained a degree of sophistication that recalls medi
eval quarrels, for rea lity as "answering" translates the impossi bil ity of
guaranteeing any kind of resemblance between the answer obtai ned and
what it was supposed to have answered . Yet the physici sts who created
the physics of operators, and now use it even in "classical physics," did
not frame the problem i n terms of resemblance. The language of opera
tors may wel l mark the renunci ation of the ascent from what is detected
toward the reasons of the being responsi ble for the detection, but it en
ables the satisfaction of a demand that defines the value of an " answer"
in physics i n another way. The answer obtai ned must be capable of bei ng
authenticated ; that is, it must not be able to be disqualified as an " arti
fact," qua prod uced by a n operation i ncapa ble of defining what it is ad
dressing as the " reason " for its result. In other words, what " answers "
must be a " respondent," in the sense of "guarantor" of the q uestion's
relevance. What the physici sts have created is thus their own way to dis
tinguish between a "good " and a " ba d " question.
    What is a "good " q uestion i n the formalism of operators ? In general,
an operator acting on a function produces another function. But the case
in which the operator qualifies as "a q uestion that has received its re
spondent" is the case where the result of the operator's action on a func
tion or vector is limited to the reproduction of the same function or vector,
multiplied by a determinate numerical quantity. These particular functions
or vectors are cal led the eigenfunctions, or eigenvectors of the operator
( " eigen " in German means " own," the operator's " own functions " ) . As
for the numerical quantities, they are called its eigenval ues. And it is to
such eigenval ues that the definition of the " answers " satisfying the physi
cists' demands for a respondent will correspond . If what a question ad
dresses can be represented in terms of the eigenvectors of the operator
corresponding to this question, the eigenvalue obtai ned will be the wel l
determi ned answer to the operant question . As a result, a physica l being,
if it can be represented by a set of the eigenvectors of an operator, can
th us be taken as guaranteei ng, answeri ng for, the adequacy of the ques
tion corresponding to that operator.
    We can understand this definition of a "good " or " a dequate " question
in the sense that the question add ressed by the operator to one of its ei
genfunctions (or vectors ) is addressed to someth ing defined as suscepti ble
of a nswering it without being transformed by it. This is where a specula
tive generalization of the physico-mathematical i nnovation consti tuted
by operators becomes possible. The great interest of thi s innovation with
regard to the hiatus verified by operators, and which Whitehea d had
                    ACT U A L I T Y   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I C S   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 8 1




a l ready speculatively general ized , i s to display in an expl icit way that it
corresponds to a problem of knowledge: what is a good question ? This
may enable specu lative genera lization to display, in its turn, that the
problem raised by metaphysics is not that of a reality to be known, but to
be produced. The relation between operator and eigenvector, a lthough it
may sti ll bear witness to the " a bsolute agreement" between modern phys
ics a nd metaphysics, will thus nevertheless change the definition of the
agreement, i nsisting on the divergence between the parties . In physics, the
relation satisfies the physicists' demand for authenticating " good ques
tions ." In metaphysics, it might wel l designate satisfaction itsel f, the
superject concluding itself from its henceforth uni fied heritage, havi ng
itself become the uni fied feeli ng of a unique felt content.
    Such an adaptation impl ies that the point will be not to define the su b
ject as "operative," as the one that raises the question, the one that decides
how it wi l l question the world, but to situate it on the side of what is to be
prod uced : the subject is that for which the question of its own unification
as a superject arises. The Whi teheadian subject thus does not operate but
concludes itself from an operation which, when completed, will determine
the operator, the actual world of the subject. In other words, whereas the
physics of operators, as a scienti fic theory, designates a real i ty that must
be interrogated in order to be known, the theory of concrescence, as a
metaphysical proposition, may designate " reality " qua raising the ques
tion of the operations that must proceed in order for the subject to be
come the unified feeling of its (eigen) actual world . The " agreement" with
the physics of operators will therefore be stated as: the superject is the
subject that has become the "eigenfeeling" of that which, as " its actual
world," has become the operator correspondi ng to this feeling. Correla
tively, the world is not what a nswers to the subject, nor the respondent for
what the subject " knows " ; it is that which, vectorially, " operates " what
the subject is to feel .
    A s w e ca n see, unlike the o l d agreement Whitehead sought, the transpo
sition I am attempting implies renderi ng explicit the di fference between
what satisfies the problem of knowledge and the problem of production.
The physicists' satisfaction is when the system can be represented in terms
of the eigenvectors of the operator that corresponds to their questi on. A
sati sfaction in Whitehead's metaphysical sense is the final co-prod uction
of the subject and " its" world in such a way that it is henceforth impossi
ble to tell whether it is the subject's standpoint that determi nes the world,
or i f it is the site, the sta ndpoi nt, that calls forth its subject. Once the pro
cess is completed, once the superject has defined itself, the operator, the
henceforth actual world acting on the superject that is its "eigensubject,"
3 8 2   COSMO LOGY




should reproduce it equal to itself, affected only with an eigenvalue. In all
its details, experience is then one and individual: private.
   This doctrine, that the final "satisfaction " of an actual entity is intoler
ant of any addition, expresses the fact that every actual entity-since it is
what it is-is finally its own reason for what it omits [ . . . 1 In other
words, indetermination has evaporated from "satisfaction " [ . . . 1 thus,
in another sense, each actual entity includes the universe, by reason of its
determinate attitude towards every element of the universe ( PR, 45 ) .
   Fi nal, fully determi nate satisfacti on is such that the " that " o f "that's
what makes me feel " is j ust as inseparable from the " I " of "I feel " as the
intel ligible, the i ntel lect, a nd intel ligence are i nseparable in the philoso
phy of Plotinus. In the risky transposition that is guiding me, intel ligence,
obviously not an attribute of the intellect, could well be a name for the
"eigenvalue" of the satisfaction, the scalar value that physics associates
with the outcome of measurement, and which here becomes the " pri
vate," scalar response, inseparably enjoyment of " self" and of " what is
felt." And this value would then be at the same time a " decision referri ng
to what is beyond it" : " what wi ll have been felt," obstinate fact, " i mmor
tal object," one added to the many, whose consequences remain to be
decided, whose effects will be "occasional," according to the role and the
value that other occasions will confer upon it qua participating i n thei r
own satisfaction.
   Yet what about the " i nitial phase " ? How has the question of the " da
tum " been modified ? It is here, not in the general physical language of
operators, that we wi ll finally confront the singularity of quantum me
chanics. In quantum mechanics, the operators corresponding to the vari
ous measurable quantities have distinct eigenfunctions. If what is ques
tioned can be represented in terms of the eigenfunctions of a class of
operators, it is, by definition, incapable of being defined as a respondent
for the questions corresponding to another class of operators. This is why
physicists must define the choice of the question, that is, of the operator,
as an ultimate. If the choice of a measurement, and hence of the corre
sponding operator, is addressed to a quantum system that is not defined i n
terms o f the eigenvectors o f that operator, w e w i l l s a y that the measure
ment " perturbs the system," is unable to designate this system as its " re
spondent." This means that, according to the preparation of a quantum
system, it will be susceptible of giving a well-determined meaning to cer
tain measurements, but will be " perturbed " by others.
   What shoul d we reta in from this singularity ? The term " perturbation "
must be excluded, for it is relative to the ambi tion of knowledge. For
physicists, it interprets the di fference between a "good " question, that
                  ACTU A L I T Y   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I C S   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 B 3




has found its respondent, and a question whose answer has no determi
nate meaning. What we shou ld retai n is that in quantum mechanics it is
impossible to make all the q uestions that can be raised, all the physical
quantities that can be measured, converge toward a being that would be
guarantor for the relevance of them all. This is why, in quantum mechanics,
operators are not j ust one mode of representation among others but a
necessity. Physicists are forced to admit not only that there is no answer
wi thout a question, but also that no question is the " right one," indepen
dently of the means they have taken ( preparation) to be able to receive a
determinate answer to this q uestion and not to another one.
   The "agreement " between physics and metaphysics, if it is to be re
newed, will not concern only operators, which mark the taking- into
account wi thin the very syntax of the physical theory of the hiatus that
had inspired Whitehead . It wi l l require the a bandonment of the " initial
datum," because this datum had the power of proposing, if not of impos
i ng, its perspective on the entity that appropriates it, and because, in
terms of knowledge, it is precisely this power that q uantum entities lack .
They do not dictate how they are to be questioned, but they are a respon
dent in the a uthentic sense only insofar as the person framing the ques
tion has undertaken the means to " prepare " them to a nswer.
   Of course, when it comes to metaphysics, one might say that God is
the one who " prepares " the datum, but i n this case the imbalance be
tween the power attri buted to God and the i nsignificant character of the
appropriation becomes blatant. All the more so as another possibil ity of
thinking has appeared : that the definition of the " datum " itself, qua op
erative, coincides with the final phase, when the su bject has become a
superject. God is then no longer a " p reparer," because " preparation"
designates concrescence i tself. And indeed, when Whitehead a bandons
the thesis according to which concrescence has as i ts starti ng point a n
already unified " datum," which it is up t o i t t o appropriate, when h e fully
deploys the " miracle of creation," entrusting unification to concrescence
itself, God will have ceased to be an "orderer," to become the "object " of
a hybrid feeling that initiates concrescence. As such, his role may be com
pared to that of an " i nstigator," operating as a " lure for feeling" for the
nascent concrescence.
   To God 's role as an instigator responds the need to d i fferentiate be
tween what the physicists would call "good " q uestions, because they
have a respondent, and the good ness that necessarily qualifies God 's in
terven tion. It may well be that what is to be contrasted are two meanings
of the word " relevance." Relevance as an issue is always primary. In
physics, the "good q uestion " is the relevant one, the one that is able to
3 8 4   COS M O LO GY




designate what answers as its respondent. However, when relevance ex
pl icitly becomes a val ue, that value designates the way a question gi ves
rise to its responden t. If I ask you a question at the right moment, in the
right terms, with the right intonation, so that you suddenly see a way
out where the situation was blocked, my question will have proved its
relevance by its effects, by the way that your experience is transformed.
In other words, your transformation is an answer, but it is by no means
an answer " to my questi on " : it answers for the relevance of the question
as a l ure that has initiated the process of which your experience is the
truth .
    The conceptual transformation that witnesses the disappearance of the
initial datum as the source and explanation of relevant novelty may be
interpreted as granting to relevance the meaning it receives in some of
our most important experiences: when a gesture, a question, a suggestion
give rise to thei r respondent without havi ng " deserved " it. Not the frus
trated insistence of the " You ought to understand," but the true miracle,
celebrated by the concord of two voices-Okay, now I understand/now
you understand-in the most rad ica l a bsence of guarantees that this con
cord designates something that is " the same." What was to be understood
did not preexist the understand ing, and belongs only to the person who
understands.
   As for the subject, it could be said that Whitehead 's has passed from a
rather literal interpretation of a saying of Pascal, "you would not seek me
unless you had a l ready found me," to a more complex one. In the literal
sense, the subject has al ready found the unity it seeks to become, since its
initial datum is deri ved from the divine ordering. But in the more com
plex version, "you" and " I " should not be able to be defined indepen
dently of the quest. In concrescent uni fication, feelings and what they aim
at gradually co-determine each other, unti l the "you found me! " a t the fi
nal stage, when feeli ngs become the feelings of a subject that has become
a superject, emerging from its uni fied feelings.
   It is better to say that the feelings aim at their subject, than to say that
they are ai med at their subject. For the latter mode of expression removes
the subject from the scope of the feeling and assigns it to an external
agency. Thus the feeling would be wrongly abstracted from its own final
cause. This final cause is an inherent element in the feeling, constituting
the unity of that feeling. An actual entity feels as it does feel in order to
be the actual entity which it is. In this way an actual entity satisfies Spi
noza 's notion of substance: it is causa sui . The creativity is not an exter
nal agency with its own ulterior purposes. A ll actual entities share with
God this characteristic of self-causation. For this reason every actual
                   ACT U A L I T Y   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I C S   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 8 5




entity also shares with God the characteristic of transcending all other
actual entities, including God ( PR, 222 ) .
   I f we recall the "miracle o f creation " associated with the vision o f the
prophet Ezekiel, we may say that this vision has now become even more
risky, that is, more complete. Whitehead has a bandoned any distinction
between settling the datum and appropriating it. Subjective uni fication no
longer has as an " objective " l ure the unity of the datum, those skeletons
that a re well-prepared and quite ready to come to life aga in. For the mir
acle of creation to take place, it is a multitude of d ried bones, not skele
tons in good working order, that must organize themselves, dress them
selves in the flesh of real, emotional beings, and gather themselves together
in the unity of an innumerable army. This is why skeletons a re not what
inspire the prophet. When Ezekiel spoke the word as he was commanded,
it was words comi ng from elsewhere that he repeated, whose meaning he
did not possess. At first, this meaning had no other locus than the quiver
ing of dispersed bones. It is as the miracle occurs that the prophet Ezekiel
will come into existence, as the person toward whom the eyes and ears of
this " one " army, that owes him its existence, are turned .
   The "subjective ai m," the aim of the feelings that will bring to existence
the subject whose feelings they are, thus has a divine endowment as its
initium. It is no longer the datum that testifies to God, but the initial aim
or lure, which is the activation of the many feelings qua " a i ming at." As
the process of concrescence proceeds, the " i nitial aim" will become a
" subjective a i m " : the aim at a subject producing itself as it determines its
world. But the initial lure does not constitute a final cause. It pertains to
the feelings themselves to operate, that is, to produce the subjective con
vergence that will make them the feelings of a superject, each of them be
coming correlatively the " feeling of an aspect of the actual world," a well
determined component affirming the inseparability of the world that
ma kes itself felt, and the superject, the " eigensubject" of this feeling.
  Each temporal entity, in one sense, originates from its mental pole,
analogously to God himself. It derives from God its basic conceptual
aim, relevant to its actual world, yet with indeterminations awaiting its
own decisions. The subjective aim, in its successive modifications, re
mains the unifying factor governing the successive phases of interplay
between physical and conceptual feelings. These decisions are impossible
for the nascent creature antecedently to the novelties in the phases of its
concrescence ( PR, 224 ) .
  However, a question a rises. If there i s n o longer any " i nitial datum "
offering a ready-made perspective o n the basis of which the entity would
be a mere " adoption of a position," isn't concrescence confronted by a
3 8 6   COS MOLOGY




tita nic task, in a ny case " unimaginable" in the sense that it would not
consti tute a " lure " for the i magination : to make a world on the basis of a
chaos of di sparate feel ings ?
   Th is objection must be examined more closely. Is the multiplicity of
felt data really chaotic ? Or, more precisely, in what sense is it chaotic ? To
envi sage this question, let us turn to the sixth ca tegory of explanation.
   That each entity in the universe of a given concrescence can, so far as
its own nature is concerned, be implicated in that concrescence in one or
other of many modes; but in fact it is implicated only in one mode: that
the particular mode of implication is only rendered fully determinate by
that concrescence, though it is conditioned by the correlate universe. This
indetermination, rendered determinate in the real concrescence, is the
meaning of "potentiality. " It is a cond itioned indetermination, and is
therefore called a "real potentiality " ( PR, 2 3 ) .
   The multi plicity o f data by n o means signifies " pure chaos," a pure,
disjoi nted multipl icity on the basis of which each concrescence would be
"creation of order ex nihilo." We do, of course, have to dea l with a
" nexus," a set, no longer a datum, sti ll less a " togetherness." The way in
which there will be a " togetherness " is henceforth the very q uestion of
concrescence. Yet the determination of the unique mode of i mplication
of each of the elements of the collection is nevertheless "conditioned " by
" the correlate universe." How are we to understand this conditioning
without making a datum emerge once aga i n ? How are we to differentiate
between what is really " pure multiplicity," the eterna l objects which, for
their part, a re pure potentialities, and that whose "condi tioned i ndeter
minacy " nevertheless designates a " real potentiality " ?
   To make explicit this rea l potentiality, which i s neither pure disj unc
tion nor preordered, I will allow myself a reference that interprets the
universe Whitehead qualifies as "correlate" on the basis of the notion of
"correlation." I must emphasize that I mean "correlation " i n the physico
mathematica l not the statistical sense. Here aga in, the difference desig
nates the invention and i mperative of relevance that belong to physics,
and does not by any means characterize purely statistical reasoning.
   In physics, correlations are neither calculated starting out from col
lected data, of the kind statistical enquiries attempt to reveal, nor from
actua l relations between two terms, l i ke interactions-for instance, the
force of gravity. An interaction is defined by its effects, by the determinate
way in which one being (or, more precisely, an enduring society ) contrib
utes to the determination of another, or by the way the behavior of each
testi fies to the existence of the others . Although gravitational i nteraction
has been cal led " a t a distance," it i mp l ies a loca l ized definition of the
                   ACTUA L I T Y   B E T W E E N   P H YS I C S   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 8 7




bei ngs that i nteract. In Whiteheadian terms, the interaction is " socia l " ; it
is part of the way societies that a re sa id to " interact" integrate a sta ble
reference to one another within their respective adventures. In contrast,
correlations in physics enable an answer to questions that do not fit with
this definition of physical beha vior as mutua lly determined . Correlations
may i ndeed be said to exist " between " the entities belonging to a popula
tion, but they have no meaning when it comes to the beha vior of these
entities taken individual ly. They only intervene when it comes to charac
terizing the population itself. In other words, if one followed (or, more
exactly, if one could fol low) the behavior of a molecule as a function of
its i nteracti ons with all the others, the fact that correlations may exist
between these molecules would never i ntervene i n the calculation. The
d ifference between correlated and noncorrelated takes on meaning for
questions that can only be addressed to the population as such, because
they bear upon what this population is capable of as such, not as an en
semble of interacting bodies.
    Hi storically, correlations were i ntroduced to characterize the effect of
a hypothetical reversal of the d i rection of the velocity of each of the par
ticles that constitute a population (ga s ) . The operation of velocity rever
sal has been described as "creating correlations" between particles to
j ustify the fact that this operation may result in " a bnormal collective be
haviour" of the pop ulation, in this case to move away from thermo
dynamic equi librium instead of approaching it. More generally, the notion
of correlation corresponds to the possi bility of characterizing a population
as such on the basis of a contrast with the most simple situation, which can
be relevantly described by presupposi ng that what happens in one place
has no definable consequence elsewhere. When this hypothesis of "general
ized indifference" is relevant, one wi l l say that the correlations are of zero
intensity and range. This is the case with thermodynamic equili brium, as is
reflected by the emine � t simplicity of its macroscopic description. In con
trast, there is no longer any " i ndifference " when one speaks of "critica l "
situations . What occurs locally is said t o have repercussions i n the entire
population: i n the vicinity of the critical poi nt, the range and intensi ty of
the correlations undergo a dramatic increase.
   To bring up a somewha t evocative analogy, let us take two ( huma n )
populations, apparently simi lar, i n the sense that they allow themselves
to be described similarly in terms of economic i nteractions, that is, ex
changes defined in a mnesiac terms of supply and demand. A remarka ble
difference might appear on the occasion of an event a ffecting these popu
lations as such, like an earthquake or a n i nvasion . To simulate this d iffer
ence, however, modelizations wi l l have to associate with thei r actants a
3 8 8   COS MOLOGY




term of " memory," which has no influence on individual excha nge be
haviors, socia l ly defined as amnesiac, but becomes dominant when it
comes to asking how the population will respond to the test. In this sense,
correlations a re delocalized, since they characterize the mode of belong
ing to a population, not behavior that can be attri buted to the members
of this population. And they a re abstract, in the Whiteheadian sense, in
that they have no meaning in themselves but only from the viewpoint of
the event that " activates " them-we could say that the event " q uestions"
the population as such about the response it might become capable of.
Accord ing to the event, correlations may remain without consequence or
" make all the di fference."
   The fact that correlations, as physics has invented them, may give
meaning to what is neither pure multiplicity nor a system unified by inter
actions to which each individual behavior would be subject testifies to
what constitutes the strength of physics: its ability to introduce what is re
quired by the relevance of a description. In the present case, what the de
scription required is analogous to what the Whiteheadian crowd of initial
feelings requires, in that the question raised is what this crowd will be
capable of. One could therefore say that the initial phase of feelings desig
nates the data as correlated, and even defines the divine lure as a "creator
of correlations," so long as creation is understood as " activation " and es
pecially not as creation ex nihilo. In fact, the multiplicity of data is rich in
activatable correlations, for they constitute a " nexus," a " set of actual en
tities in the unity of the relatedness constituted by thei r prehensions of
each other or-what is the same thing, conversely expressed--constituted
by their objectifications in each other" ( PR, 24 ) . The correlated universe,
the universe as correlated , is thus an " activated nexus."
   It can thus be said that the " correlated universe " is not unified, but
may be characterized by a multiplicity of " correlations," relations that
are " non-loca liza ble," for they are not defined between terms but rather
by repercussions and repercussions of repercussions : a reciprocal imma
nence that entangles harmonies and dissona nces, convergences and di
vergences, captures and diversions. Each element refers to others and is
a reference for others, but each time in a way that is pa rticular, possibly
qualified only by the type of pattern or the " defining cha racteristic" that
designates a " social fact."
   This is why to cha racterize the crowd of feelings Whitehead could use
the very term he had used to characterize the " initial datum " : that of
" rea l potentiality." But more than physics, it would henceforth be lan
guages one should address to accentuate what matters here: the fact that
the determination of the indeterminate is no more a si mple adoption of
                   ACTU A L I TY   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I C S   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 8 9




position with rega rd to a datum than it is a " demi urgic" miracle. A con
crescence is no more of a " demi urge" than a statement, and no less, for
every statement has as its " rea l potentiality " the correlated multipl icity of
what coul d be called the " usages " that make a la nguage, and is the pro
ducer of a use that does not preexist it as such. It can thus be said of every
statement, whether it is produced in the manner of a watchword, redun
dant with regard to the situation, or like a poetic statement, actua lizing a
completely new usage, that it is conditioned by " the correlated universe "
of the language, that it is the rea liza tion of a " rea l potentia l i ty." But it
must then be added that a la nguage, qua real potentiality, raises the q ues
tion of its " reality," which is not to be confused with any of its rea liza
tions. In other words, the " usages " are not cases among which one has to
choose, like the various possibilities of translation presented by a diction
ary. Instead, they should evoke what these possi bilities are made to bri ng
about, the perplexed and undivided nebula whence the choice emerges:
"this is the word that (its."
   Let us return to the ontologica l principle that will ta ke on its ful l im
port at the end of this journey; that is, it will i mpose that God, who is a
ca use, m ust also be " expl ica ble" in terms of causes. We w i l l examine
later the theological q uestion that arises in this case, but we can show
here that what has a l ready been set a side is the threat of a God solely
responsi ble for the parti a l i ty of an adoption of position, and therefore
responsi ble both for " good " and for " ev i l ."
   A ccording to the ontological principle there is nothing which floats
into the world from nowhere. Everything in the actual world is referable
to some actual entity. It is either transmitted from an actual entity in the
past, or belongs to the subjective aim of the actual entity to whose con
crescence it belongs. The subjective aim is both an example and a limita
tion of the ontological principle. It is an example, in that the principle is
here applied to the immediacy of concrescent fact [ . . . J In another sense
the subjective aim limits the ontological principle by its own autonomy.
But the initial stage of its aim is an endowment which the subject inherits
from the inevitable ordering of things, conceptually realized in the nature
of God [ . . . J Thus the initial stage of the aim is rooted in the nature of
God, and its completion depends on the self-causation of the subject
superject. This function of God is analogous to the remorseless working
of things in Greek and in Buddhist thought. The initial aim is the best for
that impasse ( PR, 244 ) .
   We d o not yet know how the " inevita ble ordering," conceptua lly rea l
ized i n the divine nature, communica tes with the " initi a l aim" of a na
scent subject. What we know is that this ordering does not correspond to
3 9 0   COS M O LO GY




global calculation, from which the " best of subjective endowment " could
be deduced, but is " what is best for that i mpasse." Whitehead's God is
not " Leibnizian," in the sense that the globa l and the local do not com
mun icate in him, for him, and through him. Reality, says Whitehead, is
" incu rably a tomic," and God is not assigned to the service of an ideal,
placing what is local i n the service of some global best. In fact, such an
ideal would have brought to existence the sophism Whitehead denounced
as early as Religion in the Making: the one everyone winds up with who
tries to reconcile God 's assumed general will for the good with his rather
curious particular applications. The biblical God does not approve of the
friends who advise Job to submit his pretensions to the impenetrability
of the divine plan. Whitehead's God is the envisagement of " that" im
passe, Job's lament or friendly advice, and not of their role in a universa l
economy. And this is so, not by choice, out of respect for individual " free
dom," but by the necessity of the divine mode of functioning.
   The divine endowment thus corresponds to an individual possi bi l ity,
not to what individuals should accomplish in the name of interests that
transcend them. Here we find the concern that had led Whitehead, in Sci
ence and the Modern World, to i ntrod uce God as the principle of limita
tion: only what is actual has value, what is actually ta king a position,
that is, what is refusing as well . Thus and not otherwise. Whitehead
mod ifies, rearranges, inverts the rela tions, but never does he blame con
crete experience, including those that have been celebrated as exhi biting
notions he has abandoned .
    In Science and the Modern World, the divine l imitation made the dif
ference between the idea l and the individual . The ideal situation, insofar
as it resulted from an ordering of all the eterna l objects, gave no meaning
to any horizon, to any possibility of bri nging to existence the individual
decision to be a prehension of " this," rather than of everything presup
posed by " this." I f there were no limitation, each occasion shou ld have
" reflected " a l l the other events, the whole of nature. How, then, could it
be cal led " decision " ? Decision was thus associated with the " mental
pole" of an occasion, in contrast to its " physica l pole," with the former
" breaking off" from the latter's actual illimitability. In Process and Real
ity, the distinction between physical and menta l poles has been deeply
mod ified, since the physical pole is no longer placed under the banner of
illimitability but of (correlated ) multiplicity. Yet this distinction can now
be generalized to God hi mself, and it is, as we shall see, this characteriza
tion of the divine functioning that will make it possible to coordinate the
" ordering" constituted by eternal envi sagement with the local character,
relative to " that" impasse, of the initial di vine endowment. Correlati vely,
                  ACTU A L I TY   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I C S   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 9 1




God will no longer be a principle but will have to satisfy, in his distinct
way, the categoreal obligations.
   In the first place, God is not to be treated as an exception to all meta
physical principles, invoked to save their collapse. He is their chief exem
plification ( PR, 343 ) .
    Like Whitehead himself, who reserves the fifth and last ( ra ther brief)
part of Process and Reality to this question, I will not try to approach
the rather thorny question of the divine functioni ng until the end of our
iti nerary, after having explored what Whitehead has j ust created . We
now leave physics behind; for the locus where the Whiteheadian con
cepts will have to be experi enced is the one from which the demand that
what exists must be the cause of itself has arisen. Not an electron, to
be sure, but a thinker: Job, for i nstance, demanding that his " lament" be
heard . It is therefore toward the adventures of consciousness that the
flight of speculative experience must henceforth orient itself.
                                                       C H A P TER TWENT Y - TWO
