And They Became Souls




          HE INITIAL AIM    is the best for that impasse. But if the best be
         bad, then the ruthlessness of God can be personified as A te, the
        goddess of mischief. The chaff is burnt. What is inexorable in
God, is valuation as an aim towards "order "; and "order " means "soci
ety permissive of actualities with patterned intensity of feeling arising
from ad;usted contrasts " ( PR, 244 ) .
    It is sti ll with regard to " evi l " that metaphysics' correction o f the excess
subjectivity of consciousness, here expressing itsel f in a religious image, is
played out. From this viewpoint, the exa mple taken by Whitehead when
he announces, in a somewhat elliptical way, that " the chaff is burnt," is
particularly formidable. The prophecy of John the Baptist, to which the
el lipsis refers ( Matthew 3 : 7-1 2 ) is a prophecy of anger. The time of pa
tience is succeeded by that of impatience, of the good affirming itself in
the destruction of what resis ts it, in the elimination of what impedes it.
The prophet baptizes with water, with a view to repentance, but he an
nou nces the coming of He who was to baptize in the Holy Spirit, and also
in fire, of He who would sort the grain, and would have the chaff burned .
    But the worst is yet to come. The text to which Whitehead alludes not
only conta ins the usua l prophetic threats, but it proposes a formidable
novelty: the prophet's anger appeals to the piti less figure of a God who,
as he announces, is liable not to be held by the covenant. Or, more pre
cisely, by the covenant in the sense that it includes a divine commitment
to maintain that covenant with the Jewish people. Those who hea r him,
thunders the prophet, must know that i f God so wi lls, children for Abra
ham can come forth out of these stones !
                                            A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   3 9 3




   Were the words attributed to the prophet those of a Jewish prophet pos
sessed by impatience, or did they come later, inscribed in the Gospels by
those who thought that they were the true and new children of Abraham,
therefore capable of designating the chaff which had been, was, and would
be delivered over to the fire of God's anger ? In any case, even if the propo
sition comes from John, it introduces a terrible possibility, which was to be
exploited by the Christians, that God, while faithful to the covenant, might
be free from the election that seemed to be synonymous with it.
   A formidable contrast has been prod uced . The continuity of the cove
nant with the children of Abra ham remains a fact, but this fact suddenly
leaves the " how" of thi s continuity indeterminate. Of course, from the
viewpoint of Christian theology, it is the entire economy of the sacrament
of baptism that is announced here, by which God transforms into a mem
ber of his people, a child of Abraham, not, perhaps, stones, but any human
being, henceforth taken one by one. From the viewpoint of those who turn
val ues of universality into an ideal that j ustifies all means, there is no doubt
reason in this to praise God, History, or Humanity, for this proposition
opens up the covenant to all human beings. Nevertheless, the proposition
according to which no difference of origin counts when it comes to the
universality of salvation was coupled with divine anger, or with the sorting
process carried out in the name of the opposition between faithfulness and
infidel ity. In an attempt to avoid all excess subjectivity, one will limit one
sel f to saying that this new arrangement, which distinguishes divine faith
fulness to the covenant as such from the commitment bearing upon the
election of the Jewish people, is, inexorably, very interesting, liable to give
rise to new contrasts, and a vector of intense feelings.
   Wh itehead 's God is neither patient nor impatient, for these adj ectives
designate the adventures proper to societies. He is not at a l l constra ined
by any covenant whatsoever, for he "cares not whether an immed iate oc
casion be old or new, so far as concerns derivation from i ts ancestry "
(PR, 1 05 ) . More precisely, this derivation matters only through the con
trasts it has stabilized : the formidable innovation introd uced by John
would have no meaning without the l ineage of p rophets call ing Jews to
faithfulness, denounci ng infidelity. That the long worry of the chosen
people about the patience of its God could constitute a locus for a new
family of proposi tions, transforming the contrast negotiable between
faithful and unfaithful into an opposition, is a " fact" that we inherit, not
the manifestation of a divine i mpatience or of a divine proj ect. Yet, no
more than the new propositions that would eventua lly a l low the opposi
tion to be overcome, this fact is not inscribed either in any d ivine plan
dealing with the elevation of men or with the economy of Salvation . The
3 9 4   COS M O LOGY




initial moment of the aim was, of course, like any other, rooted in the
nature of God, but it was so in response to a " loca l " question: what is the
best for " that" impasse ?
   " To envisage " is the term proposed by Whitehead to describe a God
who conditions crea tivity, who bends creativity into a cosmic adventure.
Yet this term has henceforth received a more precise mea ning. It is speci
fied by the question: " what is the best for that impasse ? " the question
which, by the way, is that of Whitehead when faced by the impasses of
thought, whether they refer to professionals, to the bi furcation of nature,
or to the omni potent God of theology. And it does indeed work in an
inexora ble way, in the sense that it has the emi nently nonsocial character
already assumed by l i fe, as a j ustification of the robbery that is required
by the regime of existence of l iving societies: nothing of what a society
sta bilizes qua importa nt, qua j usti fying mai ntenance and imposition, can
escape the possibil ity of a new contrast, tra nsforming this importance
into an impasse urging escape. Yet what is at stake is stil l " that" i mpasse:
the divine envi sagement, like life, is a lways local and interstitial. Nothing
guarantees that the possibility of esca ping the impasse, i f it gains i mpor
tance, will not actual ize the trick of evi l : to insist on being born at the
wrong season .
   The reference to God's inexora ble va l uation thus does not ma ke him a
j udge. God does not j usti fy any j udgment. If he is a respondent, it is only
for the trust of the person who dares to appeal against a j udgment, since
God responds for the fact that no reason has the power to define as im
possible the new contrasts that would transform the range and the mean
i ng of a j udgment. The adventure of religions is thus indeed a social
adventure. The names men give to God do not testi fy to him, but to the
adventures of the human consciousness in search of its j ustifications.
   Quite obviously, all this does not mean, from a metaphysica l stand
point, that the names human beings give to God are pure fictions without
any importance. It signifies the need for a severe sorting process between
religious statements and metaphysica l statements, with the former testi
fying to what human consciousness has made itself ca pable of at a gi ven
epoch, and the latter accepting themsel ves as obligated only by the im
perative of coherence. Yet this sorting process, because it quite obviously
proceeds from a highly conscious demand, must itself find a meta physi
cal meaning.
   So far, we have primarily dealt with consciousness in an indirect way,
with rega rd to something other than itsel f. This mode is dominant in
Whitehead, and we will find it aga in in the fol lowing pages; but this time
the point will be to go further, as we are of course obl iged to do by a
                                            A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   3 9 5




minimum of coherence. Although Whitehead constantly insists on the
one-sided and especially partial cha racter of what we ca ll conscious ex
perience, deploying all that is blindly presupposed by the most reflexive
of such experiences, the vocation of speculative philosophy-the flight of
experience-designa tes this conscious experience as its most crucial is
sue. Or, more precisely, it designates as its most crucial issue the possibi l i 
ties of modifying t h e conscious experience o f those w h o expose them
selves to that flight.
    The d istinction is crucia l . The wager of ma king conscious experience
the crucial issue designa tes modern philosophica l thought, as defined by
what Whitehead ca lls the " subj ectivist principle." He himsel f will adopt
what he calls a " reformed " subjectivist principle in order to mark his
belonging to modern philosophy and to designate i ts l imitations. For the
subjecti vist principle has made conscious experience the central issue, to
be sure, but this issue does not designate the question of this experience's
modi fications, it designates it i tsel f qua unique source of certai nty and
j ustification. This is why the " subj ect" always dea ls with an "objective
reality " with rega rd to which the q uestion arises of what it can say about
it, what pertains to this rea lity, and what perta ins to itsel f.
   The difficulties of all schools of modern philosophy lie in the fact that,
having accepted the subjectivist principle, they continue to use philo
sophical categories derived from another point of view. These categories
are not wrong, but they deal with abstractions unsuitable for metaphysi
cal use [ . . . 1 The notions of the "green leaf" and of the "round ball " are
at the base of traditional metaphysics. They have generated two miscon
ceptions: one is the concept of vacuous actuality, void of subjective expe
rience; and the other is the concept of quality inherent in substance. In
their proper character, as high abstractions, both of these notions are of
the utmost pragmatic use. In fact, language has been formed chiefly to
express such concepts. It is for this reason that language, in its ordinary
usages, penetrates but a short distance into the principles of metaphysics.
Finally, the reformed subjectivist principle must be repeated: that apart
from the experiences of subjects there is nothing, nothing, nothing, bare
nothingness ( PR, 1 6 7 ) .
   In order t o affirm tha t nothing exi sts independently o f the experience of
subjects, and that there is therefore no sorting process to carry out on
the basis of the d istinction between subjective experience and objective
reality, one must overcome a terrible hesitation, a veritable " lea p of death."
This explains, no doubt, why modern philosophica l doctrines have made
na ture bi furcate. For i f a stable world is no longer there to confirm what
we think, to propose the ideal of a well-founded agreement, everything
3 9 6   COSMOLOGY




seems to be reduci ble to mere fiction, interpretations that no arbitrage will
enable to distinguish. And it is often by designating beliefs that are "of
fensi ve," in the sense of Wi lliam James, that philosophers proceed : if we
have no criterion defining " objective reality" against fictions, everything
will be no more than a matter of taste and color. We will be forced to
accept that the earth might j ust as well be flat, or fai l to contradict the
creationists when they maintain that God created each living species
separately !
   The common feature of all these "offensive beliefs " is that those who
evoke them trust the interlocutor not to ad here to them more than they
themselves do: a typica lly phi losophical rhetoric. Yet with proposi tions
evok ing the j udgment of God , which have litera lly " i nfected " Christian
history, the case is completely di fferent. Whereas phi losophers often act
as though the conscious subject could indifferently envisage all possibili
ties, and therefore needed a referee to carry out the sorting process be
tween fictions that are equa lly envisagable, those who listened to John
the Baptist may have felt their world tremble to its foundations. In this
case, words are efficacious. They insti ll offensive doubt and demand con
version. Yet it would not occur to us to search for a referee or to spea k of
fiction . Conscious experience has been mod ified as such. A cry may rise
toward the hea vens, but those who utter the cry are aware that thei r ex
perience is the only possible " referee," and even that the reasons they
themselves will produce come only after the decision. Independent of the
subject, there is nothing.
   With regard to those who utter such cries, one will speak not of con
sciousness that is sure of its pretensions or demands certai nties that have
finally been gi ven a foundation, but of a soul in distress. And the distress
of these souls testifies to what will be one of the major inventions of
Whitehead's philosophy, the invention of what he calls " propositions." I f,
on the sixth day, we became souls, it is not because language enables us
to manipulate the pros and cons, to wonder whether the earth is flat or
round. It is because language raises to its highest power the efficacy of
what cannot be confused with it, the efficacy associated with what White
head was to define as a genui ne existent. For propositions appear among
the categories of exi stence of the categorea l scheme, j ust as actua l occa
sions and eternal objects do (eight types of existent are defi ned ) .
  ( vi) Propositions, o r Matters o f Fact i n Potential Determination, or
Impure Potentials for the Specific Determination of Matters of Fact, or
Theories ( PR, 22 ) .
  N o category of existence is intelligible a s such, since the categories of
existence are req uired by the categories of explanation and thus cannot be
                                            A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   3 9 7




explai ned . In particular, no verb is possi ble, si nce verbs pertai n either to
explanation or to obligation; that is, they correspond either to what we
seek to understand or else to the way what comes into existence is pro
duced . But the sixth type of existent may seem q uite particularly enig
matic. What are " theories" doing among existents ? In fact, propositions
are rather curiously absent from most Whitehead ian studies. Perhaps
Whitehead's heirs are embarrassed to find in the midst of the metaphysi
ca l scheme a type of existent which, far from being appropriate to every
occasion, seems to pertain to the theory of knowledge in the sense that
it presupposes consciousness. In this case, they are " victims" of the casual
Whitehead ian manner: appearing in the scheme among " existents," prop
ositions then disappear, to reappear only after Whitehead has discussed
"symbolic reference " and "j udgment." They can therefore be taken, in the
same sense, as a means of characterizi ng the experiences that imply per
ception, proposi tions, in this case, marking the appearance of conscious
ness . There is nothing coincidental about this: Whitehead very proba bly
decided rather late to transform the problem, and to turn certa in aspects
of conscious experience into the privi leged witness to a type of efficacy
that would not be limited to consciousness. Not until the third part of
Process and Reality wi l l the " propositional feeling " be introd uced, cor
responding to the categoreal definition of the proposition as " i mpure
potential."
   How can we approach the difference between a statement correspond
ing to a perception or to a judgment, and a statement exhi biting proposi
tiona l efficacy ? Let us abandon prophecy, too dramatic an example, and
take Descartes contemplating a piece of wax and applying himself to
doubt, to separating the attri butes that may pertain to the "objective real
ity " of the wax from those which, beca use they are variable or unreliable,
do not. How can we descri be Descartes 's experience, as he conscientiously
constructs the motivations of a verdict that should enable him to impose
upon "anybody" a definition of "extended substance " that is exemplified
nowhere in the worl d ? Does he doubt, or isn't the " doubti ng self" instead
a part of the data of the problem whose solution Descartes is construct
ing ? Does the emotiona l tenor of his experience speak of the risk of refus
ing to the wax what belongs to it? Or else, doesn't the risk l ie elsewhere ?
Perhaps with the possi bility of founding his theory, of infecti ng his reader
not so much with experience of doubt as with the mode of j udgment that
doubt will authorize ? Every time an experience is questioned in this way,
not on the basis of the word s that present a theory but of the way that
theory inha bits thinkers, of the issues that actually obsess them, of the
risks to wh ich thei r theory exposes them, the " reformed subjectivist
3 9 8   COSMOLOGY




theory " is activated . " Beliefs " no longer demand a referee, because what
they propose ma kes the thinker think.
    As the reader will have understood, the flight of speculative experience
here returns to what had been at the origin of the flight itself, White
head's "cry" : " That's a bsurd ! " i nspired by the philosophical and scien
tific statements that make nature bifurcate. The example he borrowed to
criticize the use made in modern philosophical doctrines of the su bjectiv
ist principle, "I see a green leaf there," is the parad igmatic example of a
statement that is clear from the viewpoint of consciousness and con fused
from the viewpoint of propositional efficacy. The question that imposes
itself, in fact, is " so wha t ? " Now, however, the point will no longer be to
criticize. The contrast between " that which " we percei ve and what we
a re aware of in perception will no longer constitute an argument without
being interpreted, correlatively, in a positive way: an exploit of percep
tion that will be named " symbolic reference." One will, of course, still
have to "correct " the excess subjectivity attested by the privilege ac
corded to the " that which " as opposed to the " what," but this time lan
guage will no longer intervene as what explains this privilege: this argu
ment is valid only when it comes to understanding the difficulty proper
to phi losophica l language. Correcting the excess subjectivity of skeptical
and critical phi losophers, the point will be to celebrate what Whitehead
will ca ll a veritable " fortune."
    If Whitehead 's exposition situated propositions " a fter" " symbolic refer
ence " and " j udgment," it is because the point was to manifest that speech,
or la nguage, thanks to whose gift we have become souls, must be ap
proached from two distinct angles. Accord i ng to the fi rst, language is
" made to express" the reliefs of an experience that is not i nitia lly linguis
tic, and this is why thi ngs are then " easy to say," as i f words referred to
matters of fact that they limited themselves to describing. According
to the second angle, however, the point wi ll be to redescribe this experi
ence by introducing " propositions." Accordi ng to the first approach, lan
guage is marked, one might say, by redundancy and ca n therefore be re
duced to an instrument of communication, "there is an elephant," whereas
according to the second one it will exhibit itself as designating creativity,
which is the ulti mate. The first angle of approach will become, retroac
tively, as insepara ble from the second as the description of the living or
ganism, imposing its obstinate values at the cost of the destruction of
other societies, is inseparable from originality, which is the justification
of life. I f we wish to make the analogy explicit, we will say that the re
dundancy of language, insofa r as it rati fies an elimination, is a robbery
whose j usti fication designates propositional efficacy.
                                            A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   3 9 9




   Before we come to propositions as such, Whitehead has thus proposed a
kind of genealogy of the experiences that language requires but does not
explain. Such a genea logy is complementa ry to the " adventure of the
senses," but here the emphasis will be on the importance of a bstraction.
This is why we will start from the trap represented by the misplaced con
creteness associated with some of these a bstractions. In particular, the two
"errors " of construction noted by Whitehead in his critique of modern
schools of philosophy testify to this error: that of vacuous actuality and
that of quality as inherent in a substance. Vacuous actuality refers to what
would be devoid of su bjective experience. It is connected with the a bstrac
tion of simple loca lization, when we say, "This stone is where it is, and it
just 'is.' '' As far as the concept of a quality as inherent in substance is con
cerned, it corresponds to the influence of logical abstraction, which among
all relations privileges the attri butives ones: the leaf is green, and Socrates
is mortal. Linguistic expression is appropriate to this twofold a bstraction
in a privileged way, designating a world in which things that are contem
porary with one another, and with myself, appear, the bearers of sensible
qualities but bereft of any relation with one another other than spatial.
   This time, therefore, the point is no longer to criticize but to approach
what sets the trap. The world " placed as a spectacle and as logic," the
world that "appears to us," which we perceive in the way Whitehead was
to call " presentational immediacy," is certa inly a tra p as soon as philoso
phers try to construct their concepts while profiting from the abstractions
exhibited by the spectacle. Yet these a bstractions have nothi ng to do with
the categories we wou ld proj ect upon a mute reality. If this were the case,
a science such as physics, which depends on the measures of distance and
time, a nd therefore on the a bstraction constituted by simple loca l ization,
wou ld be " the daydream of a solitary intelligence with a taste for the day
dream of publication " ( PR, 329 ) . We must think of the percei ved world as
an audacious and sophisticated montage, whose metaphysical generalities
are to shed light on its selective a nd biased character, but in the sense that
this selection privi leges something important, testifying to important as
pects of a systematic order, without which we would not survive for an
instant.
   Perception in the mode of presentational immediacy, beca use it pro
poses a world made up of things that exist " simultaneously," indifferent to
one another, each one defined by its position relative to the others, would
be a daydream without the solidarity that Whitehead has interpreted in
terms of coordinate analysis, with each actuality confirming and prolong
ing the extensive continuum in which it situates itsel f. Yet we must not
confuse the indifference of what coexists in the " now " of simultaneity
4 0 0   COS M O LOGY




with the impartial articulation of coordinated situations. Nothing is less
impartial than presentational immediacy, than the experience of a " slice "
o f the world without past o r future. This experience exhibits the impor
tance of transmuted feelings (the attribution of color, for instance, to a
nexus) as wel l as of the social mode of extensiveness that cha racterizes
societies insofa r as they endure. Neither simultaneity nor "colored things "
exist outside of visual perception, but they translate a "cerebra l " trust in a
community of enduring beings that actualize a separation between " space "
and " time" according to interdependent modes. That tiger I see, and that I
see looking at me, may well be my way of inheriting the past: it is never
theless prudent that I wager that the past has not had my vision as its sole
heir, and that I think about runni ng away. Nor is this trust peculiar to
perception, for it is that without which detection would not have any
meaning either. I f the source of the smell that orients a butterfly's flight did
not endure on its own account while the butterfly is flying toward it, there
would be no butterflies.
   The indifference of presentational immediacy to contemporary actuali
ties in the environment cannot be exaggerated. It is only by reason of the
fortunate dependence of the experient and of these contemporary actu
alities on a common past, that presentational immediacy is more than a
barren aesthetic display ( PR, 324 ) .
   Presentational immed iacy obviously al lows a resumption of the dis
tinction Whitehead made i n The Concept of Nature between what we
are aware of in perception and what we percei ve. The ultimate fact con
stituted by the mind's " foothold " in nature, the relation of cogredience
between the percipient event that is " here " and the duration that is " now,"
is henceforth commented on in terms of " fortunate dependence." The fact
that perception itself induces us to pay "due attention" to the tiger is our
" fortune," the biased and selective wager we inherit with regard to what
ma tters . However, speculative interpretation will accentuate what The
Concept of Nature left i n the shadows, since Whitehead limited himsel f
to associating the percipient event with what he called, " roughly speak
i ng," " bod ily l i fe ." This dimension of experience obviously does not tes
tify to the " rea l " world as opposed to the abstraction of immed iacy. But
it testifies in a nother way, which Whitehead will ca ll "ca usa l efficacy " :
we a pprehend reality qua " making itself felt." I n other words, the idea
that what presents itsel f now in the mode of indifferent coexistence " has
made itsel f felt " through a route of sophisticated experiences that ends
up in a perception " there " is by no means, as some empi ricists would
maintain, an i ntel lectual hypothesis. On the contra ry, it is these empiri
cists who fa ll into the trap by denying what we know but what our lin
guistic statements can say only " rough ly."
                                           A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   4 0 1




    Whitehead never tires of crossing swords with H ume on the question
of causal ity. In the name of his system, H ume has denied the obvious. He
has denied what everyone knows: what " I see," I see " with my eyes," and
the feeling this " wi th my eyes " corresponds to testifies to the primordial
cha racter of the "causal efficacy " that his system turns into a j udgment
derived from " habit," with no regard, as we have seen, for what oculists
and prohi bitionists would think a bout that. Yet there is not even any
need for their testimonies. It is with an a lmost sadistic delight that White
head notes the a bsurdity in which H ume ends up when he underta kes
to reduce to the constraints of presentational immediacy a case where
bodily experience, instead of being inconspicuous and steady, makes it
self brutally felt: the experience of a man who blinks his eyes while a
l ightning bolt tears through the darkness.
   The sequence of percepts, in the mode of presentational immediacy, is
flash of light, feeling of eye-closure, instant of darkness. The three are
practically simultaneous, though the flash maintains its priority over the
other two, and these two latter percepts are indistinguishable as to prior
ity. According to the philosophy of organism, the man also experiences
another percept in the mode of causal efficacy. He feels that the experi
ences of the eye in the matter of the flash are causal of the blink. The man
himself will have no doubt of it. In fact, it is the feeling of causality which
enables the man to distinguish the priority of the flash; and the inversion
of the argument, whereby the temporal sequence "flash to blink " is made
the premise for the "causality " belief, has its origin in pure theory. The
man will explain his experience by saying, " The flash made me blink ":
and if his statement be doubted, he will reply, "I know it, because I felt it "
( PR, 1 75 ) .
   Philosophers who have adopted the subjectivist principle, including
Kant, who raises causality to the dignity of an a priori category, have
exaggerated-the favorite sin of philosophy. They have ignored the crowd
of vague feelings, which are hard to put into words but nevertheless bear
a quite different message, that of a " presence," not of a "presentation." We
may wel l describe the world as i f it were given to us as a spectacle or a
picture, and eliminate the notion of "cause," which does not belong to
the picture: the "causes " nevertheless make themselves felt. Of course, they
take on a meaning completely di fferent from the wel l-defined "causes " of
our reasoning: they designate the "efficacy " of those presences that testify,
simultaneously and inseparably, to a body and to things.
   The "causal feeling " according to that doctrine [n.b., that of Hume]
arises from the long association of well-marked presentations of sensa,
one precedent to the other. It would seem therefore that inhibitions of
sensa, given in presentational immediacy, should be accompanied by a
4 0 2   COS M O LOGY




corresponding absence of "causal feeling " [ . . . j Unfortunately the con
trary is the case. An inhibition of familiar sensa is very apt to leave us a
prey to vague terrors respecting a circumambient world of causal opera
tions. In the dark there are vague presences, doubtfully feared; in the si
lence, the irresistible causal e{fzcacy of nature presses itself upon us; in the
vagueness of the low hum of insects in an August woodland, the inflow
into ourselves of feelings from enveloping nature overwhelms us; in the
dim consciousness of half-sleep, the presentations of sense fade away, and
we are left with the vague feeling of influences from vague things around
us ( PR, 1 76 ) .
   The point i s n o longer to criticize, hut t o enunciate importance. Hume
made the mistake of trying to separate the i nseparable. Reducing percep
tive experience to presentational immediacy, he could only reintroduce
what he had first eliminated, in the guise of mere habits linked to our
associations: " this then that " becoming " this, therefore that." As we have
already seen, Whitehead also speaks of habits i n The Concept of Nature;
yet these a re not the habits of an individual, but of experience. For him,
these habits constitute not what should be d iagnosed, or even denounced,
but the veritable " fortune " of perceptive experience, what we a l l owe to
a past of which we are not the author.
   If perception is not a " daydream," it is because a l l perceptive experi
ence is in fact made up of two distinct perceptive modes, one pertaining
to presentational immediacy, and the other to causa l efficacy. It is in terms
of a particular, enduring articulation between these two modes that
Whitehead names " symbolic reference." The perception of that yellow
patch striped with black that I see over there is inseparable from a brutal
emotional transformation, giving its meaning to what is perceived : "a ti
ger! " or rather, "do I have time to run away? " What Whitehead calls
" symbolic " is not something referring to something else, inaccessible or
not. It is what we have in common with all animals endowed with per
ceptive experience. The emotion that may seize Christians when the host
is offered to them is, of course, more complex than the one that invades
a rahhit at the sight of a predator, but i f the Christians' faith approaches
the ideal called " simple faith," it does not, as such, require any particular
conceptual i nnovation. And when we " understand " a word, it is often in
the mode of a meaning " that goes without saying." The word, as an au
dible object uttered "there," is a " symbol," whereas meaning, sometimes
laden with emotion, refers to causal efficacy. We understand a word " be
cause it has a meaning."
  It is mistake to think of words as primarily the vehicle of thought. Lan
guage also illustrates the doctrine that in regard to a couple of properly
                                            A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U LS   4 0 3




correlated species of things, it depends upon the constitution of the percipi
ent subject to assign which species is acting as "symbol" and which as
 "meaning." The word "forest " may suggest memories of forests; but
equally the sight of a forest, or memories of forests, may suggest the word
 "forest " [ . . . J but we do not usually think of the things as symbolizing the
words correlated to them. This failure to invert our ideas arises from the
most useful aspect of symbolism. In general the symbols are more handy
elements in our experience than are the meanings. We can say the word
"forest " whenever we like; but only under certain conditions can we di
rectly experience an existent forest. To procure such an experience usually
involves a problem of transportation only possible on our holidays. Also it
is not so easy even to remember forest scenes with any vividness; and we
usually find that the immediate experience of the word "forest " helps to
elicit such recollections. In such ways language is handy as an instrument
of communication along the successive occasions of the historic route
forming the life of one individual. By an extension of these same principles
of behaviour, it communicates from the occasions of one individual to the
succeeding occasions of another individual ( PR, 1 82-1 8 3 ) .
   For Whitehead, the word is not the murder of the thing, but an i nstru
ment of communication that helps things to prolong themselves, to make
felt in our experience the causal efficacy associated with the past. Cor
relatively, language is here placed under the banner of red undancy, not
of thought. Only our relative d i fficulty in resuscitating vivid memories
makes the d i fference between the word qua symbol and what it evokes
qua its meaning.
   Symbolic reference has major pragmatic importa nce. The rabbit's
intense experience is fortunate: without it, it would no doubt not have
survived . The irrepressi ble relation between words and things is the daily
bread of human experience: without it, no language. But to talk a bout
fortune, or l uck, is also to ta lk about possibility of misfortune. Symbol ic
reference is always a risk, a nd this risk is also first and foremost prag
matic, as is testified by all the l ures ( l u res for feeling) prod uced by both
preys and predators . Here, however, a problem a rises: butterflies can also
be " l ured ." There does not seem to be a frank d istinction between what
I have called detection and what Whitehead ca lls " symbolic reference."
Except that, unlike detection, which I have risked associating with what
is incoercible, symbolic reference, because it is an articulation between
two distinct perceptive modes, opens up the possibility of hesitation and
of learning. The bird that has, more or less at random, spotted a cater pil
lar imitati ng a twig will begin to test all the twigs in its vicinity. "Twig"
henceforth signifies "might be a caterpillar! "
4 0 4   COSMOLOGY




   In fact, symbolic reference places us at a crossroad. In one sense, it con
stitutes a primary fact, the source of many perplexities for consciousness.
If a thunderbolt is, rather indubitably, the cause of your (incoercible)
blinking, it is not certain, in contrast, that the emotion that i nvades you,
ma kes you tremble, is "caused " by what you see there, in front of you.
One thinks of William James's undecidable question: am I moved because
the world is moving, or does the world seem to me to be moving because
I am moved ? On the other hand, however, we must not exaggerate. We
are not, as some claim, " imprisoned " i n the network of our symbols and
our meanings . What is true of the bird, who is able to learn, is even more
true for us. We can learn more, even about what moves us. And we are
(sometimes ) able to question a symbolic reference as such, to verify the
"correctness " of the articulation between symbol and meaning.
  Symbolism can be justified, or unjustified. The test of justification must
always be pragmatic [ . . . I The rightness, or wrongness, of symbolism is
an instance of the symbolism being fortunate or unfortunate; but mere
"rectitude " [ . . . I does not cover all that can be included in the more
general concept of "fortune." So much of human experience is bound up
with symbolic reference, that it is hardly an exaggeration to say that the
very meaning of truth is pragmatic. But though this statement is hardly
an exaggeration, still it is an exaggeration, for the pragmatic test can
never work, unless on some occasion-in the future, or in the present
there is a definite determination of what is true on that occasion. Other
wise the poor pragmatist remains an intellectual Hamlet, perpetually
adjourning decision of judgment to some later date. According to the
doctrines here stated, the day of judgment arrives when the "meaning " is
sufficiently distinct and relevant, as a perceptum in its proper pure mode,
to afford comparison with the precipitate of feeling derived from sym
bolic reference ( PR, 1 8 1 ) .
   If there is a privi lege of consciousness, it does not consist in symbolic
reference, which is attested j ust as well by the way chi mpanzees scatter
when an alarm signal sounds. Nor even in the deliberate manipulation of
symbolic reference, as is attested by the extraordinary i nvention by that
chimpanzee, observed by ethologists, who prod uced cries of alarm, then
calmly went to fl irt with a female abandoned by her fleeing male. Con
sciousness is surely in command, however, when ethologists determine
what an animal's "symbolic reference " articulates, when they use lures
not to trap an animal and feed upon it, but to correctly identify what
percept is articulated with what a ffect. It is not that these scientists "es
cape " pragmatic j ustification. Yet in their case, success does not designate
a hunger to be assuaged , but their concern to separate what concerns the
                                           A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   4 0 5




animal from what they themselves feel . They a re not hungry, but are con
cerned for truth.
   The fact that the day of j udgment may a rrive-relative, of course, to
the formulation of a doubt-i mplies that symbol ic reference may be
ta ken up i nto new adventures. Pragmatist philosophers exaggerate when,
referring all our constructions to their success, they forget that we a re
also capa ble of putting these constructions deliberately to the test, that is,
of seeking other types of success. Factual truth, for Whitehead, counts in
a sense similar to the fallibilist sense of Popper: not because it opposes
error, but because it presupposes the explicit awareness that " we might
be wrong," which someti mes ma kes the " day of j udgment" happen.
   "It is only a theory, and it might be contrary to the facts " is a concern
proper to i ntellectual life. The experience of a di sappointed expectation,
or of an ambiguous sign that " attracts an animal's attention," ma kes it
turn its head, or prick up its ears i nstead of runn i ng away without fur
ther ado, a l ready exhi bits the feeling of a possi ble contrast between a
" theory" correlated to a percept that belongs to the " immed iately pres
ent" world, and this world i nsofa r as it is or is not capable of "causing"
that which, emotionally, the theory evokes: terror, attraction, a ppetite,
and so on. The head that turns, the ea rs that stand up testify to a possible
contrast, foreign to detection, between the world i n the "causa l " sense
and the " theory " that i nterprets it. But it does not testi fy to the fact that
the animal experi ences a feeling of the theory qua theory.
  But a felt "contrary " is consciousness in germ. When the contrasts and
identities of such feelings are themselves felt, we have consciousness. It is
the knowledge of ideas, in Locke's sense of that term. Consciousness re
quires more than the mere entertainment of theory. It is the feeling of the
contrast of theory, as mere theory, with fact, as mere fact. This contrast
holds whether or not the theory be correct ( PR, 1 8 8 ) .
   Consciousness, as the " feeling o f the contrast o f theory, a s mere theory,
with fact, as mere fact," is a l l the more important in that our genuine
" fortune," the multi tude of our interpretations" exposes human percep
tion to error. The two go together: this may be a reason why on the sixth
day, receiving language, which ma kes interpretations and significations
proliferate, we became souls, concerned with making a di fference be
tween the correct and the noncorrect.
   The link between consciousness and theory, felt "as mere theory," an
nounces, of course, the intervention of the propositions that Whitehead,
as we know, baptized " theories." And we may understand here that
propositions first intervened in Whi tehead's thought " a fter " judgment,
oriented toward the contrast between correct and incorrect. His goal was
4 0 6   COSMOLOGY




to emphasize that judgment constitutes only a sma l l part of i ntel lectua l
experience, and t o provide himself with the means t o venture toward
imagi native experience, in which consciousness really ma kes a d ifference
with regard to perceptive hesitations.
   For example, consider the Battle of Waterloo. This battle resulted in the
defeat of Napoleon, and in a constitution of our actual world grounded
upon that defeat. But the abstract notions, expressing the possibilities of
another course of history which would have followed upon his victory,
are relevant to the facts which actually happened. We may not think it of
practical importance that imaginative historians should dwell upon such
hypothetical alternatives. But we confess their relevance in thinking about
them at all, even to the extent of dismissing them. But some imaginative
writers do not dismiss such ideas. Thus, in our actual world of today, there
is a penumbra of eternal objects, constituted by relevance to the Battle of
Waterloo. Some people do admit elements from this penumbral complex
into effective feeling, and others wholly exclude them. Some are conscious
of this internal decision of admission or rejection; for others the ideas
float into their minds as day-dreams without consciousness of deliberate
decision; for others, their emotional tone, of gratification or regret, of
friendliness or hatred, is obscurely influenced by this penumbra of alterna
tives, without any conscious analysis of its content ( PR, 1 85 ) .
   Perceptive experience, even i f i t has symbolic reference a s its fortune,
and the fact that we may be mistaken as its concern, does not suffice to
describe our experience. It does not give meaning to the interest of the
Battle of Waterloo for those who l ive themselves as the hei rs of the his
tory i t has decided . The multiple ways we " feel " the past, be it i n the
mode of that which, settled once and for all, leaves us free in the face of
an indeterminate future, or i n that of a debt we wi l l never finish paying,
do not call for a del i berate, pragmatic putting-to-the-test. Whereas judg
ment seems to prepare the definition of truth i n the logical sense, the
imagi nation reflects the fact that theory cannot be felt as theory without
the truth, in a logical sense, being recognized as importa nt, to be sure,
but pertaining to an extremely specialized i nterest.
   In fact, propositions a pparently intervened i n Whitehead's thought in
the same sense as symbolic reference and j udgment, i n the conti nuation
of a battle agai nst a logicist approach to thought. More precisely, the point
was to show that the "theories" privileged by this approach, because they
designate a well-determi ned state of affairs, which might or might not
verify them, are characterized by the red undancy associated with sym
bol ic reference. Veri fication, in the logical empiricist sense, has as its
cond ition the definition of a state of affa i rs whose meanings have already
                                          A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   4 0 7




been chosen by symbol ic reference and considered as having successfully
surmounted the test of judgment. The " truth " of a statement such as
" Socrates is a man " does not raise the sl ightest problem : the statement
comes at the end of the reasoning process, making explicit what has been
decided well before it.
   It is merely credulous to accept verbal phrases as adequate statements of
propositions. The distinction between verbal phrases and complete propo
sitions is one of the reasons why the logicians' rigid alternative, "true or
false," is so largely irrelevant for the pursuit of knowledge ( PR, 1 1 ).
    Logicist philosophy a ssigns a primary importance to the question of
the correspondence between a statement and a sta te of a ffa i rs, confus
ing " verbal phrase " and proposition, that is, the possibi l i ty of syntacti
cally orga nizing a series of words in a way that m ight correspond to
a state of a ffa i rs, and the felt contrast of theory, as mere theory, with a
state of a ffa irs qua mere state of a ffairs. This is why it marks a clear
propensity to focus on chimerica l or fictive beings, or on offensive be
l iefs, which, defined i n a purely l i nguistic mode, cannot generate any
true hesita tion .
    In The Concept of Nature, Whitehead had a l ready d istinguished be
tween " demonstrative " and " descriptive " statements ( CN, 1 1-1 2 ) . A
purely demonstrative statement exhi bits the redundancy associated with
symbolic reference. I f I were to move, I could point out what I am tal king
about. In contrast, when I say that Homer is the a uthor of the Iliad, my
statement is descriptive, since we know nothing a bout him except that
fact. If, however, I am tal king about the Iliad, my statements will once
again be demonstrative to experts, for their experience wi ll integrate a
contrast between what I say and such-and-such an aspect of their own
reading experience. Yet the same might be true if I have read a novel or
seen a film i n which " Homer " was depicted so that I remember it as if I
had k nown him. The fact that this Homer is a fictional character matters
l ittle: what matters is the contrast between the descriptive mode of verbal
functioni ng, presenting itself as sel f-sufficient, and the demonstrative
one, in which words activate symbol ic reference.
   The point to be emphasized is the insistent particularity of things expe
rienced and of the act of experiencing. Bradley's doctrine-Wolf-eating
Lamb as a universal qualifying the absolute-is a travesty of the evidence.
That wolf eat that lamb at that spot at that time: the wolf knew it; the
lamb knew it; and the carrion birds knew it. Explicitly in the verbal sen
tence, or implicitly in the understanding of the subject entertaining it,
every expression of a proposition includes demonstrative elements. In
fact each word, and each symbolic phrase, is such an element, exciting
4 0 8   COSMOLOGY




the conscious prehension of some entity belonging to one of the catego
ries of existence ( PR, 43 ) .
   Any verbal statement may function i n the mode o f a l ure for feeling,
but a statement is incapable of defining how it will function. Thus, the
very famous statement " this stone is grey " may be prod uced in the a b
sence of any stone, especially if it has been uttered in front of an audience
of logico-empi ricist philosophers . Perhaps in the same discussion, the
statement " the king of France is bald " will sound forth, or " the moon is
a piece of white cheese," unless discussion turns to unicorns. The possi
bil ity of tal k i ng a bout a unicorn, a bout a k i ng of Fra nce today, a bout
a celestia l white cheese or a n a bsent grey stone i mplies that the corre
sponding statements are not to be confused with the expression of prop
ositions. Even fiercely Republican Frenchmen can hear tal k a bout the
" present king of France " without flinching, if they are logicians. Nor do
these statements i nd icate a ny particular urgency with regard to the dis
tinction to be made between what has never existed, wha t no longer ex
ists, what is defi ned as false, and what is stil l available for designation.
There is no hurry, beca use everybody knows a bout that. The only ques
tion is how best to formulate th is d ifference generaliter.
   In other words, if the sta tement " this stone is grey " can " work " in this
case, if it does not i nspire astonished looks on the faces of the l isteners
as they wonder what stone the speaker could possi bly be talking a bout, it
is because its production, in this mode, has a very particular environment
as its condition. "This stone," perhaps placed in contrast to " this unicorn,"
presupposes the existence of the community of specialists for whom the
contrast is a watchword, causing no unease, inspiring no worry, no thought:
pure communication, fully belonging to the routines of logicism. Neither
the stone nor its color is of interest to the specialists, but only the way
thei r attention may eventually be attracted to new formulations, impor
tant for them, of the relation between language and states of affairs. The
statement itself is often nothing more than the signal that the community
has to deal with one of its favorite problems, and the specialists will wait
patiently for the eventual appearance of what Whitehead would call
genuine propositions, which will sed uce or horrify them, or at least give
rise to the feeling of a possi ble contri bution to a controversy, or a con
trast, with regard to the state of affairs that constitutes the consensus of
the community.
   A vague impression of uneasiness, of a " felt contrary," on the part of
one of the specialists l istening to a col league talking about the grey stone.
Is the specialist conscious, or not ? The matter is undecidable, si nce the
mere fact that she asks hersel f the question will produce consciousness
                                            A N D   THEY   B E C A M E   S O U L S   4 0 9




and i ts verification : " I heard what was just said, therefore I was con
scious." In contrast, the question of consciousness no longer arises if our
specialist's body suddenly freezes, while the diffuse uneasiness is trans
formed into the feeling of a contrast between a statement heard and wha t
becomes a " fact." A specific aspect of H ume's position, which she had
perhaps never thought of explicitly i n that way, has become relevant in
that it contrad icts the statement she has j ust heard . The sta tement has
done its job as a l ure : listening has become fully conscious, with each new
statement nourishing a process of verification of disagreement, while the
renewed understanding of Hume becomes ever more explicit, prod uced in
a way that did not exist prior to the disagreement, in a way that perhaps
comes into existence for the first time. An epochal change.
   Here we must pa use, for the contrast I have just described leads us to
associate propositions and thought, or consciousness, in a specific way.
This, i ndeed , is how Whitehead first introd uces them. But when, in the
third part of Process and Reality, which is devoted to the " theory of pre
hensions," he moves on to generic considerations, independent of our
particular modes of functioning, the contrast between conscious thought
and symbolic reference will disa ppear. This contrast belongs to social
adventures that designate us i n our di fference from ra bbits . O ther forms
of experience, assigning other degrees of i mporta nce, might a lso have
been conceivable. It is possi ble, for i nsta nce, to imagine bei ngs endowed
with another kind of memory, for whom an experienced scene imposes
itself with the vivid ness of the present, and who use words as markers,
not as "endowed with meani ng." It would then be the word that would
be associated with the past, with a past classificatory convention, and
that should be evoked . The association between proposition and verbal
consciousness is i mporta nt, to be sure, but it should not be exaggerated .
   When Whitehead i ntroduces propositions in a generic mode, he wil l
introduce them in relation t o " propositional feeli ngs," a n d these w i l l con
cern both the routine use of words and words that turn an experience
upside down: both the rabbit head i ng as usual for his lair and the one that
flees when the silhouette of a predator suddenly appears. In short, propo
sitions wil l no longer intervene in the discussion of the contrast between
" symbol ism" and "conscious thought." The question wil l be generalized
to the role played by a proposi tional feeling in the experience of which it
is an ingredient.
   In order to reca ll the former distinction, I will cal l " propositional effi
cacy " the capacity of a propositional feeling to make a path of occasions
bifurcate, to " mark an event " or to " mark an epoch." The di fference is, of
course, hard to discern, si nce as soon as I evoke " the Battle of Waterloo "
4 1 0   C O S M O LOGY




as an example of what might be, i n certain experiences, bereft of any
efficacy, I feel that efficacy. The di fference i s thus relative to a " social en
vironment," not to the "propositional feeling " as such . On the other hand,
this d ifference also concerns the rabbit with its perceptive habits, the al
fal fa field, the rabbit hole, a familiar tree, and the efficacy upon i t of the
sudden noise or of a sil houette appearing unexpected ly. The d ifference, in
this case, is crucial for survival: it designates the rabbit "on the watch,"
" always ready to flee."
   The point is not to affirm that every occasion is susceptible of admit
ting " propositional feelings." What is at stake certainly concerns the rab
bit, probably not the electron . But it does impose a certain correction of
the excess subjectivity associated with consciousness. We are so perme
ated by the opposition between objective statement and fiction that we
must evoke decisive i ntellectual experiences- " but that isn't what Hume
says! "-to make recognizable the efficacy proper to language, its func
tion as a " l ure for feeling." We need to recal l that there are " words that
kil l " and " words that change everythi ng." Yet once propositional efficacy
has been recognized , it must be situated , and it must be admitted that the
" propositional feeli ng " to which it testi fies is j ust as relevant where we
evoke habits of experience, that is, in any case, for the totality of experi
ences marked by awareness, or the contrast between what we are aware
of in perception and what we perceive. In this case, of course, theory is
not felt as theory, but a habit does constitute a " theory."
   Whitehead 's discovery of the general iza ble character of propositional
feeli ng, that is, of propositions qua l ure for feeling, was no doubt one of
the events that ma rked the writi ng of Process and Reality. As usual, he
did not note the event, a nd left it up to the reader to d raw all the conse
quences. This may be the reason why propositions are rather neglected i n
Whiteheadian studies. Yet the style of this event is typically Whitehead 
ian. When, in The Concept of Nature, Whitehead had dissociated recog
nition from any psychological or neurophysiological discussion, rather
add ressing what it requi res, the object that is there "once again," he had
already placed the Platonic "great question," the one that permits the in
vocation of the Ideas, under the banner of the greatest genera l ity. Here,
the generality that propositional feelings wi ll al low us to conceive is the
difference between the cases that Whitehead groups as " primitive," i n
which t h e categories of transmission a n d transmutation suffice, that is,
in which " conformal " reprod uction predominates, and the cases i n which
partiality matters, and we are led to speak of " recognition," of " i nterpre
tation," and even of origi nality and novel ty. This is the generality White
head had designated when, in Science and the Modern World, he distin-
                                            A N D   THEY   B E C A M E   S O U L S   4 1 1




guished between " physical " occasions and " mental " occa sions. I n Process
and Reality, every occasion has officially received a menta l pole, and the
genera lity m ust be reformulated . It is needed in order to express the
rather radica l contrast between the electron and the physicists who dem
onstrated the existence of the electron.
  The low-grade organism is merely the summation of the forms of
energy which flow in upon it in all their multiplicity of detail. It re
ceives, and it transmits, but it fails to simplify into intelligible system
( PR, 254 ) .
   The proposition will thus henceforth b e li nked to the question o f a b
straction as such, an a bstraction that is not in the first instance cognitive,
nor linguistic, for it a lready designates the " what" of perception, that is,
the meaning associated with a symbol ic reference as wel l. Accord ing to
Leibniz, it is preferable to hear Socrates tell why he is drinking the hem
lock, rather than to describe in all their details the corporeal, muscular, and
physiological movements that would ( ideally) reduce his gesture, from the
cup to the l ips, to the result of " physical causes." For Whitehead, even if it
were completely described, Socrates' gesture could never be ana lyzed i n
terms o f " i mpartial " causes. Yet this only enriches the Leibnizian contrast:
in a ny case, being able to listen to Socrates' reasons constitutes a very
fortunate simplification, and any simplification, fortunate or unfortunate,
has its reason . This reason refers to the ingression of an eternal object into
a feeling, in a mode associated with a selective and partial " how," a b
stracting from what does not matter to it.
   With propositions, then, eternal objects will intervene in a way that is
new, but as always perfectly d istinct from the one they have been sus
pected of playing as Platonic ideas in d isguise. Their ingression will be
synonymous with novelty, originality, and partiality. Transmutation, which
                                                              °
conditions perception, signals a new mode of ingression for an eternal ob
ject, but it cannot give meaning to the fact that " what is transmuted " may
be endowed as such with a meaning, even with the simplest " being there."
As for the suddenly perceived predator, it is not a simple contrasting com
position of colored patches " over there." The colored " nexus," coexisting
with the other components of my world in the indifferent mode proper to
presentational i mmed iacy, has suddenly been transformed into a testi
mony to their active cond ition: "it's a tiger! " In The Concept of Nature,
Whitehead could only emphasize the importance of active conditions, the
attention due to the role they play, for to go further would have required
questioning the mind, which was the ultimate. Here, however, the sudden
attention to what actively conditions this colored contrast reflects the fact
that the eternal object that makes ingression with a proposition is new
4 1 2       C O S M O LOGY




with regard to physical feelings, which wil l henceforth be defined as the
"subjects of the proposition."
   In fact, when Whitehead introd uces propositions with the status of
existents, his first problem wi ll be to distinguish them from eternal ob
jects . Every time he had evoked a concrete case requiring eternal objects,
it was to an experience, of which a propositional feel i ng is an ingredient,
that he had referred . "This is a circle." The major contrast defined by
Whitehead between eternal objects and propositions is that, whereas
eternal objects say nothing a bout their ingressions, propositions
   [ . 1 are the tales that might perhaps be told about particular actuali
        .   .



ties ( PR, 256 ) .
   Eternal objects are " pure " potentials, that i s , without particular refer
ence to any actuality, any particular epoch. This is why conceptua l feel
ings belong to any concrescence. In particular, they are required so that
from physical feelings may derive feelings of " how" what was felt was
felt. This means, correlatively, that they do not communicate as such with
any particular experience, whether conscious or not. We never have the
experience of an eternal object as such, for every experience is always
"such-and-such " an experience, whereas the eternal object refers to " any"
experience.
   In contrast, every proposition is " i mpure," requiring the cosmic epoch
in which the subjects of the stories that " might be tol d " exist. The color
blue requires visual organs, at the least. Even a mathematical truth, such
as " one plus one equals two," is l inked to a cosmic epoch, Whitehead
specifies, an epoch in which there exist societies enduring enough for the
notion of two bei ngs existing " at the same time " to have meaning.
   There is no difficulty in imagining a world-i.e., a cosmic epoch-in
which arithmetic would be an interesting fanciful topic for dreamers, but
useless for practical people engrossed in the business of life. In fact, we
seem to have been only barely rescued from such a state of things. For
amid the actual occasions located in the wilds of so-called "empty space,"
and well removed from the enduring objects which go to form the endur
ing material bodies, it is quite probable that the contemplation of arith
metic would not direct attention to any very important relations of things.
It is, of course, a mere speculation that any actual entity, occurring in such
an environment of faintly coordinated achievement, achieves the intricacy
of constitution required for conscious mental operations ( PR, 1 99 ) .
   Whitehead defi nes a second i mportant contrast between eternal ob
jects and propositions, or, more precisely, a contrast that gives impor
tance to the " perhaps" that appears in the first contrast, the tales that
might perhaps be tol d. Unlike eternal objects, which cannot be said to be
                                             A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U LS   4 1 3




true or false, it belongs to the definition of proposition to have to be
" true" or " false."
  But its own truth, or its own falsity, is no business of a proposition.
That question concerns only a subject entertaining a propositional feel
ing with that proposition for its datum ( PR, 25 8 ) .
   I t i s crucial to emphasize that the proposition i n itself ca nnot b e said to
be true or fa lse, any more than the eternal objects: in itself, it is indetermi
na te with regard to the way it wi ll be entertai ned . As a lure-" what might
be " sa id, or felt, about particular actual entities-it raises a question. It is
the decision with regard to the fact that the proposition will or will not be
realized, whether or not the correspond ing propositional feeling will be
an i ngredient of the entity's final satisfaction, that determines the " truth " of
the proposition. The role that propositional feeling will play, the meaning
that will be associated with it, the decision concerning the " might be," also
depends on the prehend ing subject of the proposition.
   Quite obviously, the truth of a proposition has nothi ng to do with logic.
Logical truth belongs to consciousness, and we cannot ha ve consciousness
of the i ngredients of our satisfactions. Nor does this truth designate the
question of "attention to truth." A proposition, true because its feeling is
the ingred ient of an experience, may nevertheless be entertained in the
mode of derision: "No, you idiot, we're in Africa: that's not a tiger, it's a
zebra." The negation, as wel l as the affirmation, i mply the entertainment or
realiza tion of a proposition. Entertai nment merely means that the entities
designated as its subjects by the proposition actually assume, in a feeling
that is an i ngredient of the entity's satisfaction, the role that the proposi
tion assigns to them. Again, however, the role that the feeling will play in
satisfaction is not itself determined .
   The primary mode of realization of a proposition in an actual entity is
not by judgment, but by entertainment. A proposition is entertained when
it is admitted into feeling. Horror, relief, purpose, are primarily feelings
involving the entertainment of propositions ( PR, 1 8 8 ) .
   The truth o f a proposition thus corresponds, more o r less, to the mean
i ng " true" that Wi lliam James associated with pure experience: it is an
ad herence. But ad herence m ust be separated from any psychologica l con
notation. One adheres as soon as what is proposed " ma kes sense," inde
pendently of the mea ning that wi l l be conferred upon it. The pigeo n that
learns to tap with its bea k on a circular form in order to be fed no doubt
" entertains" a proposition, i n the mode of a purpose. With propositions,
Whitehead thus has the means to a ffirm the inadequate character of any
description that would place perception under the banner of neutral i ty.
Any " objective " concrete perception presupposes that a propositional
4 1 4   C O S M O LOGY




feeling has been entertained , that the proposition is " true," but the enter
taining of a proposition makes it a " l ure" for other feelings: it " makes
one feel," and always in a determinate mode.
   Horror, rel ief, and purpose all imply " bod ily life," the causal efficacy
associated with the body. Are we committi ng an inj ustice against the but
terfly, or on the contrary doing justice to its d ifference, if, refusing per
ception to it, we refuse it a propositional purpose, relief, or horror ? And
what about the eye that blinks when l ightning flashes ? That hesitation
which speculative phi losophy can make explicit, but not, quite obviously,
decide, will i ntervene every ti me a being, unlike an electron or a falling
stone, exhi bits a partiality that seems to have to be associated with an
experience entertaining a proposition, but we lack any imagi native ac
cess with regard to that experience. What properly characterizes detec
tion is "I cannot imagine " : I can, of course, evoke i ncoercible nausea, but
this is precisely the contrary of an i mage.
   Propositional feelings are not, however, specifically a l l ied with what
we can imagi ne, any more than conceptua l feeling are. Instead, proposi
tions are closely linked to what Whitehead generically calls " originality."
Their feeling is the capture of a particular-that is, partia l-relation be
tween felt entities, and more precisely the capture of those entities qua
articulated by a particular relation .
   In the proposition, the eternal object, in respect to its possibilities as a
determinant of nexus, is restricted to these logical subjects [ . . . I this
eternal object is the "predicative pattern " of the proposition [ . . . I thus
the physical feeling indicates the logical subjects and provides them re
spectively with that individual definition necessary to assign the hypo
thetic status of each in the predicative pattern. The conceptual feeling
provides the predicative pattern (PR, 257-25 8 ) .
    Like all feelings, propositional feelings derive from a n integration be
tween conceptual feelings and physica l feel ings, but in this case concep
tual feel ings and physical feelings are articulated in a new way, which
could be associated with a " mobil ization." The question is no longer
" how" to feel, but it also bears upon " what" is felt. The proposi tion sig
ni fies that the " how," of which the ingression of an eternal object is a
determination, now designates particular " l ogical subjects." Proposi
tional feelings eliminate from physica l feeling everything that exceeds the
role of logical subject, which felt entities are cal led upon to play. Even if
it means, of course, that what is elimi nated becomes the su bject of other
feelings, which can create the kind of dramatic contrast accord ing to
which " the word is the murder of the thing."
                                           A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   4 1 S




   In a proposition the logical subjects are reduced to the status of food
for a possibility. Their real role in actuality is abstracted from; they are
no longer factors in fact, except for the purpose of their physical indica
tion. Each logical subject becomes a bare " i t " among actualities, with its
assigned hypothetical relevance to the predicate ( PR, 25 8 ) .
   The difficulty raised in Science and the Modern World by the question
of whether eternal objects might not ultimately be " what" is prehended ,
tra nsforming actuality i nto a k i nd of ra tification of the ideal situation,
i s thus solved . The brea king off ( SMW, 1 7 1 ) that Whitehead associated
with " menta l " experience is none other than the pred icative pattern, and
it does not need to refer to a principle of limitation: it is l i mited, and may
infect experience with limitation. The modes of experience that give pri
macy to the a bstraction ( for instance, that of presentational immediacy ),
correspond quite precisely to the working of a propositiona l feeling.
What is felt is literally placed in the service of the predicative pattern; it
is henceforth felt only as what this pattern ind icates as its terms. The
proposition is the vector of a bstraction.
    When the cry "a tiger! " marks the horrified entertainment of a new
proposi tion in perceptive experience, the delicate contrasts between col
ors are eliminated , the colored patch is no longer anything more than a
logical subject. Yet, of course, the possibility of such a logical subject be
longs to the epoch when animals endowed with perception came into
existence on earth. Otherwise, the proposition would litera lly " have no
meaning." When John the Baptist proposes that God could transform
even the stones themselves into the children of Abra ham, the stones that
the prophet was probably designating did not tremble with hope; their
endura nce as stones was not d isturbed, for the logica l subjects with which
the problem of belonging to the people of God arises were not incl uded in
their experience. For them, the statement of the problem has no meaning.
Its efficacy is restricted to those who could say to themselves with regard
to themselves: "am I, or could I become, a subject of election? " In fact,
the very gesture that designates the stones excludes them . They are logical
subjects of the proposition, in the sense that they a re bereft of everything
that makes them real stones. "Even stones!" None of the fea tures that
characterize the chosen people as the logical subject of the proposition of
covenant constitutes a guara ntee any longer, except perhaps endurance.
  Evidently new propositions come into being with the creative advance of
the world. For every proposition involves its logical subjects; and it can not
be the proposition which it is, unless those logical subjects are the actual
entities which they are. Thus no actual entity can feel a proposition, if its
4 1 6   COSMOLOGY




actual world does not include the logical subjects of that proposition.
The proposition " Caesar crossed the R ubicon " could not be felt by
Hannibal in any occasion of his existence on earth. Hannibal could feel
propositions with certain analogies to this proposition, but not this prop
osition ( PR, 259).
    One might as well be talking to a stone! This is the desperate exclama
tion of a mathematics teacher when a student does not prod uce the "[ get
it " that signa ls the entertainment of the propositional feeling required by
mathematical definitions, even though they appear fully expl icit to the
teacher. Mathematical language, by the spectacular contrast between its
intel ligibi lity, when the logical subjects of a proposition belong to the
experience of the person who hears a statement, and the radica l perplex
ity of the person for whom " that makes no sense," strongly exhibits the
relation between propositions and the creative advance of the worl d . Yet
it ca n be said, more generally, that it is the proper character of all lan
guage to give their ful l importance to propositions, not insofar as they
themselves have the power to ca use, in the sense of the ontological prin
ciple, but i n that their entertainment l ures us into feeling, thinking, speak 
i ng, in short, becomes, in the most various ways, a n ingred ient o f the
experiences that will fol low it.
   What we ca l l " memory " or " image " are, of course, saturated with
propositions. During his multiple expeditions to many lands, Caesar had
the opportu nity to cross many rivers, but we remember that " Caesar
crossed the Rubicon," and if we remember this, it is because when he and
his soldiers, ful ly armed, crossed this river (which no Roman army could
cross on pain of bei ng declared outlaws), they knew they were crossing
" the Rubicon " : not a mere river, but a frontier/image that made them
topple into an unforeseeable future. This is why the Rubicon was " what
had been crossed " for all the soldiers, right from the first step taken by
Caesar's horse. As far as the physical ad venture of the encounter with the
cold water of the river is concerned , it does not belong to the proposi
tiona l image, except, perhaps, in the personal experience of a soldier, or
for a novel ist who might evoke the episode under the banner, for instance,
of the contrast between the greatness of the moment and the prosaic char
acter of the sensation.
  One of Caesar's old soldiers may in later years have sat on the bank of
the river and meditated on the assassination of Caesar, and on Caesar's
passage over the little river tranquilly flowing before his gaze. This would
have been a different proposition from the more direct one which [ am
now considering. Nothing could better illustrate the hopeless ambiguity
of language; since both propositions {it the same verbal phraseology.
                                           A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   4 1 7




There is yet a third proposition: a modern traveler sitting on the ban k of
the Rubicon, and meditating on his direct perceptions of actual occasions
can locate. relatively to himself by spatio-temporal specifica tions, an
event which inferentially and conjecturally he believes to include a por
tion of the past history of the Rubicon as directly known to him [ . . . 1
Then there is the proposition which m ight have been in the mind of one
of the crowd who listened to Antony's speech, a man who had seen
Caesar and not the Rubicon ( PR, 1 96 ) .
   Every proposition, o f course, i s abstract, even the one that incl udes a s
its logical subject a " Caesa r " whom the soldier sitting beside the river had
known well, even the one that ma kes Caesar hi mself think, "I, Caesar,
have crossed the Rubicon," although his horse has barely begun its move
ment. Yet abstraction explains nothing. On the contrary, it is the proposi
tion's regime of existence, the feeling of which it is the object, and the role
this feel ing wil l play in experience, that decide upon the abstraction and
its role, even the simple descriptive statement that may float in school
time memory: " Caesar, that was the guy who crossed the Rubicon . . . " Is
the statement still a lure for feeling? The question has become undecid
able, in the sense that the proposition's efficacy, what it lures to, no longer
implies the risk taken by Caesar, any more than " the moon is made of
white cheese " implies an epoch when moon and white cheese were food
for a proposition that designates and articulates them. Dead a bstractions
of scholastic knowledge, or of the "cases " of ana lytic philosophy.
   With language, the proposi tional efficacy " Caesar has crossed the
Rubicon! The times are changing, and nothing will be as before! " is ex
hibited, as well as red undant routine. But language does much more than
" express " an epoch, that is, a society and the logica l subjects that are
part of a n experience qua socia l . It is itself the operator of changes of
epoch, on every scale. Such is, ultimately, the reason why we became
souls when we recei ved language. And what we call " souls " must there
fore designate the multiple epochs that a re entangled in a human person.
The soul has no other identity than the propositional efficacies to which
the innumerable habits of a particular human experience are vulnerable.
Yet nei ther this multitude nor the vul nera bi l i ty itself designates " lan
guage " as such, but each language, what makes sense for each language,
what another la nguage is often unable to translate.
   Mathematics teachers must trust " mathematical language " qua trans
lata ble i nto a l l la nguages . This is why they persevere, hoping that their
statement, in one of its particular versions, or else the effect of the con
trasting succession of such versions will bring a bout a change of epoch
for the student, the correlative rea lization of the logical subjects and of
4 1 8   COS M O LOGY




propositional feeli ng, "So that's what you meant! " As far as John the
Baptist is concerned , he speculated on the propositional efficacy of his
furious and oh-so-e1oquent gesture: "Even the stones! " This gesture pre
supposed an epoch, that is, auditors whose language presupposes the
possibility of enterta ining the proposition that ma de them the logical
subjects of the covena nt. For this is what would make them vulnerable to
the propositional efficacy of the proposed modi fication, of the i nclusion
of new logica l subjects in the proposition "covenant," of the incl usion of
anyone at a l l ! And all those who " heard " the prophetic excla mation ad
hered, were infected, even i f some of them su bsequently refuted the state
ment, shrugged thei r shoulders, and forgot. The proposition is indi fferent
to its consequences, it does not say how it should be felt, and obviously,
not every enterta inment signifies a change of epoch, even at the level of
an individual thread of experience. Nevertheless, the fact that the prophet
himself could utter this terri ble statement is inseparable from the voca
tion he enterta ined for it, a vocation which presupposes that, sharing the
sa me language with his auditors, he was addressing their "soul." He in
tended to make an epoch topple, to infect with a previously i nconceiv
able alternative the experience of the proposition that ma kes the Jewish
people the subject of the covenant.
   In Science and the Modern World, Whitehead had made what he cal led
"abrupt realization " the source of error, truth, a rt, ethics, and religion. He
takes up this passage explicitly in Process and Reality, while stating the
importance of propositions ( PR, 1 8 9 ) . When Whitehead cites himself, it is
not to cover his tracks, to create the impression of a false unity, but, quite
the contrary, to celebrate a reunion: not with hi mself, but with what had
already obliged him to think. He succeeded in "saving " a statement, as a
mathematician must save, in the new formal language that he explores, all
the relevant mathematical truths already acquired. In this case, then,
" propositions " enable Whitehead to recuperate the thesis of the " great re
fusal " for which, in Science and the Modern World, he had needed God .
   The abrupt rea lization of Science and the Modern World had been
placed under the banner of li mitation. To the i mporta nce of propositions
" rendered not true" by a decision corresponded the necessity of an ab
straction bearing upon what is actually decided . What Caesar's decision,
when crossi ng the Rubicon, renders " not true " must be li mited; otherwise,
his decision could be assimilated to the behavior of an electron, blind with
regard to what " really" determines it and to its many repercussions. As I
have emphasized , it is i mpossible to know whether Whitehead had taken
the measure of the risk he was running by ma king God intervene as a
principle of limitation . The undecida ble character of the question il lus-
                                           A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U LS   4 1 9




trates, moreover, the abrupt character of real ization: " what seems to you
to be an impl icit consequence of my position, you may of course make
me admit it, a nd you can even make me admit that I 'should have' k nown
it, and even, i f you are in the mood for torturing, that I in fact knew it;
but whatever I may be led to admit subsequently, the fact is that I had
perceived my position, or the problem, in that way and not otherwise." In
any case, the risk has henceforth been avoided . The propositions ren
dered " not true " by a decision are significant insofar as a nother decision
might, socially, have made them true. Did Caesar render " not true " the
propositions that woul d have l ured him i nto submission to the Senate or
into flight, consideri ng the offensive character of the act he was commit
ting? Or did he just decide to cross the river i n spite of them? Error, truth,
art, ethics, and rel igion are so many examples exhibiting propositional
efficacy i n conscious adventures marked by risk, the possibility of fai lure,
and the explicit cal l upon the future.
   When, i n the eighteenth century, the new proposition resounded : " a l l
men a re equal i n right " (and not: a l l a r e equally the children of God ),
what was a ffirmed was the risk taken with regard to social states of a f
fai rs, a nd it was the future that was appealed to. This mea ns, more tech
nical ly, that it was i ndeed the future that was to be infected. Those who
would actually be i n fected by it might very wel l deny human equal i ty,
limit its import to specific circumstances, negotiate its consequences,
ra ise its problem. Nevertheless, if they are truly infected, if they belong to
that epoch in which this proposition makes sense, the equality that desig
nates all men as its logical subjects will be included in their experience,
by way of contrast, when the word " ma n " or " huma n " is pronounced. It
will be, in this sense, " true."
   It is here that the " scars " ( PR, 226-227 ) left by what negative prehen
sions have eliminated take on a l l their importa nce. I am not speaking of
the " rendered not-true " that is a positive, conscious part of experience
but of the many repercussions of the abstraction that are part of propo
sitional efficacy-what is described a fterward by means of sentences
such as "they should have known that . . . " or "how could they not under
stand that . " The " emotional tone " associated with sca rs l i nks the
            .   .



Whiteheadian notion of epoch to a rad ical historicism: the adventure of
propositions " makes an epoch," but the way it ma kes an epoch al lows us
to understand that those who refute a statement a re j ust as m uch part of
the same " history " as those who a ffirm it or as those who echo the inter
stitial expression of what has been rendered not-true.
   Oliver Cromwell's cry echoes down the ages, "My brethren, by the bow
els of Christ I beseech you, bethink that you may he mistaken " (SMW, 1 6 ) .
4 2 0   COSMOLOGY




   The obstinate insistence of a realized propos ition is obviously neutral
with regard to the di fference between good and evi l . If the proposition
" a l l men are equal i n right" opens up new possibil ities of evil on the part
of those who reject it, it also opens such possi bil ities for those who re
ceive it in a positive sense. For once a propositional feel i ng has infected
experience, nothing is harder to imagine than that experience might not
entertai n it. There will be evi l consequences of the revolt of a furious
mathematics teacher i n front of her student, " deaf as a stone." This is
why a lso it is so easy to " transcend one's epoch." From the d i fficulty each
of us has in accepting that the way we think and feel belongs to an epoch
may well follow "they are all racists without even knowing it! " uttered
agai nst those who do not belong to our particular epoch, in which each
person is supposed to be the logical subject for a proposition of equality.
Those who ad here can then become " hogs," that is, transform the pro
posed equa l i ty i nto a vector of legiti mate destruction, j udging " the
others " qua needing, voluntarily or by force, to be educated toward the
universal . Rendering " non-true " (/ know, but still!) the propositions deal
ing with the historica l character of equality between men, they a re the
designated prey for the trick of evil.
   We require to understand how the unity of the universe requires its
multiplicity. We require to understand how infinitude requires the finite.
We require to understand how each immediately present existence re
quires its past, antecedent to itself; and requires its future, an essential
factor in its own existence [ . . . I Again we require to understand how
mere matter-of-fact refuses to be deprived of its relevance to potentiali
ties beyond its own actuality of realization ( MT, 8 3 ) .
    Propositional efficacy i s obviously required b y speculative philosophy,
whose speculation dea ls precisely with the possibility of " leaps of the
imagination," without which its statements would not make sense. O f
course, every statement is saturated with abstractions, a n d every abstrac
tion, of course, works as a " lu re for feeling," demand ing, in order to as
sume meani ng, an entertainment that it does not explain. Yet it is the
singularity of speculative abstractions to exhi bit this demand. " Social
abstractions " translate symbolic references that are rel atively stable, and
propose themselves most often as designating a state of affai rs or as de
riving from consensual obviousness . John the Baptist's prophetic state
ment speculates on a change of epoch, but he was careful not to announce
it; otherwise, that statement would be enterta ined as a witty remark or a
" mere speculation." Speculative a bstractions, for their part, wager on the
interstices of our social a bstractions, not to disqualify them but in order
to activate what lurks in these interstices, the " feeling " of the abstraction
                                            A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   4 2 1




as such . They are meant to disclose misplaced abstractions and their
pow er, a power that may infect us to the point that we can read, with a
stra ight face, that it is the sequential association between the lightning
and the blinking of the eyes that makes us conclude that the l ightning is
cause of the blinking .
    With the existents known as propositions, then, Whitehead h a s pro
vided himself with the means for speculative philosophy to account for
what is required by the efficacy it cla ims. A verita ble " machi ne" for sug
gesting " non-conforma l " propositional feelings, it is " epocha l," of course,
because the propositional efficacy i t aims at designates the socia l ab
stractions of a language which, in multiple ways, has stabil ized the bi
furcation of nature. Its effects on di fferent readers, who would not be
infected by these abstractions, a re unpred icta ble. Yet we can spea k of
it as i f it were a language, i n the same sense as the mathematica l or
physico-mathematical languages. Like them, it exhibits abstraction:
Whitehead ian " applications" a re abstract language machines that make
the routine dimension of verbal statements, thei r redundancy with regard
to perceived things, shrink to a minimum, and deploy propositional effi
cacy to the maximum.
    Yet propositions open up sti ll other questions. In particular, they may
entail a new flight of experience toward the "order of nature," which has
become a "cosmos," and open up some hypotheses with regard to the
" l ure for feeling" provided for each entity by " God."
    The fact that propositions can play so many roles, in so many ques
tions, is a good indication that their entertainment, or what Whitehead
calls their " truth," is neutral with regard to their meaning. It is the role
pla yed by the propositional feeling in satisfaction that is not neutra l, and
is never neutra l . Making sense is neutra l, but it ca lls for a signification
that is never such . A proposi tional feeling is, therefore, somewhat l i ke
the conceptual feeling of those eterna l objects called " sensa," eminently
available for the most disparate experiences. Unlike a sensum, a proposi
tion is always relative to an epoch, but once that epoch is given, it may be
engaged in the most diversified adventures or, more precisely, the most
divergent ones.
    Another way of talking about " what makes sense " is to say " that's
relevant." And releva nce is always what Whitehead has associated with
God. Divine intervention-the a nswer to the question "what is the best
(or this impasse? "-is certainly not thereby clarified, but the concept of a
proposition already creates the necessa ry distance between envisaging
and actua lizing. If God 's answer is propositiona l, it is indeterminate with
rega rd to the way i t will be " enterta i ned " by final satisfaction or even to
4 2 2   COSMOLOGY




whether, i n the final a na lysis, it will be entertai ned at a l l . And this i nde
terminacy is definitiona l : if it is a divine proposition that initiates the
subjective aim of a concrescence, God does not precede actuality, does
not enterta i n an idea l conception of what it shou ld prod uce, a nd there
fore will not judge it by the sta ndard of that conception. Here, the term
" relevant " takes on its fully conjectural and limited value, thanks to which
an occasion is i ndeed an " occasion," a singular moment, not a simple as
pect of the world as it would be envisaged by God . What Whitehead a f
firmed, without qu ite being able to j ustify it, in Science and the Modern
World, can now be understood : only actuality is value.
    As for the efficacy proper to propositions for what Whitehead ca lls
"cosmos " or " creative advance of nature," Process and Reality remains
silent on the subject. Whitehead did not even find it appropriate to return
to the set of texts written about perception before he ela borated the con
cept of propositiona l feeling. As Lewis Ford remarks, Whitehead was
much more concerned with the difficulties of his theories than with the
explanation of what no longer seemed to him to pose problems.
    I sha l l therefore try, before finally turning to God, to render explicit cer
ta in "cosmic" perspectives opened up by propositions, making use above
all of Modes of Thought ( 1 938), Whitehead's last book. In this work, we
no longer rea d of eternal objects or of propositions. Not that White
head had (once aga i n ) cha nged his position : quite the contra ry, this is
an i nstance of the freedom of an author who has henceforth gained the
freedom to address questions that are concrete-that is, by definition,
"sociologica l " ---co ncerning societies and i mplying trad itions of thought.
Whereas eternal objects a nd propositions belong to the metaphysics of
actual occasions, our modes of thought, for their part, bring to the fore
front imaginative adventures centered on what matters to us. Yet the
penumbra of metaphysical propositions wi ll make itself felt in the way the
question of the bifurcation of nature will be taken up once again: Modes of
Thought is the most poetical of Whitehead's works. The point is no longer
to resist or to a ffirm, but to celebrate what metaphysics has allowed to be
constructed, the fact that " nothing can be explained as normal."
                                                  C H A P TER TWENT Y - T H REE
