Modes of Existence, Modes of Thought




          MPORTANCE IS PRIMARILY
      I
                                      monistic in its reference to the Uni
        verse. Importance, limited to a finite individual occasion, ceases to
        be important. In some sense or other, Importance is derived from
the immanence of infinitude in the finite.
   But Expression is founded on the finite occasion. It is the activity of
finitude impressing itself on its environment. Thus it has its origin in the
finite; and it represents the immanence of the finite in the multitude of its
fellows beyond itself. The two together, namely Importance and Expres
sion, are witnesses both to the monistic aspect of the universe and to its
pluralistic character. Importance passes from the World as one to the World
as many; whereas, Expression is the gift from the World as many to the
World as one ( MT, 20).
   Expression, i n Modes of Thought, actively requires t h e tw o meanings
we can give it, designating subjective satisfaction as a final decision-thus
and not otherwise-and as a decision for one future i nstead of another. It
is that which will make itself felt, that which, in one way or a nother, will
have to be taken i nto account. It does not, therefore, by any means desig
nate the Leibnizian idea that a subject expresses " the" world, in the sense
of being its reflection, deduci ble from a certai n viewpoint. Whitehead's
association between expression and "gift" rather brings to mind the way
Wi l l iam James characterizes the " chance act " : Its origin is in a certain
fashion negative: it escapes, and says, Hands off! coming, when it co mes,
as a free gift or not at all (DD, 1 54 ) . Individual satisfaction fashions its
own perspective, its own divergence, and as such it will give to the wo rl d
the gift of a new expression of itsel f, of what might perhaps make a
di fference.
4 2 4   COSMOLOGY




   Yet the fact that Whitehead talks about i mportance before talking
about expression is significant. When he wrote Modes of Thought, he no
longer had to struggle to conceive of an occasion as causa sui, and cou ld
therefore give meaning to its correlate: to the world dependent on an in
dividual decision- " Hands off! "-which will come l ike a gi ft. Individual
expression is i mportant.
   Whereas expressions refer to creativity, to the many becoming one and
being i ncreased by one, i mportance, for its part, refers to the Uni verse as
"one," that is, to the Uni verse in its cosmological perspecti ve. Nor i s this
perspective foreign to indivi dua l experience, for, as Whitehead a ffirms,
i mportance " passes " to the world as many.
   The verb " to pass " is the verb that, as we sha l l see, Whitehea d used
on the last page of Process and Reality to characterize the dynamics of
the relationship between God and the world. Yet God is not, of course,
what explains: he is what is required, in terms of the conceptua l scheme,
by the cosmological perspective. " Passage " then means that this perspec
tive belongs to experience, in the mode of feeling that a decision will not
only have consequences beyond itsel f, but matters to somethi ng other
than itself. Unlike a throw of the dice, indi fferent to the consequences
that depend on it, a free gift impl ies that the feeling of waiting is an ingre
dient of the occasion. The q uestion "what is expected of me here? " is too
i mportant in human life to be ignored.
   The full solemnity of the world arises from the sense of positive achieve
ment within the finite, combined with the sense of modes of infinitude
stretching beyond each finite fact. This infinitude is required by each fact
to express its necessary relevance beyond its own limitations. It expresses
a perspective of the universe. Importance arises from this fusion of the fi
nite and the infinite. The cry "Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die "
expresses the triviality of the merely finite. The mystic, ineffective slumber
expresses the vacuity of the merely infinite ( MT, 78-79) .
   " The full solemnity of the worl d " does not transcend the " fact " b u t i s
required b y the fact as soon as the latter is experienced in the mode o f
positive accomplishment or-which a mounts t o the sa me thing-of de
feat or betrayal . The fact itself then demands relevance beyond itself, and
both cry and mystica l slumber bear wi tness to this, even i f, each in their
own way, they testi fy to it i n the mode of what Whitehead, in Science and
the Modern World, cal led " the great refusal," a decisive mode because of
the importance for them of the propositions they render " non-true."
   Here, what is to be thought is no longer an order of nature, for a form
of dualism always corresponds to the definition of such an order: that of
statements of knowledge tha t cannot help but presuppose and rati fy a
                       M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E .   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 2 5




contrast between those who learn the attention due to what they deal with
and what they have to deal with. The point will be to attempt, experi men
tally and with my own means, to inhabit the cosmological perspective
opened up by Whitehead in Modes of Thought. Like all experimentation,
this one has a goal . What matters here is to explore the proposition that
the q uestion of the cosmos does not transcend positive knowledge a ny
more than the solemnity of the world transcends positive individual achieve
ment. It merely demands that attention be paid to this knowledge itself, to
the way that, although it deals with societies, it testifies to the question of
the importance, beyond itself, of individual expression.
   What matters here is thus the plural ity of modes of knowledge. Let us
take this simple q uestion as a starting point: why do biologists, in gen
era l, have no doubt that the order they a re trying to understand is that
of a living being, whereas the order that physicists a re in the habit of
baptizing " la ws of nature " has given rise to such a doubt, to the opposi
tion between rea lity as it supposed ly is "in itself" and as we define it as an
"object of knowledge " ?
  The laws of nature are large average effects which reign impersonally.
Whereas, there is nothing average about expression. It is essentially indi
vidual. In so far as an average dominates, expression fades (MT, 2 1 ) .
   The enduring social continuity that physicists descri be by a function re
quires and translates the dominant " i mpartial" character of the modes of
taking-into-account called " i nteraction," which the physico-mathematical
function characterizes in terms of a rticulations between well-defined vari
ables. The exploit constituted by the production of a physico-mathematical
function is thus radically asymmetrica l . The techno-conceptual creativity
of those who formulate it implies the most extreme partiality, the most ex
treme importance accorded to the struggle against any possibility of confus
ing scientific statements a nd "opinion." But the statement, for its part, ren
ders explicit the way in which societies reproduce by respecting a median
conformity that we baptize " laws " or " regularity " : in their cases, the diver
gence always constituted by an i ndividual expression has no i mportance.
Correlatively, the " reality " of what physics baptizes as an " individual prop
erty " (of electrons, atoms, molecules maintaining themselves in conformity
with themselves ) can always be placed in doubt, identified with the func
tional articulation of experimental relations and thus made relative to the
questions raised by the experimenter.
   In contrast, a l iving society must be approached in terms of q uestions
that render explicit its partial character: what is food or poison for it, what
will al low it to reproduce, what wi l l provide it the opportunity to survive,
what wi ll kill it. In other words, functional articulation in biology has as
4 2 6   C O S M O LOGY




its respondent a society characterized not in terms of conformity, but of
selective choices that are extremely partial, precise, varied, and someti mes
unexpected with regard to what does and does not count, with rega rd to
what is relevant and what may be neglected. With rega rd to what matters.
Biologists ca nnot confuse the choices with which they deal with a transla
tion of their own questions, an answer to their own demands. To take up
Heisenberg's famous saying, they are neither actors nor spectators, but
" inquirers." In one way or a nother, the " biological function " refers to be
ings for whom the logical roles it makes explicit matter.
    Here, the point is no longer to "j ustify life " from a cosmological view
point, but to celebrate it. The contrast between life and nonlife does not,
of course, designate the cosmic epoch in which the question of impor
tance emerges. This contrast designates our mode of thought in the first
instance, the full solemnity of the difference between those of our modes
of description that presuppose and confirm the possibi lity of neglecting
the relevance of individual expression, and those that must recognize it in
the guise of partia lity. " Life is robbery " : every living society impl ies the
creation of a way of enduring whose importance is paid for by an active
differentiation between what its maintenance requires and what threatens
it. Whereas nothing in the description of copper alludes to the fact that its
encounter with sulfuric acid will have as its consequence a social catastro
phe for the molecules of copper, the least cell or the slightest bacterium
exhi bit the partial character of their relation with other societies, prey or
poison, in their environment. Whereas the physico-mathematical function
refers to a homogenous world, to the environment of a society as de
scribed by the same variables as those that describe its own social behav
ior, the history of life tells the story of the creation of multiple, selective,
and innovative a rticulations . In biology, functions a re related to issues.
    I will first turn to Religion in the Making to find the terms of that cele
bration in Whitehead, for it is here that the term " expression," associated
with a rather unexpected reference that I have decided to take seriously,
appears for the first time with properly cosmic echoes.
   Expression is the one fundamental sacrament. It is the outward and vis
ible sign of an inward and spiritual grace r . . . 1 There is then a commu
nity of intuition by reason of the sacrament of expression proffered by
one and received by the other.
   But the expressive sign is more than interpretable. It is creative. It elic
its the intuition which interprets it. It cannot elicit what is not there. A
note on a tuning fork can elicit a response from a piano. But the piano
has already in it the string tuned to the same note. In the same way the
expressive sign elicits the existent intuition which would not otherwise
                       M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E ,   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 2 7




emerge into individual distinctiveness. Again in theological language, the
sign works ex opere opera to, but only within the limitation that the re
cipient be patient of the creative action ( RM, 1 3 1 -1 3 3 ) .
   I n Religion in the Making, the emphasis was o n human experience,
and the expressive sign rather clearly i mplies " human i ntu ition," as it can
be exhibited for i nstance by the proliferation a nd reception of a grimace,
a gesture, a word, or a sound . This sign thus refers to what Whitehead
calls the "symbol ic." And yet, the fragments cited may also describe what,
in Modes of Thought, Whitehead decided to ca ll "expression," the way
each actuality " proffers " its divergence, which will have to be taken i nto
account and wil l contri bute to bringing forth what will i nherit from it. In
this case, however, the one a nd only funda mental sacrament would des
ignate creativity, as attested by any given concrescence. Each initial feel
i ng is a n " expressive sign," giving rise to the creative process that will
ma ke it come i nto being as the feeling of a su bject.
   Ta king seriously the reference to sacrament that Whitehead associates
in Religion in the Making with what he calls "expression" by no means
signifies conferring a ny kind of privilege upon the conception of the su
pernatural associated with the Catholic rel igion. The sacraments a re in
teresting i n that i n Cathol ic doctri ne they designate the question of a re
producible i ntervention of the supernatural within the natura l . Such a
question implies a " mode of thought" inhabited by the contrast between
this type of intervention and a nature defined by its own regularities. In
th is sense, the sacraments al low the question to be raised of what we call
" regularity." On the other hand, among Cathol ics the efficacy of the sac
rament is said to be " objective." The sacra ment must actually produce
what it signifies; its signification cannot itsel f be reduced to a " secondary
quality." The contrast is thus irred ucible to a form of symbolic efficacy, as
we say today, testifying only to human subjecti vity. The sacraments de
mand a " realism" that is precisely what Whitehead su bscri bes to when he
emphasizes, still a nd again, that all feeling is the feeling of an object, and
that objects are what have to be felt.
   Quite obviously, the way that, prolongi ng Whitehead, I i ntend to gen
era l ize the notion of sacrament transforms the meaning of the contrasts
associated with it by Catholic doctrine. It is our modes of thought that
are under investigation, not an actual opposition between natural and su
pernatural, or between " merely" subjective and objective. What is at stake
is a farewell to a " nature " capable of defining itsel f, a farewel l to the pos
sibility of attributing to " natural entities " a behavior, properties, or capaci
ties that would enable a general definition of what is meant by " i t can be
explained ' natural ly.' "
4 2 8   COSMOLOGY




   The question of the conditions under which the sacraments are effec
tive has provoked passionate theologica l discussions. On what does this
efficacy depend ? What is the share of divine grace, and what is that of
man ? What is the share of the person who administers, and that of the
person receiving ? With the theologica l formula ex opere operata, White
head adopts a position in this discussion: the sacrament is efficacious
independently of the person administering it. The priest's sacramental
words are valid as soon as he is a priest, independently of his state of sin
or of grace. The only condition is that the person receiving the sacrament
not present an obstacle. What is an obstacle ? That is another delicate
theological question.
   For Whitehead, when he was writing Religion in the Making, the ques
tion of obstacles obviously impl ied what is called " social environment" in
Process and Reality. The stones do not tremble with hope when John the
Baptist designates them . However, this definition of an obstacle no longer
holds if we ta ke the risk of accepting that what is cal led "expression " in
Modes of Thought is stil l valid as " one and only fundamental sacrament."
For here, expression is that whereby each actual entity, whatever it may
be, transcends all the actual entities from which it inherits, including God .
And, in this case, the relation between sign and response has neither mea
sure nor j udge, and the notion of obstacle therefore becomes completely
indeterminate. The efficacy associated with the sacrament of expression,
the "one and only fundamental sacrament," cannot be refused to any crea
ture of creativity, any more than Leibniz refused a soul to any monad .
   The great line o f difference does not separate the organic from the in
organic, but crosses the one and the other by distinguishing what is an
individual being from what is a collective or mass phenomenon, what is
an absolute form and what are massive, molar figures and structures.
These are the two levels or two aspects of the calculus [ . . . 1 individual
beings are probably the last and sufficient reasons [ . . . 1 But the lower
level is no less irreducible, because it implies a loss of individuality
among its components, and relates to different kinds of composite collec
tions material or secondary forces of linkage. Clearly, one level is folded
over the other, but above all each one conveys a very different kind of
fold [ . . . 1 What must be radically distinguished are the pleats of matter,
which always consist in hiding some part of the relative surface that they
are affecting, and the folds of form, which on the contrary reveal to itself
the detail of an absolute surface that is cop resent with all of its modifica
tions (LP, 1 3 9-1 4 0 ) .
  To t h e Leibnizian contrast described b y Deleuze between folds and
pleats, between actual ization in the soul and realization in states of a f-
                      M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E ,   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 2 9




fa irs, correspond s the d istinction constructed hy Whitehead hetween the
indivisihle unit of suhjective satisfaction and the pragmatic value it will
assume a s part of the many for other occasions. Ohjective immortal ity in
itself signifies the loss of the i ndivid ua l i ty of what has heen accomplished,
and the relevance of physical laws testifies to the possi hi lity that nothing
then " counts " other tha n a transmission dominated hy conformity. The
loss of individual ity does not, however, as in Leihniz, proceed from a
contrast hetween two modes of descri ption, two levels, two aspects of
a calculus, hut from the " perishing " that tra nsforms individua l i ty i nto a
fact, whose val ue depends on future decisions. Ohjective immorta lity
mea ns that what fol lows is responsi hle for the new modal ity in which the
gift of i ndividual expression will he ta ken into account. What is certa in is
that no occasion will inherit the way the suhject made the multipl icity of
its feelings hold together, in all i ts deta ils, the way it was co-present to
each qua i mmed iately its own.
    Yet if the loss of individual ity does not perta in to modes of descri ption,
hut designates the " perishing " of the satisfied suhject, the "one a nd only
fund a menta l sacrament " constituted hy express ion does not suffice to
ensure the difference hetween a disorderly universe and a "cosmos." For
there to he a cosmos, what has heen decided, what the individual has
made of itself, and what it has unified as its datum must he ahle to " ma t
ter," that is, to succeed in infecting its environment with the consequences
of the fact that it is this expression that was prod uced and not some
other. From the piano respond ing to the tuning fork, to the understand
ing that responds to a word , the " expressive signs" we can evoke do not,
in fact, correspond to the one and only sacra ment, for a l l of them require
societies capable of granting i mportance to individual expressions, or, in
Lei hnizian terms, of giving meaning to pleats of matter that certa inly
hide, hut that also exhihit a selective and partial manner of pleating in
one way rather than in another.
    Ohviously, what we are approach ing is the question of what I have
called the "culture of interstices," which I have associated with the "cos
mological justification" of living societies. The term "culture" referred , he
yond the " fact" of the interstices where l ife l urks, to their i mportance, that
is, to the way l iving societies can simultaneously canalize and be infected
hy what l urks: origina lity. And we ca n henceforth give a name to what
may well he specifically associated with this origi nality, what the efficacy
of a " sign" as such testifies to. It perta ins to propositional feel ings to open
up new possibilities of " fold ing one level over the other." The relations
hetween levels, the gift of the i nd ividual expression, may then he multi
ple, adventurous, a nd capable of originality.
4 3 0   COSMOLOGY




   And of course, the most exacerbated example of adventures that relate
importa nce and expression, social belonging and origina lity, is la nguage.
No one ca n be sa id to be responsible, guarantor, depository, or a uthor of
a language, for no individual expression has the power to modify it unless
this modification is taken up by others: unless it infects them. La nguage
exists only in a collection of individua l expressions, but these expressions
translate at the same time a social " fact," a "cosmic rea lity," without which
neither language nor spea kers would exist: the efficacy proper to these
expressions capa ble of infecting human experience, that is, j ust as much
the " patience " of human experience with regard to this infection.
   The question of " sacraments" is thus not closed . To unicity, to the one
and only funda menta l sacrament, corresponds the indefinite multipl icity
of entities. But the question of the importa nce of a n individual expres
                                '
sion must a lso be raised, a nd it can only be ra ised accord ing to the
essentially plura l modes of what societies ma ke possi ble and what they
impede, what they are una ble to entertain. The prophet's a udience trem
bles, but not the stones.
   The unique sacrament of expression might then cal l for a sacra mental
plura l i ty: " the" sacraments, in the sense that each one correspond s to
a di fferent ritua lization, that is, communicates with the social question
raised by the " patience " of a society qua cond ition for the efficacy of a
sign. In Modes of Thought, of course, Whitehead no longer spea ks of sac
raments, but the cosmic mea ning he confers upon expression and i mpor
tance translates the same obligation to think in a del iberately " a nti
natura l ist" mode. Importance, which " passes from the World as one to the
World as many," and expression, " the gift from the World as many to the
World as one," testi fy, by the plurality of the ways that one passes and
the other gives, to a cosmos, in contrast to the neutra l ity of creativity. As
in Religion in the Making, then, the point is to propose a " mode of thought"
that articulates what the scientific and religious modes of thought oppose,
but the question of the "culture of interstices " obliges us to reunite: the
possi bility of descriptions that " expla in" certa in living societies, and the
ineffa ble mystic sentiment that leads " living persons" themselves to live in
immed iate unison with the cosmos.
   Let us take first the scientific achievement of biochemists, demonstrat
ing that a specific i nterwea ving of chemical processes produces an overa ll
behavior analogous to a form of " calculation," assigning to the interact
ing elements roles of a quasi-logical kind. Even if the biochemist-modelizers
announce that an apparently finalistic functioning has been reduced to
molecular behaviors tha t are perfectly compatible with physico-chemistry,
they a re in fact celebrating the signal novelty constituted by an interweav-
                       M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E ,   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 3 1




ing of chemical processes that become, as such, capable of being descri bed
as " working" in a way that is both intelligible and partial, giving original
consequences to the presence or a bsence of certain ingredients i n its envi
ronment, that is, giving them a signification.
   The discourse on successful reduction will turn the analyzed case into
the representative of a genera lity, and the person holding this discourse
will often make common cause with other defenders of the same genera l
ity. Yet "Whiteheadian" biologists, for their part, would be more "con
crete " : thei r result, even if i ts site is a la boratory populated by a chemist's
instruments, has issued from questions that differ from those of chemists.
For chemists who wish to obtain a given type of synthesis a nd no other,
what matters is the success of " their" synthesis. The result will belong to
them, and they must deserve it. Biochemists, too, must succeed and de
serve, but their questions are d irected to a success that has alrea dy ta ken
place: the chemical interweaving " holds," " works," a nd " functions " be
fore them a nd without them . In one way or another, the state of affa i rs
they study implies that the molecules play " roles" which it is, of course,
their job to decipher, but each of which, as they k now a priori, should
be the partial expression of a function without which they would not ex
ist as such . From the viewpoint of this function, each molecular behavior
is required, but none of these behaviors explains the function: i t is the
function i tsel f that explains i tself through them.
   Wherever there is a region of nature which is itself the primary field of
the expressions issuing from each of its parts, that region is alive ( MT, 22 ) .
   Once aga in, this is not a ma tter o f " mystery " b u t o f a tra nsformation
of the mode of descri ption . In one way or another, i t is as if the biochem
ists were not the first " i nterpreta nts," as if what they deal wi th was sim
plifying, or schematizing, or a bstracting "on i ts own account," i n a way
that can be described, and that ca n even be " explained," but on condition
tha t all the relations that ma tter i n this ca se have been identi fied and
a rticulated . The expla nation i s not reductive, beca use the q uestion it
answers is not that of the chemist-what molecules a re present, a nd how
do they interact?-but that of the biochemist: how do these processes
ma nage to . . . ?
   If one ha d to associate the i ntelligi ble, l ogical simplification presup
posed and made explicit by biochemical models with the efficacy of a
particula r sacrament producing what it signifies, that is, in this instance,
the importance of a partial articula tion, distinguishing success a nd catas
trophe, life and death, it would be to the efficacy of the sacra ment of ma r
riage. Each such articulation is a n entreaty to the universe: " What God
has united, let nothing brea k asunder." To this sacra ment corresponds the
4 3 2   C O S M O L O G Y




efficacy of functional " signs " or " sensi bi l ia," signs that m ust be felt i n
order for the roles required b y the function t o b e a rticulated .
    With the time for marriage, however, what a lso begins is the time of
" marriage against nature," of articulations between heterogeneous things
as such. The intense traffic of signs, the multiplicity of traps, mimes, lures,
and poisons woven by the lives of plants, insects, and parasites, had fasci
nated Bergson, who, in Creative Evolution, turned the contrast between
the perfect precision of instinctive action a nd the clumsy hesitations of
intell igent action into the terms of a choice between two divergent direc
tions ca rried out by life. What Bergson celebrated with insti nct translates
the original successes proper to " functional societies " : what succeeds may
be called " requisition," the " grasping " of a being qua " playing a role" in a
function . The orchid that presents a mime of the sexua l organs of a female
wasp increases its chances of contact with the male wasp, which improves
its own chances of reproduction. The pa rasite that affects the bra in of
an ant so that it goes to immobil ize itself at the end of a blade of grass
increases its chances that the infected ant may be grazed a long with the
grass by the herbivore, as is required by its own reprod uctive cycle.
    It is very important, from the viewpoint of the modes of thought ca lled
for by living beings, to emphasize the extremely va ried field of relevance
of what is ca lled a " model " in biology. Biochemica l models exhibit highly
complex functions, a rticulating a rather la rge number of varia bles, most
often requiring computer simulations. But what also lend themselves very
well to modelization are the multiple modes of etho-ecologica l definitions
of living beings, accord ing to the " functional " signs they give or are sensi
tive to, what those signs elicit, with what conseq uences, and so on.
    I will therefore associate the efficacy of the " sacra ment of marriage "
with what is the privi leged field for modelization in biology, exhibiting
the efficacy of functiona l signs, whether they refer to functions that a re
i nternal ( the quasi-technology of intra- and intercellular detections, cap
tures, and regulations ) or external, between wasp and orchid, or between
ants, or between the butterfly and its fema le, whose smell it can detect a t
a distance of severa l miles. The model ma kes explicit the a rticulation o f
roles played b y various, d isparate actors, i ndependently of thei r personal
experience: wha tever the butterfly's experience may be, the odoriferous
molecule i ntervenes in the d irection of its flight, and the fema le, source of
the odor, may be at the arrival point.
    Ca n we already speak of a propositional efficacy, i n the sense tha t it
designates a "culture of i nterstices " ? A model renders a proposition ex
pl icit, but what enterta ins this proposition-with ad miration, astonish
ment, or amusement-is none other tha n the biologist. This is why the
                       M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E .   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 3 3




relevance of such a modelization communica tes, in our modes of thought,
with " na tura l selection," the great sieve, indifferent to what it reta i ns, as
long as it improves the chances of survival and reproduction . The model
defines, in Lei bnizian terms, the modes of " pleating," or pa rtia l, prag
ma tica l ly verified simplifications that constitute the success of living soci
eties insofar as they endure and infect. But the model is mute about what
we cannot i magine, the efficacy of the functional sign itself, what it " does "
to the experience it infects.
   What does the wasp that has been seduced by an orchid " feel " ? The
butterfly detecting the odor of a fema le? The a nt rushing to a ttack an
intruder ? We ca nnot i magine, and the models do not tel l us, but they are
also--a nd this is highly interesting-completely neutra l in this matter.
This corresponds wel l to the defi nition of marriage: whatever you feel
towa rd your spouse, you are united. Ethologists know that they must
certainly not attri bute to insects and pa rasites-the two types of l i vi ng
beings which, according to Bergson, embodied the tri umph of instinct
experiences that would imply the possibil ity of a disa ppointed, furious,
or frustra ted wasp, of a butterfly looking forward to a del ightful encoun
ter, or of a heroic ant overcoming i ts fear. Perhaps one could say that for
such beings, action must be stated in the infinitive: "copulate," " go," " a t
tack," as close as one can get to an imperative without a subject. In any
case, it is i mportant to i nsist, once again, on the fact that impotence i n
imagi ning by no mea ns signifies a bsence. The experiences of a wasp, a
butterfly, or even a biologica l macromolecule a re unknown to us, and
they are certa inly di fferent. It is possi ble that, unlike a macromolecule,
the wasp's experience includes the sense of a continuity of experience. It
is possible that, i n its case, the reception of a " functional sign " is the ex
perience of a bi furcation of experience. Ultimately, we do not know what
constitutes for us the experience of a word when we are not paying spe
cific a ttention to it either. Nor is it an accident that Natha lie Sarra ute has
named the obscure multipl icity of tiny experiential bifurcations " tro
pisms," a term used for plants and butterflies, successfully conveyi ng the
extent to which such bi furcations populate the adventure that is both
required and smoothed over by the continuous construction of a " l ivi ng
person ." Our imagination presupposes and implies attention to the truth,
and to all the contrasts a rticulated around this a ttention . It cannot there
fore bear directly on "a word," " this word," without ma king it change its
nature, without transforming its reception into an i maginative experi
ence. But some writers and other artists may succeed, by reinventing the
very mea ning of attention to truth, in evoki ng something of experience
" outside of persona l requisition."
4 3 4   COSMOLOGY




   The fact that models a re relevant, although they cease where we can
not imagine, tra nslates the proper efficacy of the " sacra ment of mar
riage," the disjunction between experience and requisition. The sacra
ment is efficacious, whatever the spouses feel a bout it. The model renders
explicit the way that d ispa rate beings a re in a situation of correla tive
requisition, requiring one another, and its releva nce consists precisely in
the fact that here i t is requisition alone that matters, independent of the
question of expression or the experience that gives rise to the functional
sign. With functiona l signs, biologists thus celebrate life as " imposition "
in the sense Heidegger gave to this term, a functiona l, calculating taking
into-consideration. One might also say that it is here that the (Hegel ian)
notion of the proposition as the murder of the thi ng ta kes on a precise
meaning. If the proposition in genera l impl ies and carries out a form of
robbery, red ucing its logical subjects to the status of food for a possibil ity
( PR, 2 5 8 ) with no concern for thei r individuality, the properly biological
proposition carries out this operation to the letter.
   Everything changes, however, once we can associate the notion of prop
osition with its "entertainment" in an experience that is not that of the
biologist. Everything changes when we enter into the doma in of behaviors
to which ethology owes its existence, because these behaviors have i m
posed the interest of describing animals in " thei r " envi ronment, not in one
that ha s been artificially prepa red . We can spea k, of course, in the broad
sense, of the ethology of ants or spiders, but the difference between envi
ronments in this case is not crucia l: we know, or we think we know, what
ants and spiders need to behave in a " typica l " way. In contrast, when we
are dealing with a rat or a bird, the difference between a " natura l " and an
"artificia l " environment becomes importa nt, as is attested by the confron
tation between the ethologica l and experimental modes of thought, and is
also attested by the suddenly highly questionable cha racter of models that
interpret behavior from the viewpoint of its selective va lue alone.
   Where is the cha nge to be situated ? Here I wil l fol low the suggestion of
Deleuze and Guatta ri, according to whom we can designate the kind of
animals ca pable of obliging our modes of thought to take this change into
consideration. The animals in question are the ones called " territoria l " :
   A rt may begin with the animal, o r a t least with the animal who marks
out a territory and builds a home (the two are correlative, or even merge
sometimes, in what is called a habitat). With the territory-home system,
many organic functions are transformed: sexuality, procreation, aggres
sion, food, but this transformation does not explain the appearance of
territory and home, but rather the reverse; territory implies the emer
gence of pure sensory qualities, which cease to be merely functional and
                       M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E .   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 3 5




become expressive features, enabling a transformation of functions
(QPh, 1 74 ) .
   This suggestion, fully developed i n A Thousand Plateaus, fits admira
bly with the sociology of life that Whitehead demanded . The point is
(obviously ) not to attempt a reduction of art to territorial signs, but to
celebrate the irred ucible cha racter of the event na med " territory." Every
thing cha nges " with" territory, " with " the emergence of signs that are no
longer merely " functiona l " but " expressive," that make sense or symbolic
reference " for" the animal itself.
   The ca se of the butterfly attracted by an odor, and that of an " intruder,"
recognizing by an odoriferous mark that he is penetrating into someone
else's territory, do not have much in common. No biochemist will risk
underta king a model that actua lly articulates the way that the detection
of the odoriferous molecule matters, its consequences for the animal that
"smells " : the intruder's unease, its hesitations, its attention on high alert.
Here, indeed, " what" is d iscerned discloses other discerni ble thi ngs, for
instance, the possi ble presence of the legitimate owner of the territory into
which the hesita nt intruder is venturing. The animal is " aware" of the fact
that it is not at home.
   We are entering the doma i n where reference to " molecules" becomes
a byword, concea ling the fact that here d ue attention must be paid to
propositiona l efficacy as such. We are entering the doma i n where the
" culture of i nterstices " must manifest itself, that is, the notion of " l iving
person" as well, whose constantly reinvented conti nuity presupposes
both infection and ca na lization-in short, original i ty.
   The fact that models are fairly inoperative in this case does not by any
means signify that we have reached a mysterious point at which behavior
becomes " inexplicable," but simply that the framing of the explanation
has changed . Independent of any hypothesis about animal consciousness,
the reference to territorial behavior as such implies that a series of con
trasts has a meaning " for" the animal, matters " for" it, and ethologists, l ike
a piano string " responding" to a tuning fork, will be irresistibly ind uced to
make the animal the subject of their description. Henceforth, the individ
ua l lives in " its " environment, or " mil ieu," and ethologists, when they de
scribe the radical difference between the behavior of the " i ntruder" and
that of the " legitimate owner," no longer reconstitute but accompany with
thei r words the risks experienced as such by those they are describing.
Here, i magination is not a vector of a misplaced anthropomorphism but a
risk i nspired by an irresistible " community of intuition ."
   In other words, upon the traffic of functiona l signs-which, of course,
continues-the open question of possible communities is superimposed,
4 3 6   COSMOLOGY




with their ritua ls, distances, synch ronizations, rhythms and j ingles, their
perceptions. And upon the risks evol ution has sanctioned throughout
biological evolution a re superimposed, in our modes of thought, the risks
experienced as such by the individual, by the intruder whose tense, ner
vous body hesitates, testi fying to the fact that it "does violence to itself,"
by the rabbit that hesitates to flee, or by the monkey isolated in its cage,
who gnaws on its ta il while the experimenters discuss the possibi l i ty that
animals may suffer.
   Pursuing the theme of sacraments, one might celebrate the territorial
event in the terms that define the sacrament of baptism. Just as baptism
introd uces the members of God's people one by one into their native land,
so the " territorial " sign may be described not merely as the enterta inment
of a proposition as such, but as an entertainment implying a feel ing of be
longing: my territory, my male, my people, my habits, my discipline. With
the territorial animal, the notion of a " common world " assumes a mean
ing, under the banner both of a contrast-the community to which one does
or does not belong-and of the appearance of " symbolic reference"
expressive features that are perceived, there, in relation to our trembling,
hesitant, appetitive, assured bodies, which are " here " : the percipient event.
   How far should we extend the consequences of this innovation if it
gives meaning to the contrast between " me " and " not me," " mine" and
" not mine" ? The animal whose fur sta nds on end when it identifies an
intruder could surely not experience the radica l metamorphoses of the
experience of itself and its world that must be traversed by what we cal l a
butterfly, from la rva to winged creature. I f we refer here, once again, to
the great bifurcation that Bergson observed in the history of life, between
instinct and intelligence, we can then wonder whether another novelty
might not be correlated with it: living as " having a body." For Bergson, in
telligence can be identified by its hesitation, clumsiness, and approximate
character, tra nslating an interpretative distance that is foreign to the sen
sible certainties of a butterfly flying toward a female. Yet hesitation, cl um
siness, and approximation cannot be stated without presupposing a feel
ing of the di fference between " self" and " one's body," a feeling of the body
as property, itsel f endowed with properties with which one has to make
do. In other words, the association between " percipient event" and " bodily
life " that Whitehead pointed out in The Concept of Nature can also be
phra sed as " having a body."
   The sacrament I associate with " baptism " would thus celebrate a con
j unction in experience a mong what we designate as " having a world,"
" having a body," " being able to hesitate," " ta king risks," and so on . Its
efficacy would have as its correlate the fact that learning from these ani-
                      M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E ,   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 3 7




ma ls may also mean learning with them, i mplying that a common world
is possible with them. And this is indeed what is tra nslated by the risks
proper to ethology, risks that translate the ful l solemnity of the event that
is indicated by the " ethological mode of thought."
   The first risk is that of " psychologizing projection." To spea k of a
" community of intui tion " i s not to speak of any guaranteed adequacy of
interpreta tion, truth, or intersubj ective fusion. As is demanded by the
objective efficacy of the sacrament, the risk, that of an " empathetic "
ethology, translates the new stakes tha t take on meaning for ethologists,
and which are those of " symbolic reference." Moved by your expression,
I may also be as completely wrong a bout the consequences as I infer
them, as the ethologist may be wrong a bout what this chimpa nzee show
ing his teeth means. To spea k of " community " is to spea k of creation of
the problematic space in which the question of i nterpretation assumes
mea ning-of what has been understood or misunderstood, of trust and
of deceit, of hesitation and of veri fication. As Bergson said, i t is when life
makes the choice of intel ligence compared with instinct that the notion of
error itself may be formulated . Here, then, the expressive sign, as a vector
of a bstraction for a problematic experience, may be said to be fully and
simultaneously lure and decoy, eliciting temptation, hesitation, frustra
tion, or disappointment. In short, when a society is no longer " functional,"
but gi ves mea ning to a " community," its interstices make themselves felt
by a l l the proposi tions enterta ined, which a re therefore " true," but whose
mea ning it is sometimes better to verify.
   Another risk proper to ethology is that ethologists, unbeknownst to
them, may observe behaviors tha t they themselves have brought a bout,
that is, that they may have " d omesticated " those they thought they were
j ust describing.
   Here aga in, risk ind icates the objective efficacy of the sacrament. The
members of the people of God a re introduced one by one, and i t is only
one by one that animals can be domesticated, that is, in this case, led to
admit a particular human i nto their " d omus " : a singular, i mportant per
son, whose gestures and a ttitudes may be interpreted as " thei rs," as the
" signi fica nt other" on whom they a re counting and with which ( or
whom ? ) they l ive. If domestication is possible, it is no doubt because hu
man beings understand something of the importance of the hesitations,
temptations, fears, approaches, and flights of the animals they seduce.
How they interpret what they understand is a wholly different question:
what domestication celebrates is that nether the sed uced nor the sed ucer
may be defined in terms of functiona l signs that ma ke a social, specific
world for the insect. The expressive sensibilia that are being invented
4 3 8   C O S M O LO G Y




between themselves, laboriously, painfully, ind icate that this time the ad
venture of life designates the individual, or the living person, as an active,
vibrant site of the negotiation that takes place within it a mong fear, curi
osity, and attraction . A site that testifies both to the infection and to the
canal ization through which what is new becomes important.
   Finally, in ethology, there arises the thorny q uestion of the innate and
the acquired . There is no debate about the " innate" character of the behav
ior of ants and butterflies, but the question arises of the " innate" character
of human intelligence, homosexuality, or aggression and of birdsongs, or
of the long, complex parades that precede and seem to condition that
functional behavior known as copulation .
   Intell igence, homosexuality, and aggression are categories that are too
"coarse " for the question to be elaborated in an interesting way. The ques
tion becomes interesting, however, in those cases where it is clear that the
behavior under d iscussion is closely linked to properly functional urgen
cies, that is, to matters of selection . Through the question of whether
someth ing that is " innate " and as such is supposed to be the direct prod
uct of selection, can "expla in" the behavior and hence the experience of
the individual, the question arises of the articulation between the two
" sacra ments," corresponding respectively to functional individual ity and
to the possibility of a common world .
   The natal is the new figure assumed by the innate and the acquired in
the territorial assemblage. The affect proper to the nata, as heard in the
lied: to be forever lost, or refound, or aspiring to the unk nown home
land. In the natal, the innate tends to become displaced: as Ruyer says
[n.b., Raymond Ruyer, in La Genese des formes vivantes] , it is in some
way prior to or downstream from the act; it concerns less the act or the
behavior than the matters of expression themselves, the perception that
discerns and selects them, and the gesture that erects them, or itself con
stitutes them [ . . . ] This is not to say, however, that behavior is at the
mercy of chance learning; for it is predetermined by this displacement,
and finds rules of assemblage in its own territorialization. The natal thus
consists in a decoding of innateness and a territorialization of learning,
one atop the other, one alongside the other (MP, 4 1 0 ) .
   Once aga in, i t i s William James who may help u s to understand what
Deleuze and Guattari borrow from Ruyer, and more precisely that aspect
of Wil l iam James that has incited the most controversy, the one that a f
firms that the truth, or i mportance, of an idea is nothing other than its
process of verification, the creative process in which the eventual conse
quences of these ideas are produced and put to the test. Let us take as an
example of " act" the wel l-known case of the sexua l display tha t precedes
                      M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E ,   M O D ES   O F   T H O U G H T   4 3 9




copulation, when a couple of storks is consti tuted, for exa mple. Copula
tion responds to a functional imperative that must be satisfied in order
for there to be storks in this world . This imperative is not satisfied until
the outcome of the d isplay, " downstream," but can we say that the storks
obey it from the beginning, that is, that this d isplay behavior is " innate " ?
For Ruyer, i t i s more adequate to say that a t the outset each stork is for
the other an object that is " va lorized " : i mportant and interesting, el icit
ing. It may be innate, but must be " decoded " in order to get at its func
tiona l meaning. The i mperative to be satisfied would have the status of
a kind of " fleeing ghost," becomi ng specified as the d isplay unfolds, as a
va l ue that is more and more significant: " my male," " my female." The ef
ficacy of functional sensibilia, of what must be felt in the mode of the
infinitive " to copulate," would then be cond itioned by a learning process
resulting in the creation of an object henceforth discerned, selected, in
short, " recognized ." "That's him," "that's her," "that's our home " will then
be celebrated in unison every spring, when the members of the stork
couple find one a nother upon their return from a d istant migration.
   To follow Ruyer, Deleuze, and Guattari, it is precisely at the moment
when perception, in the sense that Whitehead described it in The Concept
of Nature, becomes relevant, that the innate loses its power to explain, can
no longer explain behavior independently of the way it itself acquires a ter
ritorial meaning, the way it is " decoded ." The innate no more explains
territorial behavior- "my place," "your place -than an idea spea ks its
                                                              "



truth independently of its process of verification. The innate is explained in,
by, and for the being that produces itself qua belonging to a " community."
   A mode of ethological thought celebrating the events that transform the
meaning and the stakes of terms such as innate, acquired, world, env iron
ment, ind ividual, group, congener, behavior, and so on can certainly not
avoid the critical questions that ethologists ask themselves a bout their
perceptions and their interpretations. It might, however, distance them
from any nostalgia for the verification processes designating what physi
cists or chemists call "objectivity," as wel l as for the model izations corre
sponding to what selectivist biology designates as the only good explana
tion: the power of natural selection . In this sense, such a mode of thought
might be vital for our scientific ideals, d istorted as they are by the conflicts
between the imperative of "objectivity " and the insistence of relevance.
    In fact, this last point gives us a typical example of what Deleuze and
Guattari cal l the " territorial ization of learning." When working scientists
" lea rn," objectivity is the imperative idea, on which the possibil ity for
knowledge to survive qua " scientific " depends. Yet learning is not ex
pla ined by objectivity, which is only satisfied downstream once what is
4 4 0   COSMOLOGY




relevant in each case has been recognized, once the due type of attention
has been determined . Then, and only then, will scientists have become
what Kant wanted them to be: j udges interrogating " their" object. With
regard to the sciences in which the imperative of objectivity does not
need to be "decoded," nor learning territorialized, where what the scien
tist dea ls with has an a priori, " method ical " definition of objectiv ity
imposed upon it, they become the sad analogy of behaviors qual ified as
" purely instinctive," expl icable by the imperatives they obey.
   Correlatively, for scientific learning to concl ude successfully, for the
imperative of objectivity to finally be satisfied, the scientist's question
must ultimately be able to designate its " respondent." Not, of course, in
the same sense in which the female stork " responds" to the male's ad
vances, but nevertheless in the sense that what has been discerned, selected,
and erected by the question " is appropriate," does indeed address some
thing that matters for the being under interrogation. Physicists have
learned to interrogate the atom on the basis of its spectra of emission and
absorption of l ight, and their success attests to the fact that electromag
netic radiation matters to the atom, and that it does not matter for the
atom's nucleus. Physics is relevant and inventive in that it takes the great
est account of this contrast it has learned to recognize, and it therefore
cannot, any more than any experimental science, inspire the dream of an
"objective" ethology, transcending the diversity of animal behavior to
ward a common definition. A successful question, here as elsewhere, is the
one that finds its respondent, that lea rns to discern what matters to what
is interrogated . The mode of thought of ethologists studying a territorial
animal can therefore not help but differ from that of biologists special iz
ing in bacteria, because the fact of bei ng here or there may make a major
difference for an animal i f a territorial boundary passes between " here"
and " there" whereas it makes none for a bacterium, to which, however,
the detecta ble difference " more or less sugary " matters. With regard to the
imperative of having to make a difference between a "good question,"
finding its respondent, and a misplaced or a rbitrary question, it designates
humans, of course, and the imagination whose power is celebrated by
thei r mistrust.
   When we come to mankind, nature seems to have burst through an
other of its boundaries. The central activity of enjoyment and expression
has assumed a reversal in the importance of its diverse functionings. The
conceptual entertainment of unrealized possibility becomes a major factor
in human mentality. In this way outrageous novelty is introduced, some
times beatified, sometimes damned, and sometimes literally patented or
protected by copyright. The definition of mankind is that in this genus of
                      M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E ,   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 4 1




animals the central activity has been developed on the side of its relation
ship to novelty [ . . . l In animals we can see emotional feeling, dominantly
derived from bodily functions, and yet tinged with purposes, hopes, and
expression derived from conceptual functioning. In mankind, the domi
nant dependence on bodily functioning seems still there. And yet the life
of a human being receives its worth, its importance, from the way in
which unrealized ideals shape its purposes and tinge its actions. The dis
tinction between men and animals is in one sense only a difference in de
gree. But the extent of the degree makes all the difference. The Rubicon
has been crossed (MT 26-27).
   Julius Caesar knew that crossi ng the Rubicon had nothing to do with
"crossi ng a river." The Rubicon had its own importance at the time of the
Roman Republ ic, and was the object of expl icit utterances. The decision
to cross it was thus inseparable from an utterance. Julius brought an ex
clamation i nto existence-" Caesar crossed the Rubicon!"-in order for
it to fashion Caesar's destiny, for better or worse.
   Verbal statements are obviously not the only " l ures for feeling " that
we fashion for ourselves. In some circ umstances, turning one's back or
shrugging one's shoul ders can-and we know this the moment we do
it-render present the as yet unrea lized possibilities of a relationship, a
brea kup, for instance, or the del icate q uestion of the repa ir of the irrepa
ra ble. Not to mention the multiplicity of " th i ngs," talismans, fetishes,
l ucky charms, sorcerers' objects, testaments, experi mental apparatuses,
and a l l our writings: so many socially maintained and stabil ized ways
for charging a being that we fashion to intervene in our l ives and those
of others, to modify their course . The list is open and might even
include-why not ?-the scan of his wife's brain exhibited by some fa
natica l theoretician, declaring to a dazzled audience that this is the gen
uine portra it of his beloved ( who, fortunately, is j ust as fanatica l ) . For
even the scan might, for someone able to endow it with expressivity,
cease to be mute with regard to what counts in a portra it. It i s not the
tender l a ugh of a face that will have been eliminated in the name of
physica l measurement, it is the physico-mathematica l structure that will
laugh tenderly.
   There is no sorting process to be carried out here, no d istinction to be
made between apparent and legitimate efficacy. The efficacy of read ing is
as mysterious for those who are not readers as is the efficacy of a tal isman
or a pilgrimage for others. The fact that Galileo may be rad ica lly trans
formed whi le, like a child, he is rol ling balls along an incl ined plane re
quires an entire epoch, as does the fact that a Catholic may share the body
of Christ, " his" body, where others would perceive " a " piece of bread .
4 4 2   COSMOLOGY




    I f the distinction between animal and human is initially marked by the
proliferation of belongings that are territoria l-that is, also epochal
this proliferation does not explain novelty. It is rather that by which this
novelty " explains itself," that is, inseparably, is social ized and causes so
cial divergence. Galileo's experience incl udes the knowledge that others
might compare him to a child while he himsel f discovers the power of
" facts." Catholics, when not defined by an "animal faith," or " blind faith,"
know that one must belong to the community of bel ievers to accept the
piece of bread in the way that is appropriate to the body of Christ. There
is a prol i feration of belongi ngs, but some belongi ngs are produced under
the banner of a contrast, confronting belonging with the real possibility
of nonbelonging. And it is here, of course, that we also find the theme of
the "great refusa l " : all the propositions rendered nontrue by a decision
link i mportance and divergence i rred ucibly.
    The efficacy proper to the sacrament of the Eucha rist, that is, the
miracle of transubstantiation, may be appropriate for cha racterizing
the Rubicon crossed by humanity, for it is precisely with regard to it
that a contrast is proposed that is addressed, not to a living person, but
to a decision as such. And here, adhesion, marking the enterta inment of
a proposition, ca uses divergence: the community of Christians ad heres
to the proposition "this is my body " in the mode of a " scandal of fa ith,"
not with the child's beatific happiness, "this is my mother. " Here, too, a
d i fference may be introduced between animal " faith" and the profes
siona ls' a dherence to their categories, when this adherence boasts of its
obviousness " w i thout q u a l ms ." To take up the Lei bnizian disti nction
between " the pleats of matter " and the " folds of the soul," here we can
no longer ignore the " sou l " in favor of " matter," and our descriptions
can no longer l i mit themselves to celebrating the invention of a " fold
ing ove r " accord ing to the contrast between what is m i ne and not
mine, or the production of the expressive signs that give mea ning to a
community.
    The specificity of human experience is not defined by its limitations, but
rather by " leaps of the i magination " that respect no limitation. Of course,
community of intuition still rules and even proliferates. But it may also be
experienced as such. In addition, the entertainment of a new proposition
is felt as an event. Our modes of thought, as soon as they concern hu
mans, have this specificity as their question, including, perhaps above all,
the doctrines that make nature bifurcate, with their expl icit or impl icit
dua lism. For both their "subject," clai ming a freedom that does not be
long to any creature, and their "objective reality," defined by a highly ex
aggerated coincidence between explanation and submission, testify to the
                      M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E ,   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 4 3




great refusa l . Hesitation, the felt risk of error, may be replaced by terror in
the face of the somewhat inflated risk of the production of chimaeras and
arbitrariness. If no difference can be made between objective and subjec
tive, everything is permitted!
    With the experience Whitehead was to cal l " intellectual," risk itself
henceforth becomes material for propositions, turning experience into a
logica l subject, red uced to the status of food for a possibility. And it is
this risk, rather than any " defining characteristic," that best designates
how souls matter for us: they are what we risk losing, what might be cap
tured, reduced to wandering, enslaved . Between " self-righteous people,"
who know what the good is ( a case of community adherence), and hogs,
clever territoria l animals, the difference is trivia l . Correlatively, losing
one's hold becomes, in a somewhat exaggerated way, what will be i denti
fied with the paradigmatic disaster, or else with the precondition of any
initiation or any spiritual transformation.
    In other words, we have to deal here with the exorbitant novelty of so
cieties impl icitl y exhi biting the i mportance of the possible, or of what
might have been, and producing the means to raise the partiality of per
spectives to its pinnacle. For the difference between what will and will not
be recognized as legitimate, what will or will not be recognized as val id, is
no longer a " social fact," but what is at sta ke: a problem whose terms are,
of course, socially defined, but in a way tha t makes interstices proliferate.
This is shown j ust as much by the minutiae of moral casuistry and exami
nations of conscience as by the ferocity of scientific controversies. Atten
tion to truth demands sensitivity to new signs and the production of new
tests. The devil is in the detai ls, the difference between artifact and cor
rectly established experimental fact demands passionate i nterest, the devi
ous i magination of competent colleagues.
    The fact that Whitehead, apparently quite i nnocently, ca lls this novelty
" i ntellectua l feeling" may mean that the point is not to describe a l l our
" spiritua l " adventures. Instead, it is to designate with great precision, so
as to correct any excess subjectivity, the Rubicon that has been crossed .
What " m ight be " is no longer declared by hesitation demanding verifica
tion but becomes what matters as such .
   In an intellectual feeling the datum is the generic contrast between a
nexus of actual entities and a proposition with its logical subjects members
of the nexus [ . . . I This contrast is what has been termed the "affirmation
negation contrast." It is the contrast between the affirmation of objectified
fact in the physical feeling, and the mere potentiality, which is the negation
of such affirmation, in the propositional feeling. It is the contrast between
" in fact" and " m ight be," in respect to particular instances in this actual
4 4 4   COSMOLOGY




world. The subjective form of the feeling of this contrast is consciousness
( pR, 266-267).
   The cry of the sol itary consciousness, its refusa l to conform, its heroic
affirmation that it is possible to be right, even one against all, suffice to
show that there is nothing neutra l a bout " intel lectual feelings." An i ntel
lectual feel ing may be a vector of heroism, to the point of martyrdom; a
vector of stupid arrogance, to the point of the opposition between the
future science of neurons and the opinion that " bel ieves " in motives, rea
sons, and intentions; a vector of eradicative passion, to the point of the
systematic persecutions of peoples who cultivate it otherwise. Yet it is
also what some ethologists know how to cultivate. They know with lu
cid ity, when performing as the advocates or active protectors of ba boons,
chimpanzees, or gorillas, that the abil ity of these beings to inspire our
sympathy or our love may be what they will owe their survival to, but
they also know that it is not what defines these beings' proper value. Or
again, it is what is demanded of his readers by M ichel Foucault, who
designates himself as a positivist historian and undertakes to describe the
social power at work not only in the repression, but also in the produc
tion of the feelings we associate with what is true, j ust, and interesting.
   In any case, the fact objectified in " physical feeling" is not a simple per
cept. It may designate physical feelings that are as sophisticated as possible,
but it always designates them by introducing an operation of transubstan
tiation that de-territorializes them: " my gorillas," for whom I would give
my life, are also "goril las," who, for their part, confer a wholly different
sense upon our attachment. " My " most authentic " feelings " about the dif
ference between good and evil, the true and the ill usory, cannot be d isen
tangled from social habits induced by the apparatuses of power.
   Yet we must not exaggerate. The feeling of such contrasts matters, but
only intermittently, and the import of each contrast is limited.
  Consciousness flickers; and even at its brightest, there is a small focal
region of clear illumination, and a large penumbral region of experience
which tells of intense experience in dim apprehension ( PR, 267).
   The q uestion that begins with intel lectual feelings is that of exaggera
tion, the power granted to the abstractions deri ved from the " clear" zone
to define a situation. As Lei bniz said, Buridan's ass, confronted with two
fields similar from every viewpoint, would not remain stumped: the
slightest deta il, the cry of a bird, a fragrant breath of air, apprehended i n
a confused way, would make the difference. Yet it is quite possible that
" Buridan the philosopher" might, because there are no good reasons to
choose, confer such power upon intellectual feeling as to a ffi rm that only
a violent decision, the expression of a freedom i dentified with arbitrari-
                      M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E .   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 4 5




ness, can decide the question . This is why Leibniz's mora l advice, Dic cur
hic, does not demand that a decision be j u stified but intends to induce the
development of a sensitivity to the concrete of this situation, hic, agai nst
the genera l ities authorized by conscious abstraction, against the excess
differentiation between the l imited zone of clear thought and the penum
bra of physical feelings accepted without question . Leibniz himself did
not rely on his abstractions, ceaselessly testing his system in his encou nters
with his numerous correspondents, experiencing what they demanded to
see recognized, what he was capa ble of recognizing, what formu lation
could satisfy them.
   Each occasion is an activity of concern, in the Quaker sense of that term.
It is the conjunction of transcendence and immanence. The occasion is con
cerned, in the way of feeling and aim, with things that in their own essence
lie beyond it; although these things in their present functions are factors
in the concern of that occasion. Thus each occasion, although engaged in its
own immediate self-realization, is concerned with the universe (MT, 1 6 7).
   The concern of the Quakers, or the Friends, which Whitehead evokes, is
not the disquiet inq uietude or Unruhe-that al lowed Lei bniz to gather
                 -



in the same register the disquiet of the thinker, the hesitation of Buridan's
ass, or the readiness of a rabbit on alert, but a lso that of the penci l stand
ing on its tip, which the slightest sol icitation would make fal l to one side
or the other. Whereas the person who follows Leibniz's advice must resist
the power of what imposes itself as clear, what ma kes the Qua kers trem
ble is not to have been silent enough to feel what obscurely dema nds to be
felt. In both Lei bniz's and the Quakers' cases, however, the point is to ad
dress, by means of distinct intellectual feelings, an excess su bjectivity that
itself exhibits the efficacy of intel lectual feelings, to address the way we
ask the zone of clear illumination in which our reasons are formulated to
define what a situation demands, and to silence the interstices in which
alternatives lurk.
   The contrast between the means used by Lei bniz and Whitehea d re
flects a contrast between their respective epochs. Although the Lei bnizian
analogy, al lowing the sou l 's disquiet to belong to the same plane as the
insta bil ity of the pencil, could be effecti ve in the seventeenth century, it
became da ngerous in the twentieth century. In Lei bniz's time, it could
make a breath of humor waft over statements laden with hatred and po
lemics, over a theology ha unted by the dark question of grace, in whose
na me Protestants and Cathol ics were kill ing one another. Today, power is
on the side of the specialists of the pencil, and the instabil ity of the pencil
poised on its tip is destined, almost inevita bly, to appear as the " finally
objecti ve" explanation of the sou l 's disquiet.
4 4 6   COSMOLOGY




   As for the proposition according to which every entity is " concerned,"
in the Quaker sense of the term, it inspires the most surprising contrast
with all our territorial physical feel ings, with all our social j udgments con
cerning what is " ours " and what pertains to an unstable pencil. It acts as
a revelator: what appears clearly is the contrast between the seriousness
with which every proposition intended to assi milate us to an unsta ble
physica l system is entertai ned and the outlandish character, inspiring only
irony, of a proposition that would inaugurate the inverse movement, as
sociating with a cosmic suspense each process of sel f-determination, be it
that of the sl ightest electronic occasion or that of a painter adding the last
touch to her work, on which its success or fai lure may depend.
   The soul may certainly be said to be " disquiet " when it refers to a living
person. But what emerges with the soul is the possibil ity, among others, of
the Quakers' " concern," that is, the experience of the " full solemnity of
the world." This is why Whitehead could integrate the Quaker sense of the
term "concern " into his cosmological, speculative thought. What Quaker
concern brings into existence cannot be reduced to a worried hesitation,
for it escapes all final appropriation: the Quaker God will never be " their"
God . The same holds true for the regi me of thought induced by the White
headian scheme, whose singularity is to provide an expl icit disclosure of
the efficacy of the sacrament of transubstantiation. For this regime of
thought, which can be said to be del i berately speculative, includes within
it a speculation on the possibil ity that it might become a habit, a mode of
thought. Not in the sense of an " uprooting" from every community, a de
valuing the living person, but rather in the mode of the " humor of thought " :
a stable articulation between two regimes of signs, the " territorial " signs
that give rise to a " community of intuition," and the " speculative " signs,
bringing a bout the experience of what " might be thought " : " facts " as wit
nesses to a cosmos. Fully deployed intel lectual feeling, exhibiti ng the j usti
fication of life as a "culture of interstices," does not coincide with critique,
or with a break, but it has trust as its cond ition: letting go does not mean
losing one's hold .
   Here, then, with the ci rcle closed, w e have once again encountered the
function Whitehead attributed to his categories, each appl ication of which
was to coincide with a leap of imagination: for we have to do with a cul
turalization of the " miracle of transubstantiation" itsel f. Each experience,
always initially objectified according to the propositions of a special ized
territory, must be able to be ca lled upon to undergo a transformation that
gives its importance to the conscious contrast " a ffirmation/negation," but
that does not appeal to the " last judgment " of a critical operation, pro
ductive of new territorial ities that could be opposed to others. Quite the
                      M O D E S   O F   E X I S T E N C E ,   M O D ES   O F   T H O U G H T   4 4 7




contra ry, the speculative character of thought is marked by the impossibil
ity of constituting " applications " into appropriable states of things, " my"
world designated in "my" language. Speculative language will never be
"my" language, in the sense that it will never ha ve to end up in the forma
tion of j udgments, whether they have the form of an a ffirmation, a nega
tion, or even of a suspension of wha t is pronounced . It does not enable a
pronouncement, but it pronounces, and this is its efficacy: its expressions
bring into existence a " m ight be " tha t no art of consequences can trans
form i nto a verified " state of a ffa i rs." Yet it nevertheless matters, as did
the appearance of expressive signs transforming, without denying them,
the imperatives corresponding to functional signs, by d isplacing them
downstream.
   The q uestion inspired by this analogy might be: what about down
strea m ? Does an imperative of truth finally find satisfaction in it? If this
were the case, there would no doubt be an analogy with Spinoza 's third
genre, or with a certain version of Nietzsche's will to power, or else with
peace accord ing to Leibniz. I shall return to this point a t the end of our
itinera ry. What must be emphasized a l ready is that there will certainly be
no q uestion of celebrating God as truth . Divine envisagement-what is
best for that impasse?-does indeed belong to the " speculative regime"
of thought. God is its logica l subject, and the feeling of the proposition
does not req uire a j udgment concerning the ex istence of God, i n the
social sense, implying the possibil ity of a " last j udgment." Its veri fication
depends on its effects, and these designate the person who enterta ins
such a proposition qua aware of the contrast between a given j udgment
and the way i n which, immersed in the cosmologica l hypothesis, this
j udgment might be " transubstantiated ."
   In other words, every " that's true," every adherence to a proposition
concerning God, constitutes a fact that, in the " inevitable ordering of
things," is j ust as much a participant in an impasse. Whitehead 's God does
not " j udge " the propositional feelings tha t ta ke God as their subject, ac
cording to any kind of truth value tha t would transcend their enterta in
ment. For speculative thought, he is not associated with truth but with
relevance . J ust as, i n Science and the Modern World, God 's power was
defined by the " worship" he inspi res, in Process and Reality, the impor
tance of the propositions tha t ta ke God as their subject refers to the d i f
ference they ma ke for the experience that enterta ins them, to their effi
cacy in the transubstantiation of individual experiences.
   Whitehead's metaphysical God does not recogn ize his own, he does
not read in our hearts, he does not understa nd us better than we do our
selves, he does not demand our recognition or our gratitude, and we shall
4 4 8   COSMOLOGY




never contemplate him in his truth. None of these negative propositions
denies its positive as factually inexact; it denies i t as perta ining to the fal
lacy of misplaced concreteness. All belong to the mode of thought that
celebrates my relation to my self and my belongi ngs, to my body, to my
feeli ngs, my intentions, my possibilities of perception . No thinker thinks
twice. It is the risks of thought that a re exhibited as such with speculative
propositions, and if an i mperative of " truth " exists that is satisfied down
stream, it cannot be separated from the exercise of thought itsel f.
    Thinking promotes general indifference. It is a dangerous exercise never
theless. Indeed, it is only when the dangers become obvious that indiffer
ence ceases, but they often remain hidden and barely perceptible, inherent
in the enterprise. Precisely because the plane of immanence is prephilo
sophical and does not immediately operate with concepts, it implies a sort
of groping experimentation and its layout resorts to measures that are not
very respectable, rational, or reasonable. These measures belong to the
order of dreams, of pathological processes, esoteric experiences, drunken
ness, and excess. We head for the horizon, on the plane of immanence,
and we return with bloodshot eyes, yet they are the eyes of the mind. Even
Descartes had his dream. To think is always to follow the witch 's flight
[ . . . I Usually these measures do not appear in the result, which must be
grasped solely in itself and calmly. But then "danger " takes on another
meaning: it becomes a case of obvious consequences when pure imma
nence provokes a strong, instinctive disapproval in public opinion, and
the nature of the created concepts strengthens this disapproval (QPh, 44 ) .
   We know nothing of the " measures " t o which Whitehead, the most
amiable of phi losophers, had recourse, except perhaps for the strange
frenzy of his insertions, implying a highly unreasonable strategy of com
munication. Yet the result, taken in itsel f and calmly, that is, a labyrinth
of proposi tions del i berately fashioned to " induce " the " sheer disclosure"
proper to a speculative regime of thought, can indeed have "a strong, in
stinctive disapproval " as its consequence. For the q uestion, crucial for
philosophical opinion, "is this really serious? " will always be answered
only by a double series of consequences, which never cease being revived,
like the zigzag of a witch's fl ight: those that make being exist as i mpor
tance, and those that make thought exist as expression .
                                                    C H A PTER TWENT Y - FOUR
