God and the World




      1 HE FINAL SUMMARY            can only be expressed in terms of a group
           of antitheses, whose apparent self-contradictions depend on ne
           glect of the diverse categories of existence. In each antithesis there
is a shift of meaning which converts the opposition into a contrast.
   It is as true to say that God is permanent and the World fluent, as that
the World is permanent and God is fluent.
   It is as true to say that God is one and the World many, as that the
World is one and God many.
   It is as true to say that, in comparison with the World, God is actual emi-
11ently, as that, in comparison with God, the World is actual eminently.
   It is as true to say that the world is immanent in God, as that God is
immanent in the World.
   It is as true to say that God transcends the World, as that the World
transcends God.
   It is as true to say that God creates the World, as that the World cre
ates God.
   God and the World are the contrasted opposites in terms of which
Creativity achieves its supreme task of transforming disjoined multiplic
ity, with its diversities in opposition, into concrescent unity, with its di
versities in contrast ( PR, 347-34 8 ) .

Anyone might think that the philosopher who wrote those l ines, three
pages before the end of Process and Reality, is summarizing a careful
argu mentation in which he will have demonstrated how it is possible to
affirm antithetical statements at the same time, in the mode of " it is a s
4 S 0       COSMOLOGY




true . . . " And my reader is no doubt preparing for a new fl ight of experi
ence, for the new leaps of imagination that should be brought about by
ta king into account the categories of existence whose neglect, Whitehead
affirms, explains why the antitheses take on a contradictory character. As
usual henceforth, the circle that announces the leap seems to be there:
that a series of opposi tions may be transformed into so many contrasts
testifies to a cosmos, and it is the di fference between cosmos and neutral
creativity that requi res Whi tehea d 's God . The way Whitehead is going to
oblige us to thi nk of God and the World should in itself constitute a tes
ti mony to the role of God in the World.
    [ . . 1 There is no meaning to "creativity " apart from its "creatures,"
        .



and no meaning to " G od " apart from the "creativity " and the "temporal
creatures," and no meaning to the "temporal creatures " apart from "cre
ativity " and " God " ( PR, 225 ) .
   We know what to expect: w e will be obliged to think of God and the
World in a regime of reciprocal presupposition, a ffirming creativity as
the ulti mate. God and the actual occasions will be descri bed in a mode
that makes them both the creatures of creativity and the cond itions of
creativity. A new flight of speculative experience will begi n.
   And yet, in this case, the leap of imagi nation d i d not take place. White
hea d 's interpreters have remained perplexed and even " a ppal led," and in
any case rooted to the soil of their disagreements. The divergent interpreta
tions and hypotheses with regard to the manner of " mod ifying," " prolong
ing," or " completing " Process and Reality succeed one another. As if, in
this case, the conceptual assemblage could not suffice, could not become a
matter of " sheer disclosure."
   In fact, the triumphalist character of Whitehea d 's " fi na l summary"
should not impress us overmuch . On November 1 1 , 1 94 7, that is, a few
weeks before his death, Whi tehead , spea king of Process and Reality,
fragments of which were perhaps going to be reed ited , a ffirmed the true
credo of his resea rch to Lucien Price:
   "In the preface to it," said he, "I wrote something which ought to have
been repeated in the opening sentence of the first chapter, and repeated at
frequent intervals all through the book: namely, how impressed I am with
the inadequacy of any human being's attempt to express such philosophi
cal ideas at all; how utterly beyond our scope are these universal processes.
All one can do, in venturing on such subjects, is to offer suggestions "
( DANW, 3 5 9 ) .
   However, one must not turn the inadequate cha racter o f human thought
into the specific explanation of the d i fficulties encountered by readers
when it comes to divine experience. When Whitehead spea ks of the inad-
                                               G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 5 1




equacy of human attempts, he is not ta lking about God in particular but
about all the ideas proposed in Process and R eality. What is more, pre
cisely in the case of God it was most important for him that the attempt
should not end in defea.t, in the thesis of a " l earned ignorance," an expe
rience of the impotence of human intell igence in the face of an infinite
perfection that makes the categories appropriate for finitude pass to their
respecti ve limits and col lapse together. Whitehead knows that many of
his readers will be Christians, or at least " infected " by Christian theologi
cal notions. And Lucien Price reports the brutal judgment Whitehead
pronounced in this regard: "I consider Christian theology to be one of
the great d isasters of the human race " ( DANW, 1 71 ) .
   The theological figure of a creator God, omnipotent, perfect, paternal,
omn iscient, providential , and j udge, never inspired anything but the
strictest d isapproval in Whitehead, right down to the end . Constructing a
concept of God, he could not, of course, envisage repai ri ng the historica l
disaster humanity had undergone, but he certainly undertook to create
the means to fight against its consequences where this was possible for
him: in philosophical thought.
   The secularization of the concept of God's functions in the world is
at least as urgent a requisite of thought as is the secularization of other
elements of experience. The concept of God is certainly one essential
element in religious feeling. But the converse is not true; the concept of
religious feeling is not an essential element in the concept of God's func
tion in the universe. In this respect religious literature has been sadly
misleading to philosophic theory, partly by attraction and partly by re
pulsion ( PR, 207 ) .
    I t must therefore b e accepted that the " suggestions" Whitehead offers
about God should, for him, satisfy the demands of thought. In contrast,
the fact that the concept of God, which he has to construct, may, as pre
vious ones, be an essential element in religious feeling rather expresses
Science and the Modern World's trust in the religious vision recurring
" with an added richness and purity of content ." In such a purified vision,
however, this concept will be "one " essential element, but it will not be
"the " essential element. Whitehead 's attempt at secularization is not
meant to prescribe the new content of an eventual rel igious vision, even
if this vision may benefi t from consciousness' self-correction of its own
initial excess of subjectivity, which is the subject of philosophy.
    Was the attempt successful ? As I have said, for many of Whitehead's
readers the answer is no. They considered that Process and Reality should
ei ther be rewritten with no God , or else that it alluded to a book that
Whitehead could not or did not wish to write, i n which the concept of
4 5 2   COSMOLOGY




God would certainly have ga ined the coherence which, accord ing to
them, is missing.
   Yet it so happens that I think it possible to construct this coherence on
the basis of the text as it was written. And I can attempt, already at this
point, to convey the reason why the a bsence here of the " d i sclosure " usu
ally associated with a Whitehead ian construction may wel l be a coherent
consequence of that construction. For wha t is at stake in this case is " the
secularization of the concept of God 's functions in the world," and in
order to succeed in such an operation of secula riza tion, one must first
succeed in not thinking of Man in the i mage of God ; that is, reciprocally,
in not constructing a God who would be in the i mage of Man, a l l the
singul arities that enable mankind to be opposed to beasts or electrons,
passi ng to infinity to converge towa rd the inconceivable d ivine perfec
tion . Mankind, beasts, and electrons designate societies, and even thought
and its concepts refer to ad ventures cond itioned by societies . But God is
indi fferent to societies. In other words, not only did God not make Man
in his image, but above a l l , our image of ourselves as a living conti nui ty,
demand ing to be acknowledged and appreciated , finds no respondent
in God .
   And this is what makes d i vine experience, properly speaking, " un
imagina ble." Imagination cannot " lea p " in this case for it too is inti
mately linked to social ad ventures. It is only when something of our own
experience enters into resonance with what our words formulate that
imagination leaps. Our experience cannot enter into resonance with that
of God : such, it seems to me, is the first meaning of the statement that
" the concept of religious feeling is not an essentia l element in the concept
of God 's function in the universe."
   In any case, let us think of the term " function " that Whitehead used
to define what is to be understood . The point is not to set forth a " perfect
being " in concepts but to characterize a function or a role. How better to
prohi bit the mystical elan that the leap of imagination would constitute
here than by this characterization ? Yet we can go further. Whitehead was
a mathematician, and for a mathematician the term " function " typica lly
designates what belongs to the sol ution of a problem. If the following
pages do not inspire a flight of experience, it is precisely because the
question of the relation between God and the World is ra ised , for White
head, as a problem that demands a sol ution, that is, it a lso refers enti rely
to the responsibility of the person who has raised the problem. The point
is no longer to set out from what we in fact " know," from the common
sense that the multiple versions of the bifurcation of nature conspire to
silence. The point is to contri bute a keystone to the conceptual edifice,
                                                 G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 5 3




and every keystone is characterized by a rather special role as compared
with the building's other stones. In this case, the rather special character
designates precisely the need for taking up his conceptual categories in a
way that separates them from what elsewhere constitutes their truth, the
leap of imagination toward applications. They will not permit any " leap "
toward God , for the hope that God w i l l come t o meet u s is precisely
what secula riza tion must imperatively counter.
   Before defining the problem for which I believe the concept of the di
vine functioning is a solution, I must specify the challenge my hypothesis
wi l l have to answer and the interpretative choice to which it responds.
   The challenge consists in the fact that the fi fth part of Process and Re
ality, devoted to the question of God, is literally saturated by " familiar"
images. God " understands," " saves," " leads," is the "grea t companion,"
the " poet," and so on. I will have to show that the influx of these rel igious
images is part of the veri fication of the solution: in the case of a positive
verification, each will have to undergo a " speculative twisting" that coun
ters the type of rel igious emotion usually associated with it. To counter
does not mean to prohibit: nothing would give rise more effectively to
the flight of experience that is to be countered than the prohibition defin
ing it as an infraction . According to my hypothesis, it is thus by taking
up, deliberately and systematically, the images associated with Christian
theology and mysticism that Whitehead has chosen to put his solution to
the test, and it is the success of this test that wi l l have to be verified . This
cannot happen, however, until the end of our itinerary, when we will
have reached its solution .
   As far as the interpretative choice is concerned, it concerns the prob
lem, and must therefore be deployed a l ready at this point. The definition
of the problem which, accord ing to my hypothesis, Whitehead tries to
solve, presupposes a decision about the way we may understand the vari
ety of the characterizations of the d ivine functioning that figure in the
pages of Process and Reality. In this case, my decision subscribes to
Lewis Ford 's genetic interpretation, since I wi l l suppose that Wh i tehead,
here as elsewhere, did not take the trouble to rewrite his text, although,
at the end of his redaction, the subject he was envisaging was undergoing
a drastic mutation. The q uestion that must then be raised is that of the
mod i fications that he " should have" made.
   As we know, at the beginning of Process and Reality, God was endowed
exclusively with conceptual feelings, and conceived as " nontemporal pri
mord ial actuality." At the point of arrival, what was a pure, nontemporal
act of envisagement will have become God 's " pri mord ial nature," initiat
ing d ivine experience, and God, havi ng become a "creature of creativi ty,"
4 5 4   COSMOLOGY




wi l l have been endowed with a "consequent nature," an addition whose
consequences Whitehea d characterizes by a rather spectacular contrast.
   One side of God's nature is constituted by h is conceptual experience.
This experience is the primordial fact in the world, limited by no actual
ity which it presupposes. This side of his nature is free, complete, primor
dial, eternal, actually deficient, and unconscious. The other side origi
nates with physical experience derived from the temporal world, and
then acquires integration with the primordial side. It is determined, in
complete, consequent, "everlasting," fully actual, and conscious. His nec
essary goodness expresses the determination of his consequent nature
( PR, 345 ) .
   Whitehead i s not fooling around . I f what he describes i s faithful to his
solution, and i f the latter holds, one could even say that this solution
passes precisely where Christian theology has appropriated philosophical
concepts in a " d i sastrous " way. For God 's conceptual experience, as it is
characterized (except with regard to its " deficiency," that is, its thirst for
actual i ty, which is the only value ), correspond s quite wel l to the Greek
concept of " unmoved Prime Mover," who moves without being moved
and hence is not moved emotionally either, who orients without bei ng af
fected by the way that beings respond to his orientation. Whitehead him
sel f does not hesitate to emphasize this point ( PR, 344 ) . Yet this superb
concept, if it is adequate for a celebration of d ivine perfection, of its d i f
ference from a l l creatures, has nevertheless raised a terrible problem for
the Christian theologians who have appropriated it. It corresponds to a
divine figure incapable of that relation to history required by a providen
tial rel igion. God, the unmoved First Mover, may be He to whom the
prayers of mankind rise up, but not He to whom these prayers are ad
dressed if mankind requi res that their prayers be addressed to a being ca
pable of hearing them. But the physica l experience Whitehead attributes
to God seems to be the answer to this problem, and even affirms itself to
be capable of integrating the goodness demanded by the religious idea of
providence . If Whitehead's solution were to hold, one could say that he
would have " ta ken the problem by the horns," creating not a concept of
the divine in general but the finally coherent concept-the bad construc
tion of which, accord ing to him, was a disaster-{)f the God of the Chris
tians: a tinkered solution which, as the case may be, has been celebrated
as designating the unthinkable that must nevertheless be thought. In
short, he wil l have speculatively eliminated the central mystery of Chris
tian theology.
   At this point, however, a question of reading arises. What Whitehead
descri bes in this text as the two sides of God 's nature, he often defi nes
                                                G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 5 5




elsewhere as two " natures," primord ial and consequent. In fact, he even
spoke here of " two experiences," which has no meaning according to his
concepts: one or many, not two. The only genuine conceptual impl ication
of " two " is the duality of poles, physical and mental, of an experience
that is in itself undivided . Does " two " translate a specificity of God ? This
hypothesis seems to me all the less necessary in that Whitehead will also
come to speak, in these same pages, of " two experiences" for an actual
occasIOn .
   I a m therefore goi ng to run the risk of admitting that, in any case,
we have to do with a " manner of spea king." When Whitehead spea ks of
God's two natures, or of two divine experiences, he is simply prolongi ng
the l i ttle ruse that has a l l owed him to avoid ted ious rewritings. It was
enough for him to note-and even then not a l ways-i n the passages
where he had spoken of God as " nontemporal " that he was obviously
talking a bout God 's " primordial nature." By so doing, he unfortunately
set a trap for his readers, who were subjected to the temptation to attri
bute to this " primordial nature " as such the responsibility for the a spect
of functioning that Whitehead had initially attributed to nontemporal
actuality. This has very serious consequences, as we sha l l see on the basis
of a typica l exa mple.
   In what sense can unrealized abstract form be relevant? What is its
basis of relevance? "Relevance " must express some real fact of together
ness among forms. The ontological principle can be expressed as: All real
togetherness is togetherness in the formal constitution of an actuality.
So if there be a relevance of what in the temporal world is unrealized, the
relevance must express a fact of togetherness in the formal constitution
of a non-temporal actuality ( PR, 32 ) .
   From beginning to end o f Process and Reality, one invariant remains:
the fact that i f God 's intervention is necessary, it is in order to think of
relevance. In this passage, the subject is the ingression of eternal objects
that are not realized but " relevant." Yet to ensure that mental decisions
are " relevant" was already the function of God as the principle of limita
tion in Science and the Modern World, and i f this function is henceforth
attri buted to primordial nature alone, what is the function of consequent
nature ? It is that thanks to which God " feels" the world qua temporal, of
course, but what a re the consequences of this feeling for the world ? More
over, if relevance pertains to primordial nature a lone, that is, to the infi
nite envisagement of all eternal objects, how can this envisagement end up
in the definition of " what is best for that impasse," while itself remaining
"eternal," not affected by the temporal ity implied by this i mpasse qua as
sociated with a subjective sati sfaction, thus and not otherwise?
4 S 6   COSMOLOGY




  It is perhaps beca use the notion of " Unmoved Pri me Mover" consti
tutes an attractor too powerful for the conceptua l i magination that so
ma ny Whiteheadian philosophers have acted as though they could trea t
each of God 's " two na tures " sepa ra tely, instea d of attri buting to divine
experience two poles that can only be distinguished a bstractly. My read
ing choice will be the reverse: the point is to accentuate the insepa rable
character of the two " poles " of divine experience, the pole ca lled mental
and the pole ca lled physica l, and therefore to go right to the end of what
Whitehead proposed when he made God an actua l entity ( a l most) l i ke
the others.
  Every actual entity is "in time " so far as its physical pole is concerned,
and is "out of time " so far as its mental pole is concerned. It is the union
of two worlds, namely, the temporal world, and the world of autono
mous valuation ( PR, 248 ) .
   Consequently, I propose to rea d the statements in which Whitehead
spea ks of a " non-tempora l actua l ity " in a way that actively differentiates
between what mathematicians call " necessa ry " conditions and " necessary
and sufficient " conditions. When a statement refers to the nontemporal
actua lity, or to the primordial nature of God, as i f one could spea k of it
in isolation, this is a " necessa ry condition ": the envisagement of eternal
objects is necessary; otherwise, it would be i mpossi ble for nonrea l ized
eterna l objects to make ingression, si nce the notion of releva nce ca nnot
explain without being itself explained. But is this envisagement sufficient
to explain relevance passing into the worl d ? In the fifth part of Process
and Reality, by contrast, when Whitehead moves from divine conceptual
envisagement, defined as a necessary condition, to that envisagement in
the midst of the economy of divine experience, the question of necessary
and sufficient conditions is ra ised . It is then a ma tter of ta king fully into
account the undivided na ture of divine experience, the insepa rable char
acter of the two poles.
   However, a Whiteheadian scholar will proba bly come up with a very
serious objection to this reading choice. If the " d ivine endowment" con
stituted by the " i nitial a i m " of each nascent subject must be referred to
God as an actua l entity, and not to his eternal primordia l nature, it can
be assimilated to a "conclusion " of divine experience with rega rd to
" what is best for that impasse." But if God concl udes each time, he can
no longer be neither everlasting nor eterna l : his experience is "atomic."
What is given for the hybrid physical feeling from which an occasion will
derive its initial a i m is what has acceded to objective immortality, what
marks the perishing of the divine subject who therefore " never rea l ly ex
ists." Are we to imagine tha t a "divine occasion " could be reborn from
                                               G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 5 7




each worldly satisfaction, from each feeling of an impasse? This is not
Whitehead's solution, but it is the possibility accepted by Charles H arts
horne when he suggested making God a " society," a lineage of occasions
that inherit from themselves and from the world as it has decided itself
each time, according to the verdict of a n occasional new " worldly" satis
faction . H artshorne's suggestion has ra ised problems for those who insist
on agreement with physics, in this case relativistic: in this interpretation,
the d ivine feeling would correspond to a " true" definition of the world
qua simultaneous with itself. Yet the definition of a " divine society " gives
rise to many other difficulties, because turning God into a society means
placing him under the banner not only of a continuity but of a confor
mity. This risks making him topple immediately toward the side of reli
gion, for this conformity will enable him to be characterized, allowing
the definition of his " defin ing characteristic," and it will be hard to stop
once one gets going and not to deduce from him the d ivine proj ects for
the world . Such a characteristic is, moreover, ready-made, since White
head speaks of his " necessary goodness " as expressing " the determination
of his consequent nature." But if " God is good " through his own, cease
lessly confirmed continuity, why is he indifferent to our own continuities ?
Job's cry rings out.
   This is the defect of the idea of God as society: it has j ust given rise to
a misplaced " leap " of the imagination. God 's experience is social, " like
ours," therefore . . . My read ing hypothesis will thus go in the reverse d i
rection . The goal will be to accentua te what makes God an actua l entity
" unlike the others," and, on my hypothesis, this d ifference can, as we shall
see, justify a divine temporality that al lows us to escape from the threat of
the atomization of God .
   Whitehead is very clear on the subject of how God d iffers from actual
occasions. What d iffers is the fact that divine experience i mpl ies a " pole
reversa l " with regard to occasional experience. This, it seems to me, is the
genu ine problem to which d ivine functioning constitutes the solution, a
problem that can be avoided by those who describe the two natures as if
they could be separated . The solution Whitehead seeks is the character
ization of an experience that is l itera lly " unimaginable," because the ini
tial pole of this experience is characterized by the envisagement of eternal
obj ects that say nothing about themselves, nor about what their ingres
sion requires. They are not a ffected by the decisions that have conferred
upon them one or another role, nor by the multiple epochs that succeed
and become entangled with one another, punctuated by the appearance
of new contrasts and new propositions. Obviously, we cannot attri bute a
satisfaction of the occasional type to such an experience, since this type
4 5 8   COSMOLOGY




of satisfaction would i mply that everythi ng that was i ndeterminate i n
the i nitial pole h a s found i ts determi nation. A n d therefore, w e c a n sug
gest, a l ready at that point, that God is he who is unable to " conclude,"
to arrive at a determi nation that is " thus and not otherwise." Yet how
can we construct the positive definition of an experience that we cannot
i magi ne ?
   According to my hypothesis, Whitehead " thinks by the midd le." He
wi ll not try to conceive of God " i n hi msel f," but to affirm, by means of
the correlated twofold defini tion of God a nd the actual occasions, the
equal d ignity of both poles, the physica l pole that a ffirms that what has
occurred has occurred , and the conceptual pole, by which nothing of
what has occurred constitutes the last word . This is why the final chapter
of Process and Reality does not deal with God without at the same time
dea ling-rather implici tly, it must be admitted-with actual occasions,
that is, without submitting the coherence of the metaphysical scheme to
a new test.
   A n actual entity in the temporal world is to be conceived as originated
by physical experience with its process of completion motivated by con
sequent, conceptual experience initially derived from God. God is to be
conceived as originated by conceptual experience with his process of
completion motivated by consequent, physical experience, initially de
rived from the temporal world ( PR, 345 ) .
   Whitehead never formulated in s o technical a way as i n these few lines
the contrast which, accordi ng to my hypothesis, he wishes to construct,
and it is this programmatic statement ( i nvolving the imperative " is to
be " ) that will guide me from here on. This, accord i ng to my reading hy
pothesis, is the problem to which Whitehead m ust bring a sol ution.
   In fact, this problem presents itself in the manner of two d istinct " ma th
ematical formulas," a bout which it must be determined how the d ifferent
terms they connect a re to be defined in order to make the formula work.
And it is the contrast between the two formulas that obviously acts as a
constra int. Whitehead's statement prescribes that the pole reversal should
be thought in a mode that exhibits a partiality i n favor of symmetry: both
formulas propose an identical threefold articulation, " originated by,"
" with itslhis process of completion motivated by," and " consequent [ . . . 1
experience initially derived from ." These three identical articulations must
be understood as together forming a complex function, with the rest be
ing variable. How should we interpret the varia bles in a way that satisfies
and renders intel l igible their articulation, al lowing us to i magine that the
two formulas are in fact one and the same, endowed with d ifferent
varia bles ?
                                                G O D   A N D   T H E   WORLD   4 5 9




    Here, instead of the leap of the imagination, it is the la borious work of
mathematicians constructing their sol ution that i mposes itself. For we
sha ll have to proceed as one does in mathematics: starting out from what
may be considered " known," the functioning of actual occasions, to
explore the way i n which the first formula, supposed to define what is
known, in fact obliges us to make explicit, a nd even to mod ify what we
know, and use what has been acq uired as a starting point towa rd the
unknown. We sha l l therefore begin with the actual occasion, " conceived
as originated by physica l experience " and as endowed with " process of
completion motivated by consequent, conceptua l experience i nitia lly de
rived from God." I suggest that the reader who, having now understood
my a pproach, hesitates to engage in this hypothetical exploration, skip
directly to the next chapter, i n which the construction I sha ll attribute to
Whitehead will have to be eva luated on the basis of what it gives rise to:
new leaps of the imagination.
   As we reca ll, the question of the " physica l experience " i n which an
actua l occasion has its origin was ma rked by a major event: the aban
donment of the idea that " physica l feelings " a re the feeling of an a l ready
unified datum. The demand answered by this abandonment is clear: the
" initi a l phase," the physical feelings of the data but a lso the conceptual
feelings that derive from them ( according to the fourth categorica l obli
gation ) , must always be already those of a subject, always be already in
separa ble from the p·rocess of completion whose superject to be deter
mined constitutes a final cause.
   Since the point is to " get to the bottom of things," one could ask the
question " where does the subject 'come from' " ? Rather remarkably, the
" formula " does not say. Of course, the actual entity has its origin in physi
ca l experience, but this experience, once it has been referred to a nexus
i nstead of a datum, has conferred i ts full meaning upon the " m i racle of
creation." The many that wil l have to be felt a re, like d ried bones, on
vacation wi th rega rd to what wi ll give them life, what will constitute
them as multiple physica l feelings. And if Ezekiel spea ks as he was com
manded , the very fact that he spea ks implies that, one way or another, the
command requi res a proto-subject to l isten and enact. Or that there is a
relation of reciproca l presupposition between a germ of subjectivity a nd
what answers to it, a multiplicity henceforth correlated, the shudder of
the dispersed bones becoming data for physica l feelings aiming at their
subject. These would be two aspects of the same " origi n " of the actual
entity. And therefore, the " initial endowment," the hybrid physica l feel
ing of God from which, accord ing to the fourth obligation, the initial aim
derives, req uires a nd does not explain its subject.
4 6 0   COSMOLOGY




  In this regard, let us take up a fragment whose beginning has a l ready
been cited, and which describes how the initial aim is mod ified, becom
ing, accordi ng to the terms of the formula, the conceptua l experience that
motivates the process of completion. Its end, which I have not cited, gave
the reason why the hybrid feeling of God was introduced .
   Each temporal entity, in one sense, originates from its mental pole,
analogously to God himself. It derives from God its basic conceptual aim,
relevant to its actual world, yet with indeterminations awaiting its own
decisions. This subjective aim, in its successive modifications, remains the
unifying factor governing the successive phases of interplay between
physical and conceptual feelings. These decisions are impossible for the
nascent creature antecedently to the novelties in the phases of its concres
cence. But this statement in its turn requires amplification. With this
amplification the doctrine, that the primary phase of a temporal actual
entity is physical, is recovered [ . . . 1 the primary phase is a hybrid physi
cal feeling of G od, in respect to God 's conceptual feeling which is imme
diately relevant to the universe "given " for that concrescence. There is
then, according to the Category of Conceptual Valuation, i.e. Categoreal
Obligation I V, a derived conceptual feeling which reproduces for the
subject the data and valuation of God's conceptual feeling. This concep
tual feeling is the initial conceptual aim [ . . . 1 ( PR, 224-225 ) .
  When Whitehead notes that a statement requires amplification, it i s
usually because h e is making an insertion i nto a text written previously. I n
this case, the " a mplification" has enabled h i m to affirm that the origin of
an actual occasion is indeed a physical experience, answering to " Hume's
principle." God's hybrid physical feeling thus enables agreement with
both H ume's principle and the ontological principle, which demands a
reason for the ingression of unrealized eterna l objects. Yet as its name in
dicates, this feeling also presupposes its subject, albeit nascent.
  In other words, the expression " initially derived from God " a l l udes to
the derivation of a conceptual feel ing from a hybrid physical feeling, but
does not in the very least explain the " subject" that is presupposed in
both cases. And a supplementary problem arises with regard to the sec
ond formula, which concerns divine experience, for in its case, the origin of
the experience is defined as "conceptua l." Coherence, in this case, i mplies
that whatever may be its modalities that are still to be determined, divine
experience must be i nitially conceptual . As a result, what Whitehead i n
this case calls " derivation" ( God's process of completion as " motivated
by the consequent physical experience initially derived from the temporal
world " ) requires that the initium for God-what " activates " a di vine
experience-he the derivation of a physica l feeling from a conceptual
                                                G O D   A N D   T H E   WORLD   461




one, the latter involving moreover, one way or another, the temporal
worl d . But there is no category that defines this possibi lity.
   Here we face an initial difficulty of Whitehead's formula, and a deci
sion becomes necessary. Insofa r as the term " derivation" involved i n the
expression " initia lly derived " cannot be used in a strictly technica l sense
in the case of the divine, it is not necessary to think that it has the techni
cal meaning conferred upon it by the fourth obligation in the other case.
Thus, the formulas do not confer upon the term " derivation " that a ppears
in it the categoreal meaning of " derivation of a feeling from another feel
ing." This is coherent, for when i t comes to the delicate question of the
" ma tching cond itions " (as physicists call the operation of connection
between two d ifferent registers of descriptions ) between God and the
world, and between the world and God, the categories of obligation can
only remain silent, for they presuppose concrescence and concern the lat
ter's process of self-determination. In order to emphasize the importance
of this technica l poi nt, I wi l l a l low myself to use, i nstead of the hence
forth opaque expression " i nitia lly derived," a new " na me " that points
out the problem where we were l u red by a feeling of fam i l i a ri ty. This
name will be added to the series of Whitehead ian names, that is, of the
concepts that matter prima rily by their relevance to other concepts,
which is precisely what thei r name does not state.
   The goal is to name the " beginning" to which corresponds the ques
tion " Whence comes the subject? " but also the " end " ; the fact that, in a
way that is sti ll indeterminate, occasional experience can " make God
physica lly feel " in such a way that God's consequent experience may be
" relevant" for " that i mpasse." And we must choose a term that is i ndeter
minate enough to escape the demand for reasons associated with the
ontological principle. Not in order to i ntroduce something a rbitrary, but
because the " reasons" associated with the ontological principle a l ways
incl ude a mong those reasons the " final cause," the subject-superject: sub
jective feel i ngs qua aiming at the superject that will be the subject of thei r
unified feeling. Further, the reversal of poles ma kes the a pplication of the
ontological principle to God a problem. Should it be " no eternal object, no
reason " ? We must name what is demanded by creativity that is ultimate
when it comes to the twofold " making-feel," that is, to what is required
both by the hybrid physical feeling of God (which requires a subject to feel
it), and by the divine feeling " a bout" the actual occasion as an impasse
(which requi res that the occasion make God feel ) .
   "At the beginning o f beginnings, there i s induction." I have chosen the
term " induction " for two reasons. First, the term evokes an operation of
" passage " between two heterogeneous things: one thing induces something
4 6 2   COSMOLOGY




different. Then, when we have to deal with what is called hypnotic induc
tion, the term is laden with indeterminacy. Hypnotized subjects seem to
raise their arm against their will, "as they were ordered ." Yet hypnotizers
are wel l aware that they a re not the ones who have given the order. If they
have a role, it is rather that of indicating a path, or authorizing an experi
ence. Those who induce hypnosis a re thus quite unable to explain what
they are bringing about, but they know that they a re not its " reason."
   One of the ways to specify that hypnotizers are not rea lly in command
is to say that they give rise to what did not exist before the induction, a
new " you " to whom it is suggested " you must be able to raise your arm
aga inst your wil l ." The " you must be able" is not a n order, for an order
supposes the preexistence of the person to whom it is add ressed . It must
be understood more in the mode of a d iagnosis or of a hypothetica l ob
servation. In fact, th is is a path suggested to the new "you" made to
emerge by the addressing, by which the corresponding " I " will verify its
own existence . The order corresponds to a " ma ki ng fel t," whence the
subject of this feeling emerges, initiati ng, as the case may be, the ra ising
of the hand "as ordered ."
   To choose the term " i nd uction " is thus to give rise to the " leap of
imagination" in a case that does not correspond to a religious feeling but
has constrained scientists who seek reasons to acknowledge indetermi
nacy. I will take adva ntage of the flight of experience thus brought a bout
to take up the second part of Whitehead's formula concerning the actual
entity " with its process of completion motivated by consequent, concep
tual experience," and to try to make it a l ive with rega rd to the adventure
of human experience descri bed by the French phi losopher Etienne
Souriau under the name " work to be done."
   This is i ndeed a leap of the imagination, for the di fferences are just as
rema rkable as the common features. Thus, unlike occasional completion,
the trajectory of completion of both work and worker requires conscious
ness, and more precisely a properly " non-socia l " mode of consciousness,
since, as we shall see, none of the i ngredients to be " set to work" can
boast of a stabilized role, none can be felt independently of the contrast
proper to intellectua l feeling between " in fact" and " might be." More
over, unlike the accomplishment constituted by a work, the accomplish
ment constituted by every occasional satisfaction cannot, as such, be as
sociated with the contrast between success and failure. Every concrescence
prod uces its satisfaction, however trivial the way in which the many have
become one on this occasion may be.
   The common features, for their part, ind icate that those who have used
the expression " work to be done "-that is, E tienne Souriau, and a fter
                                                G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 6 3




him Gil les Deleuze-sought to depersonalize the experience of the work
as i t is carried out, that is, also to divest it of the reasons, whether psy
chological or social, that claim to account for it. The result has been a
characterization of that experience that could indeed be read as a testi
mony i n fa vor of the Whiteheadian genetic process, somewhat as i n phys
ics, the ( socia l ) properties of supercond ucting bodies testify in favor of
the relevance of q uantum mechanics. Perhaps, moreover, this character
ization converges with what Whitehead hi mself understood by " wholly
living nexus," for the " non-social " mode of consciousness of creators at
work situates them i n the interstices of the ha bits, slogans, and judg
ments proper to discursive consciousness, fashioning step by step a
thread of continuity that may be broken as soon as trust is stratified into
assurance, or dissolves into fatigue.
   The " work to be done" is, with the " task to be fulfilled " and the " prob
lem to be solved," one of the ways in which Gil les Deleuze ( DR, espe
cially pp. 253 and 274 ) characterizes the " reality " of the vi rtua l, distin
guishi ng it from the potential, which lacks only existence. This, in fact, is
how the correlated multiplicity of pri mary physical feelings can be de
scri bed, feelings which appea l, as to their final cause, to the " solution"
that will celebrate the correlative determination of the superj ect and i ts
actua l world : satisfaction. Yet the Deleuzian virtual does not state expl ic
itly that it requi res, in order to assu me i ts i mperative meaning, " to be
done," " to be fulfil led," " to be solved," someone who hears and accepts.
No problem can, of course, i nsist " in genera l," or demand its solution " i n
genera l," independently o f the person experiencing this insistence, who
wi ll be mobi lized by this demand. Thus, Fermat's conj ecture is, for the
non-mathematician, a proposition that is plausible but " dead," " the kind
of thing whose eventual demonstration may excite mathematicians." And
for most mathematicians, this conjecture was accompanied, before its
demonstration, by all the discouraging stories a bout the fai l ures that suc
ceeded each another for centuries: a problem to be solved, perhaps, but
those who attacked it had to thi n k they were capa ble of succeed ing
where so many others had failed. The conjecture only became " a live" for
those who, at thei r own risks and peri ls, felt themselves a ble to i nherit
not the repeated failures but the possible, the " it should be possible to
demonstrate it." For them, the conjecture ass umed the i m perative cha rac
ter of the question that would devour a life.
   In this "it should be possi ble," one will of course recognize the " mak
ing felt" that corresponds what I have called " induction." The i m perative
of the problem to be solved has made itsel f felt, which also means that
the subject of these feelings is born, for whom the correlated multipl icity
4 6 4   COSMOLOGY




of known mathematical theorems and relations is now what the solution
 " should come" from .
    Yet what happens next also illuminates the process of completion which,
for Whitehea d, has the character of a quantum in solido, that objective
analysis can only decompose in a way that abstracts from its undivided
character. A problem can only be divided when it is in fact solved, when
mathematicians have succeeded in giving it a formulation that constitutes
them as " ma sters " of their procedure, allowing them to proceed to the
verification of thei r solution. They can then ma ke the ordered stages suc
ceed one another, and proceed to the progressive determination of the
landscape, where, finally, the solution should swoop down like an eagle
on its prey: QED. Yet verification is preceded by rovings, zigzags, drea ms,
and nightmares, i n which the dissolved self of the mathematician a nd the
indeterminate fragments of what might be the solution affect one another
in an entanglement that is i mpossible to recount. For this entanglement,
on the one hand, creates ever more singular relations between the i nitial
data-a l l the mathematica l theorems that might be releva nt-and, on
the other, the enrichment of the "final cause" that motiva tes the mathe
matician: the a bstract " it should be possible" gradually becomes half
formulated hypotheses, hesi tant conjectures. As if the solution were i n
some way more a n d more "present," motivating an effort that is more a nd
more singular, but without it being possible for thi s presence to be, for all
that, the object of a n appropriation enabling a narration : "and then I said
to myself that . . . " It is not that creation is ineffa ble, but those who nar
rate it divide the i ndivisible, transformi ng what had put them to the test
i nto questions they would have asked themselves. Creation is a " private"
process, but " private" has nothing to do with a psychological form of in
timacy, the refusal to show something until it is finished . It is because,
strictly speaking, there is nothing to see, nothing to show, nothing to dis
cuss, nothi ng to share, except by allusion, and only with those who-and
the private can clearly be col lecti ve-a lso expose themselves to be inhab
ited by a question to enter i nto a process of creation.
    The " i nappropriable presence " that motivates the work, the idea that
flees i f one tries to make i t explicit, for its only clarification wi l l coi ncide
with the work produced, is called by Etienne Souriau the " spiritual form"
of the work to be done, or aga i n the "Angel of the work ."
   You realize, of course, that I only propose this word while accompany
ing it with all the appropriate philosophical "as it weres." No doubt, for
this comparison of spiritual form and the A ngel, I could take shelter be
hind the authority of William Blake. In fact, and to speak a more severe
and more technical language, I do indeed say that the work to be done
                                               G O D   A N D   T H E   WORLD   4 6 5




has a certain form. It is a form accompanied by a kind of halo of hope
and wonder, whose reflection is a kind of Orient for us. All these are
things than can obviously be commented upon by a comparison with
love. A nd in fact, if the poet did not already love the poem a bit before
writing it, if all those who think of a future world that is to be brought to
life did not find, in their dreams on this subject, some amazed premoni
tion of the presence called for, if, in a word, the waiting for the work was
amorphous, there would no doubt be no creation. Here, I am not letting
myself be swept along by a k ind of mysticism of the creative effort, but
I simply observe that the creator can scarcely escape this kind of mysti
cism, by which his effort is justified " ( M EO F, 1 4-1 5 ) .
   " Spiritual form " means neither " model " nor goa l . O n the contrary,
Souriau's Angel plays a role analogous to that of consequent conceptual
experience, " motivati ng" the process of accomplishment, for that of
which it is the omen or " l ure " is inseparable from the work in the mak
ing: not a fixed form to be achieved but an insistence, ceaselessly re
launched, whose enigma puts creators to the question, turning them into
the creatures of their question . The Angel neither suggests nor inspires an
answer, he demands it from creators, and the creators alone a re respon
sible for the way they respond : either a success or a fa ilure.
   If the question of the work to be done can traverse a l l the registers of a
life in Etienne Souriau (and in Deleuze ), from the poem to life itself, then
raised to the anonymous power of "a life," it is because it is irreducible to
the continuity instituted by any positive description: a creator endowed
with habits, projects, and ideas. And it is no doubt because Whitehead
was a man a t work that he insti tuted in metaphysica l terms, that is, i n the
very structure of the categoreal scheme, what the work to be done de
mands to see recognized: the radica l difference between obligation and
explanation. All explanation, because it is division, attri buting causes and
responsibilities, distributing reasons and circumstances, takes ad vantage
of a social stability that it confirms, or of an accompli shed work that it
verifies. An obliga tion cannot be explained but must be respected, and
there is nothing moral a bout the term " respect," either when Souriau's
Angel ma kes the worker hesitate or when it comes to an actual occasion.
It must be understood a s close as possible to the expression " respect of
specifications," which leaves open the question of how i t will be so.
   I can now return to my own specifications, that is, turn towa rd White
head's second formula, the one that cha racterizes the functioning of di
vine experience. The preceding al lows the problem of this formula to be
raised on the basis of the question of " matching condi tions," that is, of
the way in which the motivation of d i vine experience may be " i nitially
4 6 6   COSMOLOGY




derived from the tempora l world ." The first goa l will be to understand
the meaning, in this case, of the translation I have given of this initial
derivation : " there is ind uction." Not, of course, in order to explain induc
tion, but to ask in what way the " temporal worl d " may " i nduce" a divine
experIence.
   But God, as well as being primordial, is also consequent. He is the be
ginning and the end. He is not the beginning in the sense of being in the
past of all members. He is the presupposed actuality of conceptual opera
tion, in unison of becoming with every other creative act. Thus, by reason
of the relativity of all things, there is a reaction of the world on God. The
completion of God's nature into a fullness of physical feeling is derived
from the objectification of the world in God. He shares with every new
creation its actual world; and the concrescent creature is objectified in God
as a novel element in God's objectification of that actual world ( PR, 345 ) .
   Whereas occasions inherit " stubborn facts," God shares " his" world
with each new creation . We will thus have to play close to the vest, for the
term " share" seems to imply that God physically feels the actua l world
correlated with the entity, that is, j ust as much that he feels the entity it
self, since the entity and its world are i n fact the two sides of one coi n, as
I have previously tried to ill ustrate by bringing up the inseparability be
tween the operator, the actual world that has become well-determ ined,
and the "eigensubject" who is its feeling. But the hypothesis that God
feels the world " physically" is excluded by the first pa rt of the formula,
defining as the " origin" a mental pole that m ust be expressed in terms of
feelings that a re uniquely conceptua l . Here, the decision I have taken to
let myself be guided by " the formula " will impose a risky interpretation .
We will have to succeed in " placing at the origi n " everything that will
have to be mobil ized by the process of divine completion, a process that
will shed light on what Whitehead calls " sharing."
   In add ition, a supplementary question arises, inspi red by the term
" sharing." Can God share his process of completion with an occasion ? In
this case, God would transcend the distinction between the " private " and
the " publ ic." He would therefore become quite close to the God of Leib
niz, able to read in the sl ightest state of the least monad " what occurs
everywhere, and even what has occurred and wi l l occur." Whitehead has,
of course, rejected the idea of a " divine reading" that refers our experi
ence of choice, hesitation, decision, and novelty to the "as if." Yet the
opposition is perhaps not as irreparable as he thought. A Bergsonian
reader of Lei bniz like Gil les Deleuze was able to take up, in an al most
Whiteheadian way, the Leibnizian metaphor of God as reader, thereby
overcoming the " evil " always constituted by an irreparable opposition.
                                              G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 6 7




   Here, it seems that the present loses its privilege, and that determinism
is reintroduced as predestination. But in what sense? Is it because God
knows everything beforehand? Is it not, instead, rather because He is,
always and everywhere? [ . . . 1 Yet to say that God is always and every
where is to say, strictly, that he goes through all the states of the monad,
however small they may be, such that He coincides with it at the moment
of action "without any distance. " Reading does not consist in concluding
from the idea of a preceding state the idea of the following state, but in
grasping the effort or the tendency by which the following state itself
comes out of the preceding one "by a natural force." The divine reading
is a genuine passage of God into the monad (somewhat like Whitehead
speaks of a "passage of nature " locally). What is more, each monad is
nothing other than a passage of God: each monad has a viewpoint, but
this viewpoint is the "result " of a reading or a view of God, which passes
through it and coincides with it ( LP, 98-99) .
    God i s certainly " passed through " Deleuze reading Leibniz, and the
opposition overcome by a " grasp" of Lei bniz's effort trying to think of
God " reading the worl d " would no doubt have made both Leibniz and
Whitehead rejoice. In no case, therefore, will one say that " the ways of
God " are impenetra ble, for it is the very i dea that God could trace paths
that contrad icts what is to be affi rmed fi rst and foremost: for Lei bniz,
i f we follow Deleuze, the effort or tendency of each monad, which God
cannot foresee but only accompany, wi thout a ny d istance; for White
head, the creative independence of each concrete occasion, the a bsence of
any viewpoint from which the choice it prod uces by itself could be sa id
to be a function of something else.
    However, the opposition does not, it seems to me, disa ppear i n favor of
an agreement, but of a contrast. For the case proposed by Deleuze with
regard to Leibniz corresponds to the one I evoked when I noted that the
private may be collective. It must simply be restricted to those who a l low
themsel ves to be i nha bited by the q uestion, who share the question of
completion. Yet Whitehead speaks of the new creature " objectified in
God," qua " new element of God 's objecti fication of that actua l world."
The fact that he uses the term " objectification " is important, for, since
this distinction was available to him, he could have attributed to God the
possibility of knowing an entity formally, from the viewpoint of its own
enjoyment, which would correspond to the " passage " of God evoked by
Deleuze. And the expression " qua new element of that actual worl d "
confirms that Whitehead ian " sharing " respects the strictly private char
acter, causa sui, of concrescence: God's consequent experience is a bout
the actual world of the occasion, not a bout the privacy of the creature
4 6 8   C O S M O LO G Y




" in the making." Whitehead thus rejects a God who, prehend i ng " with
out any d ista nce " how the su bject determi nes itself, would then find
himself in a position somewhat com para ble to that of a hidden voyeur,
seeing without being seen, that is, without his seei ng having the slightest
effect on what he sees. Nothing is hidden in the world of Whitehead, a nd
if the occasion as causa sui were not to transcend God, the whole econ
omy of the system would have to be revised .
   In other words, it seems that a distance should vi brate where Lei bniz
enunciated a coincidence " without a ny d istance." This distance by no
means signifies nostalgia, the impossibility of plenitude, or exile. In front
of his students, Whitehead, searching for the situation that would make
them feel what he wa nted to make them understand by " reality," one day
invoked rugby : " to be in the middle of the pack ." Reality never situates
us as contemplative spectators, but a lways in the middle of the pack,
where there is pushing, shoving, and mutual constraint. Likewise, the a f
firmation that reading is never " to take cognizance," in the sense of coin
ciding with what is written, is not a cause for lamentations. " Read ing " is,
still and yet aga in, creating. And since the impossi bility of a knowledge
that "coincides " with its object is not a matter of mourni ng, it is valid for
God as for everybody else.
   If God, as Whitehead someti mes says, is " in unison of becoming " with
each creative act, this does not mean that such a unison signifies contem
porary community. If God is to " share," this sharing is part of the process
of completion initially derived from ( induced by) the temporal world . Yet
a new problem a rises, a lmost immediately. Since this is a n experience
that is, strictly spea king, unimaginable, we cannot get very far with what
induction means when it concerns the " beginni ng " of an actual occasion.
But Whitehead says a bit more when the i nduction i nvolves God as its
addressee. In any case, th is is what seems to be meant by the way he will
answer a question suddenly asked, j ust before the chapter devoted to
God : the question of " ultimate evil ."
   The ultimate evil in the temporal world is deeper than any specific evil.
It lies in the fact that the past fades, that time is a "perpetual perishing."
Objectification implies elimination. The present fact has not the past fact
with it in any full immediacy. The process of time veils the past below
distinctive feeling [ . . . J "He giveth his beloved-sleep " ( PR, 340-34 1 ) .
   The increasingly confused character, from objectification to objectifica
tion, of what was decided on the occasion of an individual completion, and
its gradual forgetting, would thus be the " ultimate evil ." This definition
comes as somewhat of a surprise in Process and Reality, since nothi ng
has prepa red the reader for it. Yet it prepares for one of the functions
                                                G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 6 9




which, thanks to the intervention of the consequent nature, Whitehead
wi l l associate wi th the d i vinity, " the tender ca re that nothing be lost."
   Confronted by this image, we must bea r i n mind that Whitehead
wished to succeed in " secularizing" God 's function. The point is thus to
take great care that our interpretation of the question of ultimate evil
does not communicate with a function of the religious type, in particular,
with God as associated with the " s urvival of the soul ." In fact, i f " thanks
to God " nothing is lost, nothing, even so, will " su rvive " as such. What " i s
not lost" w i l l not b e " sa ved " as such, but in the mode of the unimagina
ble d i vi ne experience . Moreover, neither the q uestion nor its answer gives
any particular importance to death in the usual sense, mine or yours. The
question of u ltimate evi l may be understood as a supplication, which it
raises to its cosmic power: " May what I have gone through not sink,
purely and simply, i nto insignificance, u nder the banner of an abstraction
that is ever poorer as it is taken into account successively and i n d iver
gent ways! " But what I experienced one day ago, one hour, or one minute
has already undergone this fate. This is why the question of ultimate evi l
is not the religious one of the survival a fter death of a " living person," but
it arises for each occasion, whose determination also means " perishing."
   God's conceptual realization is nonsense if thought of under the guise
of a barren, eternal hypothesis [ . . . I Again this discordant multiplicity
of actual things, requiring each other and neglecting each other, utilizing
and discarding, perishing and yet claiming life as obstinate matter of fact,
requires an enlargement of the understanding to the comprehension of
another phase in the nature of things. In this later phase, the many actu
alities are one actuality, and the one actuality is many actualities. Each
actuality has its present life and its immediate passage into novelty; but
its passage is not its death ( PR, 349 ) .
   " Its passage i s not its death " : unfortunately, n o more precise indica
tion is to be fou nd i n the text, but this one is precious. The unison of
becoming might well imply that the " perishing" of an occasion concerns
only the tempora l world . Of course, the subject-superject perishes, from
the viewpoi nt of its i nherita nce, and in a twofold sense. Fi rst, its process
of completion cannot, as such, be eva luated, even by God, in the sense
that evaluation wou ld imply the possi bility of " putting oneself in another's
place," and replaying what has occu rred, a possi bi l i ty excluded by the
fifth category of explanation, according to which " two actual entities
never derive thei r origin from an identical universe " ( PR, 22 ) . Second,
what has been decided, having acceded to "objective immortali ty," is cat
egorica lly incapable of appealing against the use other occasions will
make of its decision. Yet Whitehead does not tal k about " resurrection " in
470    C O S M O LO G Y




God, preferring to distinguish between " perishing " and " dying " as fa r as
actua lity itself is concerned . It is thus here, through this distinction, that
the question can fina lly be ra ised of induction, or the way in which a
satisfied occasion is able to " make God feel ."
   Wha tever " making feel " may mean, it is a vector. And in fact, the argu
ment according to which the vectorial dimension of feelings disappea rs
with satisfaction ma y be repeated with this new question: what if its dis
appea ra nce were not its death? For nothing dema nds that the multiplicity
of vectorial feelings that have attained what they a imed at, their concrete
unity for a subj ect that will answer for its world, be suppressed upon sat
isfaction. Their disa ppea ra nce means that all has been determined, that, as
far as the process of completion is concerned, there is nothing left to aim
at. Yet we must note that their elimina tion has no meaning in the physico
mathema tica l la nguage with which Whitehead tried to remai n in harmony:
in physics, vectors may counterba lance their effects and hence disappea r
qua " having an effect," but no conceivable physica l process can "elimi
na te " them in favor of a sca lar quantity. Only the act of measurement can
accomplish this exploit, but in an abstract way, beca use the mea su red
quantity is there for whoever mea sures it, for whoever, in other words, is
affected by it: a vector. If satisfaction coincides with the production of a
value, which every actua l occasion will henceforth have to take i nto ac
count, there is no rea son to bel ieve this is the end of the story.
   There is a bea uti ful theory in Leibniz, articulating the vectorial powers
of the soul with those studied by dyna mics: the theory of conatus. In
both cases, conatus mea ns tha t there is never any rest. Rest evokes a state
that is indifferent to time, which is an impossibility for Leibniz. That is
why every quiet soul and every immobile body are in fact " a nima ted " by
a "conatus," an effort towa rd the future to which no qua ntity may be
assigned, and which ca nnot in i tsel f have a ny effect. The conatus is
" effort towa rd," perpetua l d isquiet. In physics, i f a body is ma inta ined at
equilibrium, its conatus is the beginning, at each i nsta nt, of a movement
that a borts in that insta nt, to be reborn in the fol lowing one. If equilib
rium is broken, however, the conatus unfolds into motion. More gener
ally, conatus designa tes the vectorial power insofa r as it can never be
" elimina ted," but insofar as it does not have within itself the mea ns to
develop, since its development depends upon ci rcumstances .
   The contrast associated with the conatus, the deployment or absence of
any assigna ble effect, is appropriate for the question of the becoming of
the occasional subject, and its perishing. The vectorial dimension depends
"on circumstances." It is deployed when feelings aim at their unification
and disappears in the "circumstance " in which there is no longer anything
                                                G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 7 1




to aim at, in which all has been accompl ished. Yet the analogy with the
conatus allows us to say that its disappea rance is not its elimination: if the
subject/superject perishes, it is as "cause of itself," in the sense that it per
tained to it to start out from its own circumstances, in solido, to determine
in and for itself its own production. It is henceforth up to others, given
other circumstances, to decide on the meaning of the unit produced.
   Here, the ana logy enables somethi ng new. As Whitehead never ceases
to repeat, the subject/superject's determina tion with regard to itself is j ust
as much a position with regard to the future . The occasion's " peri shing"
then means that i n this perspective the position will have no assignable
consequence . Actual occasions will ta ke the " position" i nto accou nt, but
they will remain deaf to the vectorial d i mension of the position's " a ppeal
to the future," and, more precisely, deaf to the imperative dimension of that
call, which demands to be heard for itself. This deafness is crucial for
their own freedom of sel f-determination. "Am I my brother's keeper ? "
asks Cain, a nd rightly so i n this case, accord i ng to Whitehea d . I n this
sense, the superject does i ndeed have the features of a conatus, a vectorial
appea l to a future that it does not have within itself the means to make
hea rd by its successors. And it may be this a ppeal that finds its add ressee
in God, he whose experience will be i nd uced by the vectorial imperative.
Yet ind uction is not identical with sharing. God wou l d be what the
superjective conatus aims at, the a ppeal to the future that no occasion
will i nherit, but the deployment of the conatus a lways depends on the
circumstances: the definition of the way the appea l will be heard depends
on the "circumstances " of d ivine experience.
   What I have j ust proposed does not appear anywhere in Process and
Reality, but the proposition is technically accepta ble. And it allows us to
approach the question of the object of the " ind uced " conceptua l feeling,
a feeling which, on my read ing, belongs to the " mental origin " of d ivine
experience . The fact that the superjective appea l to the future may " make
itself felt" means, at the same time, that the d ivine process of completion
will give its answer to the plea that what the subject/superj ect has become
for itself may not sink into oblivion. That which, from the categoreal
viewpoint ( the ninth category of explanation: " how" an actual entity " be
comes" constitutes " what" that actual entity " is" ) implies that what will
be initia lly objectified is a " how," the "completed how." Yet it is precisely
this " how," a quite determinate articulation of a limited group of eternal
objects, that no actual occasion ca n i nherit as such, for the articulation
will become undone, d ismembered, a nd replayed by each new process of
determination. If the divine feeling that is induced is a conceptual feeling
of this " how," there is as yet no question of sharing, for the articulation of
4 7 2   C O S M O LO G Y




the eternal objects, quite obviously, does not tell any story about itself. It
nevertheless constitutes the full determination of its satisfaction, a com
plete but silent version of what has been accomplished.
   Thus, God would not " resuscitate what is dead," but " feel " a " how "
that may have no add ressee but him. What will become of what has been
felt, the mode of deployment of the conatus, does not depend on the ap
pel lant but depends on the "circumstances" of divine experience, and it is
God's answer that is to be defined as " sharing." In other words, " in the
beginning," God does not " share " the actua l world of the satisfied entity.
This actual world will be " objectified" in the sense that this term desig
nates the fact of " being felt" by something other than oneself, accordi ng
to a pragmatic value that belongs to the formal constitution of that other
thing. When it comes to God, this pragmatic value will a llow us to speak
of " sharing," since God is he for whom every occasion, even the most
tenuous, " matters," insofa r as it is new. In this sense, divine pragmatics
wi ll not be decisional, for every decision means ta king a partial position,
thus and not otherwise, instrumental izing what it ta kes into account for
its own ends. It will, however, be " inexorable," adding a new element to
what was initially felt. If there is sharing, it will not only be in the ful l
deployment o f what is the " propriu m " of the fu lly determined entity, in
the fu ll, singular coherence of its appeal : the a ppeal will finally be heard,
but in a way that plunges it into the eternal d ivine ordering. That is, as
we sha ll see, in a way that i nexora bly a rticulates this appeal with every
thing a bout which it has d rawn a blank.
   However, before we move on to the divine process of completion, we
must obviously pa use for a moment over what has become, on this
hypothesis, of the infinite envi sagement of all eternal objects, that is, the
primordial nature of God . According to my hypothesis, Whitehea d 's two
formulas must have an obligatory value. If divine induction is required
by the first, primary phase of occasional concrescence, we must concl ude,
in pa ra l lel, that a lthough the divine envisagement of eternal objects may
wel l be "eternal," " free," or " primordial," it nevertheless requi res, in or
der to be "this" envisagement, the induction produced by a superject's
appea l to the future. In other words, divine conceptua l realization , even
if it includes a l l the eterna l objects, and as such is therefore not a ffected
by any new fact, would not for that reason be static.
   This hypothesis does not a ppea r in the Whiteheadian text, and it might
seem to contrad ict the ceaselessly repeated theme of the unique, complete,
and eternal character of divine conceptual realization . In fact, however, it
obl iges us instead to specify this character: this theme is the correlate of
the way the multipl icity of eternal objects is characterized, indi fferent to
                                               G O D   A N D   T H E   WORLD   4 7 3




their ingressions, to the d ifference between real ized and unreal ized . God's
primordial nature is thus not constra ined by the selection of eternal ob
jects real ized, nor is it limited by the " world's creative progress " : it is
eterna lly complete, without excl usivity or exception, the realization of all
eternal objects. Yet this does not necessarily mean that it is the invariant
real ization of all possible relations between all eternal objects. Quite the
contrary, the hypothesis of such an invariance would imply that any ar
ticulation between eternal obj ects rea l ized by a n occasion could never be
anything other than a case in an eternally preexistent total ity, j ust as ev
ery particular combination is a mere case in the predefined set of a l l pos
sible combina tions. Yet if God is a creature of creativity, he must exem
plify, more than a nything else, the reason why Whitehead confers the
status of ultimate upon creativity: he is what will spell out a nd ill ustrate
all novelty qua irred ucible.
   If the divine conceptual real ization is, as I suppose, " induced " by the
superjective appeal, if it includes the conceptual feeling of the complex of
eternal objects correspondi ng to " how" an occasion has determined itself,
this real ization must be interpreted as ful ly deploying this " how," that is,
deploying it in a way that completely determines the differentiated rele
vance of each eternal object with regard to this particular complex. Such a
realization could be said to be one and eternal, because any " grouping" of
all eternal objects holds for all others. Once again, Whitehead never wrote
this, but it would shed light on the import of some of his utterances .
   The endeavour to understand eternal ohjects in complete abstraction
from the actual world results in reducing them to mere undifferentiated
nonentities. This is an exemplification of the categoreal principle, that the
general metaphysical character of being an entity is "to be a determinant
in the becoming of actualities." Accordingly the differentiated relevance
of eternal objects to each instance of the creative process requires their
conceptual realization in the primordial nature of God. He does not cre
ate eternal objects; for his nature requires them in the same degree that
they require him. This is an exemplification of the coherence of the cat
egoreal types of existence. The general relationships of eternal objects to
each other, relationships of diversity and of pattern, are their relation
ships in God's conceptual realization. Apart from this realization, there is
mere isolation indistinguishable from nonentity ( PR, 257).
  Whitehead seldom renounces a concept, b u t rather recycles it. Think
ing with Whitehead, I have j ust carried out such a recycl i ng, for i f pri
mordial conceptual experience is, as I propose, experience of all eternal
obj ects i n the kind of relation determined by the finite complex of eter
nal objects grouped in an " occasional " relationship, it corresponds to the
474    C O S M O LOGY




" idea l situation " proposed in Science and the Modern World, which a lso
impl ied all the eternal objects. And this correspondence may guide us in
the question that remains to be solved . I f God does not " physica l l y " feel
the satisfied occa sion and its world but only the complex idea l articula
tion that defines both the subject and its world, what about his conse
quent nature, that is, the process of completion that is " motivated " by a
consequent " physica l " experience ?
   In Science and Modern World, God was a principle of limitation, cate
gorica lly determined by the di fference between the implica tions, unlim
ited in principle, of all rea lization, qua rea lization of an ideal situa tion,
and the abruptly limited cha racter of the mea ning of a decision. If concep
tual d ivine rea l ization is free, unconstra ined by the di fferentiation be
tween rea lized eternal objects and those that have not been rea lized, a
physica l experience can indeed derive from it, in the sense that every physi
cal experience is the experience of something that has been determined
thus a nd not otherwise. God's initial " physica l " experience, since it " de
rives " from its menta l origin, is not a "direct prehension " of the occasion.
It is the feeling of the contrast between the unlimited cha racter of the
idea l situation and the limited cha racter of the occasional, finite complex
of eternal objects. And the divine process of completion will then be ini
tia lly motivated by the physica l experience of the determinate, selective,
pa rtial, and excl usive cha racter of occa siona l completion . Thus and not
otherwise.
   The wisdom of subjective aim prehends every actuality for what it can
be in such a perfected system-its sufferings, its sorrows, its failures, its
triumphs, its immediacies of joy-woven by rightness of feeling into the
harmony of the universal feeling, which is always immediate, always
many, always one, always with novel advance, moving onward and never
perishing. The revolts of destructive evil, purely self-regarding, are dimin
ished into their triviality of merely individual facts; and yet the good they
did achieve in individual joy, in individual sorrow, in the introduction of
needed contrast, is yet saved by its relation to the completed whole. The
image-and it is but an image-the image under which this operative
growth of God's nature is best conceived, is that of a tender care that
nothing be lost ( PR, 346 ) .
   Despite the images that populate it, this i s a technica l text. I t describes
the way in which divine experience is " motiva ted " by a physica l feeling
that is itsel f consequent. The initia lly abstract physica l feeling, " this"
limitation, or " this impasse," becomes the feeling of what the entity has
done with itself, " its sufferings, its sorrows, its fa i l ures, its triumphs, its
immed iacies of joy " ; but the process motivated by this physical experi-
                                                 G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 7 5




ence is not that of a partia l actua lity, closed to its incompatibil ities and
its refusals, a n obstinate appea l to the future that will verify it, whatever
the cost may be. The process is feel ing " with a rightness that weaves "
physica l experience " into a harmony," for the negative prehensions that
were the price of the decision are also felt positively. Just as much as
what the entity has decided, what it has rejected is a part of the decision.
And the i mage of the " tender care," God 's reaction to the superject's ap
peal to the future, d rives away the threatening one of condescension.
Divine experience is the experience of limita tion qua completion, not of
completion qua limited . Whitehead has not changed his mind since Sci
ence and the Modern World: actua l i ty, and therefore limitation, are the
sole val ue, even when it comes to God .
   It remains to define the " final ca use " of the process of divine com
pletion.
   This final phase of passage in God's nature is ever enlarging itself. In it
the complete adjustment of the immediacy of joy and suffering reaches the
final end of creation. This end is existence in the perfect unity of adjust
ment as means, and in the perfect multiplicity of the attainment of indi
vidual types of self-existence. The function of being a means is not dis
joined from the function of being an end. The sense of worth beyond itself
is immediately enjoyed as an overpowering element in the individual self
attainment. It is in this way that the immediacy of sorrow and pain is
transformed into an element of triumph. This is the notion of redemption
through suffering which haunts the world. It is the generalization of its
very minor exemplification as the aesthetic value of discords in art ( PR,
349-350 ) .
    If divine experience c a n b e said t o b e conscious, it i s precisely to the
extent that it can have the val ue of " i nd uction " for a new occasiona l sub
ject. Divine experience is, of course, accomplished by sha ring what the
subjectlsuperject has decided, but in a way that j ust as much transforms
this decision into a " means." The appeal of the occasional superj ect to an
addressee for whom it would be, as such, value will have been heard, but
according to the circumstances of conscious divine experience, which i n
tegrates the fact, the physical experience of a l l that has been a ffi rmed and
all that has had to be rej ected, in a n inexorable way that turns this fact
into an i mpasse, entering into a contrast with the feel ing of this impasse
envisaged as a means. I n this sense, divi ne experience is conscious, but
a lso incomplete. God is not the envisagement of what might be; his expe
rience neither precedes nor prefigures the decision to come. His envisage
ment is a thirst for a novelty that this thirst will ind uce, but which, by
definition, will transcend him.
476    COSMOLOGY




    Whitehead's two formulas can thus be placed in para llel, and this par
al lel has al lowed me to make expl icit a twofold deficiency : that of occa
sional completion, which appeals to the future, but in the mode of the
conatus, and that of divine completion, a thirst for actua lity that will give
 its consequences to envisagement. A twofold dehiscence thus corresponds
to what I have called " induction " : God and the occasion, each call ing for
what transcends it, for what wi l l answer the ca ll, but according to its
own circumstances. But there is a lso a major d ifference between God and
the occasion, which al lows us to understand the " reversa l of poles " : di
vine consciousness, unlike human consciousness, is not placed under the
banner of " blink ing," but is constantly growing (everlasti ng ) .
    The th irst for a new actual ity cannot be assimilated t o a superjective
vectorial dimension, insisting by means of a " concl usion " that would have
satisfied God 's "consequent nature," for no concl usion can transform
primord ial divine conceptual experience, the envisagement of all eternal
objects, into a wel l-determined unity. What we ca ll God cannot be sepa
rated from the mul tiple feelings that aim at him, any more than any other
occasional subject; but when it comes to him, the vectorial d imension of
these feelings will never be submerged by a ( sca lar) enjoyment, by the
"eigenval ue" corresponding to the ful l determination of what operates as
an " actua l world ." The divine feeling " never perishes " ; it is experience
" together," perpetually increasing, of contrasts, each of which impl ies the
feeling of an individual completion in its l iving immed iacy, that is, qua
appea l to the future, and the feeling of this completion qua means. Each
new contrast, as it is added, will be integrated into harmony in the form
of what it has made possible, the feeling of what was " best " for that i m
passe . An inexorable ordering.
    From the viewpoint of his consequent nature, God may thus be said to
be conscious because he is experience of the contrast between the " im
passe " that is and a possibil ity that turns this impasse into a " means " for
new realizations. He can be said to be ful ly actual, for the eval uation of
each particular experience, qua feeling of what it has accomplished and
what it has refused , corresponds to a complete determination of that ex
perience as it is woven into the "eternal ordering." But what emerges
from this weaving, the feeling of what would be best " for that impasse,"
does not correspond either to a transcendent knowledge or to a determi
nate anticipation. Instead, this feeling has the features of a question of
the " what i f? " type . That is, more techn ica lly, of a p roposition enter
ta ined in the mode of the thirst for an answer, which would have as its
logica l subjects the subject to be born and its situation in the extensive
continuum. The fact that divine experience has the features of a question
                                                G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 7 7




brings us back, moreover, to the only invariant that ever defined God's
role for Wh itehea d : releva nce. Only questions-not adequacy, nor specu
lation about " what" might be, or prediction-make relevance thei r high
est value.
   It is as true to say that God is perpetua lly satisfied as to say that he is
perpetually unsatisfied, and in this respect he constitutes a unique con
crescence, wi thout a past, in perpetua l becoming, in unison with a world
that tra nscends him as much as he transcends it. And the series of "as
true" that inaugurated this chapter, i f the reader looks back to it, may
henceforth be read as a " verification " of the operation underta ken by
Whitehead. The " different categories of existence," whose neglect he de
plored, a re those that his twofold formula has articulated, although, it
must be admitted, in a rather condensed way.
   The operation of secula rization seems to me to have succeeded: the
" hybrid physica l feeling of God " is a nything but a religious feeling. It does
not make God the being to whom one may say "Thou," for he has no
other va lue than the di fference he will make in the occa sional experience
that will derive from him its initial aim. God, i nsofar as he is felt by the
budding occasion whose emergence is i nduced by his thi rst, is felt under
the aspect of " how " he might constitute a relevant resumption of an im
passe, but this " how" concea ls no secret. The ways of God a re thus not
inscruta ble, because the hybrid physical feeling is not the enigmatic sign
of a " way." They are not " trai l-blazing signs," or an indication offered by
God to the world in the hope that the world might take the path that he
himself envisages as the best. Divine induction has no other import than
the emergence of the respondent for whom it thirsts, of the occasion
which, i n one way or another, will confer an actual meaning upon what is
" proposed " as eventually relevant. And therefore, if God is i n unison with
the world, i t is because the enlargement of his consciousness depends
on the world, not as workers depend on thei r tools to carry out the work
they have planned but rather as what must tra nscend him in order to
" ma ke him feel ."
   In the course of these last pages, the fragments of Whitehead cited have
been populated by images of a religious type, as the reader will have noted.
I hope that my reading will have sa tisfied the announced test, that the
operation of secularization will have succeeded in stripping these images
of a l l religious connotations other than those celebrated by Whitehead
himself in Modes of Thought when he tried to make his reader feel the
" full solemnity of the world." Yet the test, when fully deployed-tha t is,
addressed not only to rel igious hopes but also to the hopes that haunt a l l
o u r appeals t o transcendence, whatever this transcendence mea ns-will
478   COSMOLOGY




resume i n the next chapter. To conclude this one, here is a fully developed
sample of what will put us to the test.
    The consequent nature of God is his judgment on the world. He saves
the world as it passes into the immediacy of his own life. It is the judg
ment of a tenderness which loses nothing that can be saved. It is also the
judgment of a wisdom which uses what in the temporal world is mere
wreckage.
   A nother image which is also required to understand his consequent
nature is that of his infinite patience. The universe includes a threefold
creative act composed of (i) the one infinite conceptual realization, (ii) the
multiple solidarity of free physical realizations in the temporal world,
(iii) the ultimate unity of the multiplicity of actual fact with the primor
dial conceptual fact. If we conceive the first term and the last term in their
unity over against the intermediate multiple freedom of physical realiza
tions in the temporal world, we conceive of the patience of God, tenderly
saving the turmoil of the intermediate world by the completion of his own
nature. The sheer force of things lies in the intermediate physical process:
this is the energy of physical production. God's role is not the combat of
productive force with productive force, of destructive force with destruc
tive force; it lies in the patient operation of the overpowering rationality
of his conceptual harmonization. He does not create the world, he saves
it: or, more accurately, he is the poet of the world, with tender patience
leading it by his vision of truth, beauty, and goodness ( PR, 346 ) .
  Sha l l w e accept t o b e " saved " ?
                                                   C H A P TER TWENT Y - F I V E
