An Adventu re of Ideas




         RADUALLY, SLOWLY, STEADILY
     G
                                           the vision recurs in history un
          der nobler form and with clearer expression. It is the one ele
          ment in human experience which persistently shows an upward
trend. It fades and then recurs. But when it renews its force, it recurs with
an added richness and purity of content. The fact of the religious vision,
and its history of persistent expansion, is our one ground for optimism
(SMW, 1 92 ) .
   If the propositions bearing upon divine experience ca nnot, as such,
inspire a speculative flight of experience, the same does not hold true of
the contrasts that derive from it. These contrasts, when they concern the
" religious vision," even aim rather clearly at participating in what
Whitehead, in Science and the Modern World, called our " one ground
for opti mism."
   When he was writing the lines I have j ust cited, Whitehead no doubt
did not yet know that he was soon going to attempt the paradigmatic leap
of death: to construct a proposition capable of participating in the adven
ture of the rel igious life. He was, however, perfectly explicit about the
barbarous brutality of traditional rel igious statements, a nd particularly
outspoken on the subject of the despotic role attributed to the mono
theistic God . In fact, the God who closes the pages of Process and Reality
might be said to " save" the world, but he constitutes j ust as much a n at
tempt to save God hi mself from the role assigned to him by the theologi
cal propositions that make hi m the respondent to the religious vision.
   Here, it is not enough to have an intellectual a ppreciation of how
Whitehead succeeded in carving out the keystone concept that ensures
4 8 0   COSMOLOGY




the speculative edifice its conceptual coherence. This edifice and its key
stone are dry bones, unless they participate in what is for Whitehead the
" one ground for opti mism " : the return of the religious vision, endowed
with a nobler form, a clearer expression, and a renewed force . And we
might guess that the force that must return is that of worship, or feeling
the world in its " full solemnity." Yet the way that Whitehead undertook
to participate in the adventure of the rel igious vision, that is, in its expan
sion, confi rms the position adopted in Religion in the Making: the only
true id entity of the good is evil qua capa ble of being overcome. It is
therefore fi rst by putti ng to the test our ideas a bout what is "good," by
creating possibil ities of "overcoming" the destructive oppositions they
bear within them, that Whitehead participates in the adventure and un
derta kes to " save" it. The " good," the new eventual expansion of his vi
sion, will be nothing other than this vision, henceforth capable of being
entertai ned without entertaining at the same time all the propositions in
the name of which, today more than ever, crusades are being launched .
   The various modal ities of the Whitehead ian test wi l l all turn around the
term I have j ust used, "to save." The test is already under way at this point,
for the very fact that, to " save" the adventure of the religious vision,
Whitehead was able to undertake to " save God " qua liable to " save the
world," will be effective only if we can succeed in making two appa rently
incompatible meanings of the verb "to save " converge. Both meanings
belong to our history, one to the history of knowledge and the other to the
theology of salvation, and both are laden with an intensity that, in differ
ent ways, connects them with destructive oppositions.
   "The point is to save the phenomena " : we have inherited this utterance
from Greek astronomy, which devoted all its skill to translating observa
tiona l data into the language of circles, and affirmed, by this utterance,
that these data by no means dictated the undertaking but on the contrary
received their signification from it, then exhi biting themselves as belong
ing to the eternal perfection that alone is fitting for the heavens. Yet the
term assumed new, intense resonances with the " Copernican revol ution." It
then designated, in a pejorative mode, the "cautious, timid cowards " who
affirmed diplomatically that the hel iocentric system was never anything
other than a different way of " saving the astronomic phenomena ." This
was in opposition to those who, like Galileo, "dared to affirm" that the sun
really was that around which the earth rotated, without retreating before
the possibil ity that the " new science" might go to war with the religious
authorities. If this pejorative value is preserved, i f the courage of truth re
mains opposed to the compromises that blunt the verd ict of facts or deck
out its hard nudity in reassuring finery, Whitehead's God will obviously
appea r as a "pure i ntellectua l fa brication," just good enough to fudge the
                                            A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I DE A S   4 8 1




difference between those who " believe" in God and those who do not
need this hypothesis.
   As far as the paths of salvation a re concerned , they lead quite obvi
ously to a multiplicity of utterances about which it is rather hard to af
firm that they have, historica l ly, contri buted to the creation of contrasts
that overcome destructive oppositions. Whether it is the sol i tary con
science's appeal to Him who will defend it against mediocre j udgments,
or the anguish of that consciousness when besieged by the world 's temp
tations, the question of salvation has not ceased to be the vector of an
appeal to tra nscend the va lues cal led m undane, and the reference ratify
ing the destructions carried out in the name of this radical transcendence.
" One does not fool with divine j udgment" : this formidable platitude
may lead not only Protestants but also atheists and even Catholics to
agree with Luther and Calvin against the " Roman whore " who a llowed
herself to sel l i ndulgences and guarantee tha t expensive masses would
ensure the salvation of the souls of the dead. What does the anguish of
the survivors matter ? As far as the " cosmologico-progressive" uttera nces
are concerned, in which God does not i nitially make the di fference be
tween the good and the bad, but pilots the world as a whole toward
some Omega point, they may be j ust as formida ble in their consequences,
and in fact they have not prevented thei r a uthor, Teilhard de Chardin,
from diagnosing the divine path, even when this path entailed the violent
conquest of Abyssinia. In any case, if salvation remains associated with
he who will separate the wheat and burn the chaff, the way that White
head's God saves the world without condemning anything, accepti ng
with i nfinite patience everything that occurs, will appear as an i nsult to
the victims, an outrage to the hope of the good .
   The way Whi tehead proposes to save a God about whom it can b e af
firmed that he saves the world may thus be subject to a double disquali fica
tion. For some, it will be a purely i ntellectual compromise position, suit
able only for those who are, in any event, indi fferent to the q uestion.
Scientists need to think that their constructions have a " true" respondent,
that they are addressing a reality that is " truly" able to make the di fference
between the questions that are addressed to it. Why wager that, when it
comes to God, this same need would not make itself felt? For others, it will
be a position that undermines what it pretends to satisfy, as is attested by
the deli berate duplicity of the images Whitehead mobi lizes.
  God is the great companion-the fellow-sufferer who understands
( PR, 3 5 1 ) .
   This could be Whitehead's answer to Job, but the biblical Job runs the
risk of rejecting whoever answers him in this way among the false friends
whose soothing discourses i nfuriate him. What Job demands is that He
4 8 2   COSMOLOGY




who understa nds understand him in a mode that makes Him his de
fender. Yet if Whitehead identifies God 's "consequent nature" with his
j udgment on the world, that j udgment would never end up in a verdict.
He wi l l never agree with Job against his false friends. God " suffers " and
"understands " in the sense that all sufferi ng, every refusa l, and all limita
tion are comprised, " taken together," with the sa me impartial tenderness,
into his experience, in the sense that all the ways of addressing him, deny
ing him, ignori ng him, or of blessing him and trusti ng him are evaluated
in the same inexorable way, without any other finality than the emergence
of new, intense contrasts. This may, moreover, suggest another image,
rather worrisome: the grea t compa nion, whom Whitehead also ca lls the
" poet of the world," may recall Nero, singing while Rome burns.
    If this worrisome i mage is out of place, it is so to the same extent that
it is j ust as misplaced to tra nsform all the words Whitehead uses concern
ing God i nto d i v i ne " vi rtues " : j u stice, tenderness, patience, good ness,
wisdom, rationality, and so on. To praise God's vi rtues is j ust as inappro
priate as to attri bute an " a ltruistic" cha racter to an ant that " sacrifices
itself" for the group. In this case, neither God nor the a nt can do a ny
thing other than what they do. God is patient, but he cannot be anything
other than patient. He does not refuse to use productive or destructive
force, but they are not at his disposa l . He does not leave up to what is free
the possi bil ity of making use of its freedom, whatever the risks may be:
neither risks nor freedom have any mea ning for the impasse, always that
impasse, that he saves. In short, what we call vi rtue, what we associate
with the passion of the " work to be done "-all that implies the possi bil
ity of a hesitation, a betrayal, a risk-a re alien to his own experience,
even if he " understa nds " them .
   A God whom it is impossible to praise, bless, or cu rse, in whose name
none can say, "Have faith, God knows best ": this is the result of the op
eration of secula rization carried out by Whi tehead . Must we therefore
conclude that he has a bandoned the definition of God he gave in Science
and the Modern World: God 's power is the worship he inspi res ? As such,
that is, in a bstraction from the world, his God may well no longer inspire
this leap of the imagination, that flight of rel igious experience that is
called " worship." Yet Whitehead's proposi tion cannot be reduced to what,
i n non-Whitehea d i a n terms, one might ca l l " pu rely i ntel l ectual ratio
nal ization," a rationa l ization that would purify the rel igious vision not
only of its barbarous el ements but a l so of a ny pa rticu lar efficacy. The
person who wrote the end of Process and R eality has been tra ns
formed by his writing. God may well no longer be that to which " wor
shi p " i s addressed, but he nevertheless intervenes i n it. This, moreover,
                                            A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I D E A S   4 8 3




is why Whitehead gave the name God to what was initially an answer to
the need to think about the possibility of relevant novelties in the coher
ent way.
   The non-temporal act of all-inclusive unfettered valuation is at once a
creature of creativity and a condition for creativity. It shares this double
character with all creatures. By reason of its character as a creature, al
ways in concrescence and never in the past, it receives a reaction from the
world; this reaction is its consequent nature. It is here termed "God ";
because the contemplation of our natures, as en;oying real feelings de
rived from the timeless source of all order, acquires that "sub;ective form "
of refreshment and companionship at which religions aim ( PR, 3 1 -32 ) .
   However, the " contemplation o f our natures " should not be identified
with a finally universally accepta ble, purified definition of rel igion'S aim,
at least if we maintain the definition of religion as " what the individual
does with his own solitariness " ( RM, 1 6 ) . Like all the constructions of
Process and Reality, the concept of God 's function in the world is meant
for the "solitary consciousnesses," whose excess of subjectivity is expressed
by both phi losophy and religion. Here as elsewhere, therefore, Whitehead 's
proposition will have to be evaluated by its pragmatic effects, by the way it
puts to the test the j udgments of the " solitary consciousness," and, in this
case, the way it can " correct" the excess of subjectivity that leads this
consciousness to define itsel f " against" what it denounces as opinion,
trad ition, social belief. In short, aga inst the reasons set forth by the fa lse
friends of Job.
   In the Bible, God proved Job right: he condemned all the appeals to
acceptance and wisdom of those who tried distract Job from the non
negotiable alternative he had enuncia ted : either his Defender lives, and
wi ll silence those who construct socially accepta ble reasons for his mis
fortune, or else life is delivered over to what is arbitrary, to inj ustice, to
lies. The worship that defines God's power has thus legiti mized the con
demnation of what might be an obstacle to the experience of this power.
It has been a vector of evil, defining itself against what contradicts it. My
hypothesis is that the possibil ity of overcoming this evi l, of proposing to
the solitary consciousness a respondent that separates this consciousness
from its propensity to worship the sword, is what Whitehead experi
enced at the time he was writing the last part of Process and Reality.
   One of the definitions of the sol itary consciousness is its mistrust of
the world. The corresponding religious feeling, according to the descrip
tion Whi tehea d gi ves of it i n R eligion in the Mak ing, defi nes the a ppea l
to the " possible" as appea l i ng agai nst the " soci ally proba ble" or " herd
psychology." The intervention of " God " as a logica l subject, that is,
4 8 4   COSMOLOGY




" God's power," corresponds to the correlative need to think of some
thing beyond the blind, smothering facts, behind them and within them,
to think in terms of the possible and not only of the probable. God is
then the respondent to the ultimate ideal, and the quest without guaran
tees. Yet this purely factua l world, thema tized by the solitary conscious
ness, a world subject to routine, to the a rbitra ry, to relations of force, a
world that is deaf to its compla int, to its appea l, to its hope, is the work
of this consciousness. The religious feeling is thus an appea l to a tran
scendence capable of restori ng what was first denied to the world by the
solitary consciousness, an appeal to the interstices in which new possi
bilities of relevance lurk. And if the Whiteheadian God is not to be wor
shiped, and is thus separated from the power of worship that religious
Gods inspire, it may be because the point is to restore to the world what
it had been stripped of at the outset.
   What Whitehead calls " God " is thus baptized relative to the territories
covered by the j udgments of the solitary consciousness. Only solitary con
sciousnesses, experiencing themselves as " alone in the world," are liable to
celebrate the fact that "our natures " a re able to enjoy rea l feelings, that is,
feelings that are not reducible to rela tions of force or social habits. Only
they can feel the threat of this possible " sociologica l " answer to Job:
what you " felt" when you lived as a righteous man means nothing; your
notion of justice is only the result of what is defi ned as such in your so
cial envi ronment. It is thus qua an a uthor who has issued forth from a
determi nate social envi ronment, nourished on the words and contrad ic
tions proper to this envi ronment, that Whitehead first experienced the
worship that confers upon God his power. The mod ification he proposes
is confi ned to adding that this power does not belong to God but is
strictly relative to the difference that will be made, in the experience of
the person who entertains them, by the propositions that a rticulate God
and the World .
   Yet this addition cha nges everything. For the infinitive " to trust "
henceforth accepts obstinate facts no longer as crushing, but as precond i
tions for creativity. It is to this " to trust," moreover, that Whitehead 's
proposition testifies in itself. For j udged in terms of a socially defined
situation, a situation described in a way that would clai m the power of
defi ning it, Whitehead 's proposition would have no cha nce of mod ifying
the j udgment of soli ta ry consciousnesses. In pa rticular, it will disappoint
the expectations nourished by the Christi an religion, from which he de
liberately borrows his vocabulary. The God constructed by Whitehead
l urks in the interstices of the Christi an religious experience, and his even
tual efficacy will not testi fy to the power of the worship he inspi res, but
                                            A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I DE A S   4 8 5




rather to the impossibility for a social environment to determine what that
environment nevertheless conditions: the disqualification of the world to
which " God's power " responds may be overcome.
   We do not have the slightest reason to think that the modes of exis
tence need transcendental values to compare them, select them, and de
clare that that one is "better " than the other. On the contrary, the only
criteria are immanent, and a possibility of life is evaluated through itself
by the movements it traces and the intensities it creates on a plane of im
manence: what does not trace or create is rejected. A mode of existence is
good or bad, noble or vulgar, complete or empty, independently of Good
or Evil, or any transcendent value: there are never any criteria other than
the tenor of existence, the intensification of life. Pascal and Kierkegaard,
who were familiar with infinite movements, and who extracted from the
Old Testament new conceptual personae able to stand up to Socrates,
were well aware of this [ . . . J
   The problem would change if it were another plane of immanence. It is
not that the person who does not believe God exists would gain the upper
hand, since he would still belong to the old plane as negative movement.
But, on the new plane, the problem may now concern the existence of the
person who believes in the world, not even in the existence of the world
but in its possibilities of movements and intensities, to give birth once
again to new modes of existence, closer to animals and rocks. It may be
that believing in this world, in this life, has become our most difficult task,
or the task of a mode of existence still to be discovered on our plane of
immanence today. This is the empiricist conversion (we have so many rea
sons not to believe in world of men; we have lost the world, worse than
a fiancee, a son or a god [ . . . J The problem has indeed changed ( QPh,
72-73 ) .
   To believe in the world, but not i n a world that would b e confi ned to
existing, at the same time backdrop, resource, and land of conquest, that
world in which Job and Socrates confront one another over the vocation
of huma n beings, and what it is permissible for them to hope. For Job
and Socrates are united in their common scorn for those who ignore what
d ivi des them, sa l va tion by fa ith or by reason. To believe in thi s world,
already existent in the passionate becomings where mathematicians be
come functions, affected by what they defi ne as variables, where the wol f
becomes a pack, a part, ceaselessly redefined, of a multiplicity without
fixed hierarchy, and where we ourselves know somethi ng about what it is
to run in a pack, or else to wa l k noiselessly, a sol itary hunter, where noth
ing is a slogan, for everything can become an sign . This world that White
head the educator, in Science and the Modern World, a l ready designated
4 8 6   COSMOLOGY




when he affirmed the necessity of art, that is, of the habit of enjoying
living val ues.
    Here we reencounter the question of that God whose function is to
" save" the world, and the test designated by the term " to save." If God
" saves " the world, it is precisely because he is the impartial feeling of all
val ues qua living, in their discords, their i ncompatibil ities, their partiali
ties. He is not the " domus " in which they find their unity, but the unison
in which each is the movement it has traced, the intensity it has created, in
which each affirms itself " for the world," as the condition and creature of
creativi ty. Nor is it in his power to save the world : this is his function,
and nothing but his function.
    Will Job be able to accept the test constituted by the " wisdom " of a
God who " saves " by relega ting to the triviality of individual facts the dif
ference he demands between the just and the unjust ? Will he be able to
accept that his cry be " purged " of what is, in this way, defined as destruc
tive, demanding the condemnation of the unj ust in order that the just may
tri umph ? Wil l he be able to accept divine impartia lity, that, is, also his
radical indifference to who recognizes him and who denies him? In short,
wil l he be able to accept seeing his cry " saved " as the religious images
mobi lized by Whitehead may be " saved " : in a way that strips the religious
address of any possibility of earning or of deserving in any particular way
a tenderness, an approval, a recognition that is, in any case, uncond ition
al ly, impartially, and inexorably the destiny of every occasion ?
    Yet the test is add ressed just as much to Socrates's descendants, who,
since Plato, have concl uded to the urgent need for " truths " capa ble of
silencing the pl ural ity of the partial and d iscordant opinions of the irra
tional populace. Will Socrates be able to accept that it is his own ques
tions about justice, the good, or love that have given rise to the discor
dant character of the answers ? Will he be able to accept that those who
have answered did not simply express " what they thought," but assumed
a stance with regard to the situation that was proposed to them ? Wi l l he
be able to accept that it is the situation he created that produces the con
tradictions on which he bases hi mself, whereas Pericles, the politician he
disqua lifies, might perhaps have given rise to other responses, add ressed
to him in order that he might create their unli kely agreement?
    And the scientists, who demand that what they deal with must be ca
pable of prov ing a view right or wrong, not of lend ing itself to the pos
sibil ity of being saved in multiple ways: will they accept that what they
call the "objective world " is what satisfies this demand ? Wi l l they accept,
not the utterance, despai ring but somewhat facile by the emi nent lucidity
it attri butes to its utterer, that " everything is relative," but the one-more
                                            A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I DE A S   4 8 7




difficult, beca use addressed to them more specifically-that their "objec
tive" world is j ust as much fa bricated by the polemica l opposition be
tween truth and appea ra nce as the i rreconcilable opinions of Athens's
inha bita nts are " fabricated " by Socra tes ?
   And those, �eirs to the same story, who would turn this fa brication
into the confirmation of their denunciation of " science " as blind a nd cal
culati ng: will they accept to celebrate the multiple and releva nt technical
knots, neither objective nor subjective, that scientists sometimes succeed
in crea ting with what they deal with ? And will they be a ble to accept that
the authentic experience of which they wish to be the defenders also re
qui red an adventurous fa brication ?
   There is nothing universal about the test proposed by Whitehead, and
this is its primary qual ity. It requests no mourning, no renunciation that
is not addressed specifica lly to the " excess of subjectivity " attested by the
adventures of fa ith, and of the rationa lity in which speculative philosophy
itsel f takes its place. Nor does it demand either the renunciation of the
"thou" required by prayer, or of the respondents, molecules and neurons,
required by the scientists who underta ke to study the brain of people who
pray. It simply proceeds to add a divine experience, " incl uding everything
without restriction," not l imited by the a bstractions that doom neurons
and prayer to enter into conflict. Infinite divine experience " saves " what
has determi ned itsel f thus and not otherwise, but in the mode of concep
tual rea l ization that transforms every contra diction, every disjunctive
alternative " either . . . or" into so many consequences of " thus and not
otherwise." This does not mean that the incompatibilities are nullified, but
neither are they ratified . They acquire the problematic status that proposi
tions never lose, the " perhaps " with regard to which every enterta inment
is determination, true or fa lse, but whose exhibi tion perta ins to intellec
tual feeling.
   The fact that Whitehea d can identi fy the divine intervention that " saves
the world" with a " patient operation of the overpowering rationa lity of
his conceptua l harmonization," moreover, gives his intervention its signa
ture. Although Whitehea d's God is nei ther the God of the missionaries,
nor the God of the ma rtyrs, nor the God of the scientists, he might wel l
satisfy the appetite of those who ta ke pa rt in the adventure of mathemat
ics . Divine feeling, which " sa ves " i n d i vidual accomplishment in such a
way that its value incl udes what has been rejected, eliminated, or vaguely
felt so that the accomplishment may be what it is, will not shock mathe
maticians, for a theorem previously demonstrated has a l iving va l ue for
them, even if the theorem is now understood in terms of the restrictive
cond itions tha t had enabled its demonstration. The mathematicia ns'
4 8 8   COSMOLOGY




appetite may be aroused by the identification of these conditions, but
their appetite does not mean that they already know how one could " do
better" than this demonstration, that they are anticipating the path to fol
low in order to transcend the limitation that the conditions confer upon
the theorem. They sense the conditions insofa r as, conditioning a success,
they make this success exist as a problem, giving rise to the question of the
possibil ities of general ization.
   Of course, to describe the divine appetite on the basis of the ma themat
ical appetite for generalizations to be constructed is completely inadequate,
as is every imaginative proposition that deals with divine experience. A
mathematician envisages a new theorem, a new kind of solution, whereas
God makes a question emerge from every sol ution. Yet the interest of the
analogy with mathematics is to divest of all painful connotations the de
scription of divine experience as perpetual and incomplete, not liable to
be accomplished in a satisfaction that would make intellect, intell igence,
and the intelligible coincide. The analogy allows us to avoid the image of
a God who is perpetually d issatisfied , tragically sepa rated from himself,
that is, at the same time, to give imaginative flesh to creativity as the ulti
mate, that creativity exhi bited, more tha n any other, by the adventure of
mathematics.
   Correla tively, the analogy with mathematics may shed l ight on the
bruta l introduction, on the final page of Process and Reality, of a new
theme: " God's love for the world ."
   In the fourth phase, the creative action completes itself. For the per
fected actuality passes back into the temporal world, and qualifies this
world so that each temporal actuality includes it as an immediate fact of
relevant experience. For the kingdom of heaven is with us today. The ac
tion of the fourth phase is the love of God for the world. It is the partic
ular providence for particular occasions. What is done in the world is
transformed into a reality in heaven, and the reality in heaven passes back
into the world. By reason of this reciprocal relation, the love in the world
passes into the love in heaven, and floods back again into to the world
( PR, 35 1 ) .
   Here, love is certa inly not what is understood by the Christians, for
whom God 's love must be addressed to the human person. Rather, it
evokes the Eros of the Greeks, beca use of its impersonal character. It is
addressed to each pa rticular occasion, that is, impartial ly, to the slightest
electronic occasion, to the least of our immediate experiences. One might
say that it is addressed m uch more to the tissue our drea ms are made of,
which flee as soon as we try to transform them into rea sons, than to us,
who demand that love be addressed to us, qua living continuities . How-
                                             A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I DE A S   4 8 9




ever, i f the Greek Eros has heirs in the European tradition, i t is the math
ematicia ns, who " love the truth " with a love that owes nothi ng to the
polemical power attributed to truth. O nly the adventure of mathematics
admits, as a fully posi tive val ue, that the truth can bring a bout a conver
gence between saving, bringing to existence, and creating, a nd mathema
ticians would be l iable to understand that God 's love for the world can
designate the i ncessant relaunching of a question with no regard for the
security of persons, beliefs, or traditions. For their own love of mathe
matics depends on the fact that a q uestion cea selessly relaunched, such
for instance, as " what is a circle ? " or " how can we define the val ue of p ? "
was able to inspire s o many a nswers, so many creations, each one involv
ing a new problematic space, bringing new stakes into existence without
the new disqua l i fying the old. For mathematicians, every mathematical
creation has its perfection, which is to be a ppreciated a s such.
   As a mathematician, Whitehead was a ble to make all the words used
when it comes to God-j udgment, tender patience, inexorable fatality,
impartial ity, the aim at new, intense contrasts, and finally, " Iove"---co nverge
toward so many descriptions of the divine appetite for the world, without
fear of fal l i ng back into a Christian theology of a persona l God, because
he k new that the question that engages the hand-to-hand confrontation
with a problem finally rai sed i n a promising way is not addressed to a
person. Instead, it is what will transform a person into that through
which a problem will be defined. This is why Gilles Deleuze can, on this
subject, speak of " chance " i n the way James spoke about it, which comes
as a " free gift, or not at a l l ."
   This decisional power at the heart of problems, this creation, this
launching that makes us members of the race of the gods, is nevertheless
not ours. The gods themselves are subject to the laws of A nanke, that is,
to chance-heaven. The imperatives or the questions that traverse us do not
emanate from the 1, which is not even there to listen to them. The impera
tives are being, every question is ontological, and distributes " what is "
into problems ( DR, 2 5 7 ) .
   A n d love, therefore, becomes relevant t o all of creation, "on earth as it
is in heaven," without hierarchy, without any privilege conferred on what
endures, with no demand for reci procity, guarantee, or permanence. The
same love, particular every time for each particular occasion, the eternal
return of an imperative question respond ing to the cry of experience
agai nst ultima te evi l . The cal l is heard : what your experience has accom
pli shed wi ll not have only partial, dea f heirs as its addressees, those who,
occupied with their own business, wi l l dispose as they see fit of what you
propose to them. Who you have been is i nscri bed in another register, for
4 9 0   COSMOLOGY




another experience. But i f the call is hea rd, it is j ust as m uch " saved,"
saved from the demand for an addressee who not only " understands" but
j ustifies. For " God's j udgment" will not fol low up the complaint, will not
pursue the crime, will not share the refusals, and will not ra tify the elimi
nations. What will be saved is not the a uthentic prolonga tion of your
self, with the treasure-house of your sufferings, your refusa ls, you r pas
sions. I nstead, it is their humorous double. Divine experience saves by
neutralizing, ma k i ng what has been affirmed and wha t the a ffi rmation
has denied return a t the same time. Wha t will be saved a t the same time
as you, woven together with you, is what you have excluded to become
what you have become, and what will not be saved, will not be able to be
saved, is the conti nuity of the construction that links your identity with
the disqualifications you have ca rried out, the j udgments in terms of
which you have j ustified yoursel f, the legitimacies you have cla imed .
   This inexora ble divine functioning can take its place, rather obviously,
in a Stoic tradition, for if there is a love that can respond to this divine
love, it is amor fati, a love that is not addressed either to the world as we
can understa nd it, nor to a di vine person who understands us, but to a
cosmic desti ny indifferent to what Deleuze calls our " bi rth in the flesh " :
what attaches u s and leads u s to say " me," " my " story, " my " sufferi ngs,
" my projects," I who wa s born i n this world, of this world, who knows
she will die and who wonders whether l i fe is worth living.
  One can say noth ing more, and never has anything more been said:
to become worthy of what happens to us, therefore to wish for and
extract its event, to become the offspring of one's own events, and to be
thereby reborn, to get oneself a new birth, to break with one's fleshly
birth ( LdS, 1 75 ) .
   Whitehead, however, i s n o philosopher o f detachment and asceticism,
and Process and Reality was not written to point out the path of a Stoic
askesis, or, more generally, to provide a philosophical justification for the
spiritual disciplines i ntended to liberate experience from the illusions of
the sel f. The God of Process and Reality belongs to the adventure of rea
son, to the del iberate, constructed undertaking of saving "all experiences "
together, and it is important that this undertaking not privilege any one
experience, nor cla i m to appropriate those other adventures in which
what matters is the q uestion of the meaning and the obl igations of daily
life. Specula tive philosophy does, of course, allude to rel igion, as it a l l udes
to science, but it does so under the constra int of creativity, and wha t is at
stake here, still and aga in, is to revise our modes of a bstraction. What is
directly at sta ke here is thus not rel igious experience but the theological
modes of abstraction which, after blessi ng accusations of heresy and
                                          A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I D E A S   4 9 1




wars of religion, have not been able to avoid that in the modern period
the Christian rel igion has degenerated into a decent formula, embell ish
ing a comfortable life ( SMW, 1 8 8 ) .
   However, it might be objected that Whitehead i s also the one who, in
Science and the Modern World, at a time when his God was sti l l to come,
descri bed religion as one of the fundamenta l experiences of humanity,
and God 's power as the worship he inspires. One might accept that, as
I have argued, the del iberately visionary and religious vocabulary White
head uses in the last part of Process and Reality constitutes, to be sure, a
test of the ability of speculative concepts to " save" the religious vision
from the solitary consciousness' excess of subjectivity. But it might per
haps a lso be, simultaneously and without contradiction, the very expres
sion of such a vision, " return ing with a content that is richer and more
pure." The philosopher, having done his job, would experience the way in
which the new modes of a bstraction he has constructed become ingred i
ents of his rel igious experience.
   The question " Is Whitehead a theistic philosopher ? "-ra ised in the
United States but not in Europe-is not to be too easily dismissed . White
head presents himself as the philosopher who comes after Wi lliam James.
It is thus permissible to wonder to what extent Whitehead is not a lso the
heir to James's God . However, this hypothesis entails an initial test. To
inherit James's God a lso means to inherit the struggle William James
fought against any confusion between the theistic viewpoint and what he
cal led the Gnostic siren song, the phi losophico-mystical temptation to
situate ma nkind's fate and vocation in the perspective of a final cosmic
reconci liation
   [ . . . 1 in which the reality to be known and the power of knowing shall
have become so mutually adequate that each exhaustively is absorbed
by the other and the twain shall become one flesh, and in which the light
shall somehow have soaked up all the outer darkness into its own ubiq
uitous beams ( RAT, 1 3 9 ) .
   The ideal sung b y the Gnostic sirens corresponds rather precisely to
the satisfaction of the Whitehead ian occasion, and it may also evoke the
moment in which a mathematician " understands," when a pro blem is
finally formulated in a way that exhi bits its solution. The Whiteheadian
God, however, has taken on meaning in a speculative construction that
may be seen as a humorous version of the Gnostic vision. His construc
tion does indeed accompl ish the Gnostic ideal of " reconciliation," but it
accomplishes it by rendering it " trivial " in the mathematical sense, for it
is an ideal real ized by every occasion, whatever it may be. One might say
that in so doing Whitehead aims at revising our modes of abstraction,
4 9 2   C O S M O LOGY




not a t reaching a truth that would be the vocation and the salvation of
the human experience.
   But the question is insistent: If the speculative God, derived from the
adventure of rationa lity, is not a ble to satisfy the vital need that James's
God a nswered, how does Whitehead inherit this need ?
   For Wil l iam James, thei stic faith was inseparable from a conception of
life not as reconcil iation but as a battle, a life woven together from con
trad ictions, rifts, and destructions. His fa ith was not intellectual but vital,
for it found its mea ning in what, for James, was the dra matic choice
i mposed by this l i fe: to consent to this worl d, to engage in the battle, or
to refuse. This choice is a test, and it forces us to turn our backs on any
perspective that adulterates this test. It must be carried out, on pa in of
obscenity, in the " presence " of all those who have been crushed by l i fe
and of the immense army of suicides evoked in " Is Life Worth Living ? "
One might certainly say that there is a common point between James's
cruel and deceptive life, and Whitehead's l iving order as robbery : both
need j usti fication. Wi lliam James needed God in order for the battle to be
worthwhile, and Whitehead needed Process and R eality to be an Essay in
Cosmology.
   Yet the difference matters: as human beings, we cannot commit our
selves to the Jamesian battle of life in the name of the Whitehea dian
cosmological perspective. Correlatively, James's God must lend hi mself
to the experience of encounter; he must hear the cry we utter as our cry,
and not in a mode that incl udes it within his own perfection.
   [ . . . 1 God's personality is to be regarded, like any other personality, as
something lying outside my own and other than me, and whose existence
I simply come upon and find. A power not ourselves, then, which not
only makes for righteousness, but means it, and which recognizes us,
such is the definition which I think nobody will be inclined to dispute.
Various are the attempts to shadow forth the other lineaments of so su
preme a personality to our human imagination [ . . . 1 But the essence
remains unchanged. In whatever other respects the divine personality
may differ from ours or may resemble it, the two are consanguineous at
least in this,-that both have purposes for which they care, and each can
hear the other's call ( RAT, 1 22 ) .
  For me, i t i s crucial that Whitehead did not speak o f his God a s a per
son or a personality, and that the reversal of the physical and mental poles
suppresses any possi ble relation of consanguinity between him and us.
Otherwise, his concepts would certa inly have " saved " james's God, and
James's need that his cry be heard, but in a way that would have silenced
what James wanted to make us feel, what he needed in order to consent to
                                             A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I D E A S   4 9 3




this world: life as a (solitary ) battle to which we can consent only i f we
believe that it demands our commitment, that is, also, that God needs us
to fight it beca use the outcome is not already decided, " i n the hands of
God," because, a l beit in a minimal way, that outcome depends on us.
   This is not a matter of psychology. The question is not whether White
hea d felt the need that gives real ity to the God of William Ja mes but to
speci fy the link between the adventure of rationa lity, to which White
hea d 's speculative philosophy belongs, and the "adventure of the spirit "
(SMW, 1 92 ) , which he associated with the worship of God . The way
James defines his God, who is rea l beca use his effects a re rea l, beca use
without him the battle would not be worth fighti ng in a world that gives
us every reason to despa i r, is very l ikely, to the same extent as the fa ith of
the Q uakers, what Whitehead was thinking about when he spoke of the
religious vision which, when it returns, returns with content that is richer
and more pure, freed, in particular, from the belief i n a j ustice-dea l i ng,
all-powerful God . Yet the speculative God that Whitehead hi mself con
structed is not the respondent to such a vision. He belongs to a distinct
adventure, even i f both adventures aim at correcti ng the excess of subjec
tivity of the sol ita ry consciousness. If Whitehead 's God is required, it is by
the metaphysical scheme, and it is to a ffirm what, it seems to me, claims
Whitehead's own worship, the " full solemnity of the worl d " he mentioned
in Modes of Thought.
   Whitehead does not, of course, refute theism, nor the empirical impor
tance of the need to which it testifies. He simply asks, as the worthy heir
of Wi lliam James, that the theists a bsta in from addressi ng metaphysical
compliments to the God of fa ith, or from d rea ming of a fusion between
the demands of reason and those of faith. The power of this last dream
may rather explain why Whitehea d 's most a udacious conceptua l inven
tion, the reversa l of the poles that shatters any relation of resemblance
between divine experience and ours, has often been neglected by theistic
interpreters. As James emphasized, i n order to a nswer the cry of the reli
gious soul, " is life worth living ? " a theist m ust require that God be expe
rienced as " present," that he be the object of a possi ble encounter, which
req u i res a n analogy between his experience and ours. But i n Modes
of Thought, where God is no longer named, we may hear the cry of a
distinct soul, the Whiteheadian soul, with other requirements.
   We require to understand how the unity of the universe requires its
multiplicity. We require to understand how infinitude requires the finite.
We require to understand how each immediately present existence requires
its past, antecedent to itself; and requires its future, an essential factor in
its own existence ( MT, 8 3 ) .
4 9 4   COSMOLOGY




   I would conclude that the God of Process and Reality differs from the
theist God of Wi lliam James because they communicate with distinct
experiences of " sheer disclosure." Whitehead 's God a l l udes to a rel igious
vision, but, no more tha n the other Whiteheadian all usions, it does not
give a particular meaning to a truth that woul d be the horizon of human
life, or would testi fy to a vocation of human consciousness as such. The
experience of disclosure does not concern human privilege, rather the
requisites without which h uman adventures could be reduced to forms of
illusion. The efficacy of the Whiteheadian a l l usion would then be: you
who a re engaged in a n adventure, whatever i t may be, do not forget what
this adventure requires, in the name of the reasons that justify it; do not
give to these reasons the power to make the fu ll solemnity of the world,
to which your commitment testifies, be forgotten; do not rob the universe
of the importance that you demand be accorded to your reasons.
   It is because they are situated at the level of requisites, not of passion
ate reasons that commit us, that when it comes to human destines White
hea d i a n descriptions a lways feature a certai n platitude, someti mes hu
morous. Platitude is necessary to succeed i n what the j udgment of the
sol ita ry consciousness ca nnot help but miss: not only to put everyth ing
on the same plane, but to avoid that this plane be oriented by the impas
sioned q uestion of what is demanded by the accomplish ment, or the au
thenticity, of human experience. The plane must a ffirm adventure, not
progressive elucidation.
   For i nstance, i n many a phi losophy since Kant, the starting poi nt
would be an eloquent d ra ma tization of human responsibility, or even of
the drama of Man, who is born free and " responsi ble for everything be
fore everyone," as the Existential ist tradition would have it. Yet from a
Whitehead ian viewpoint, we must limit ourselves to recognizing that the
questi on of responsibil ity is pa rt of human adventures, whatever the an
swers to this question may be . What matters, from the point of view of
the adventures of ideas that take shape around what we ca ll responsibil
ity, is that the question not be ill usory, for i rresponsibility, as an ultimate
metaphysical generality, would be, as Whitehead reproached Lei bniz,
inadequate.
   The feelings are what they are in order that their subject may be what
it is. Then transcendently, since the subject is what it is in virtue of its
feelings, it is only by means of its feelings that the subject objectively con
ditions the creativity transcendent beyond itself. In our own relatively
high grade of human existence, this doctrine of feelings and their subject
is best illustrated by our notion of moral responsibility. The subject is re
sponsible for being what it is in virtue of its feelings. It is also derivatively
                                            A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I D E A S   4 9 5




responsible for the consequences of its existence because they flow from
its feelings ( PR, 222 ) .
   The notion o f moral responsibility i s thus a testi mony t o a generic,
neutral fact. A partial testimony, to be sure, since this notion i ntroduces a
" person who is responsi ble," who should be a ble to detach herself from
her own feelings in order to be a ble to j u dge them. This transfo rms
responsibil ity i nto an " ultima te," on the basis of which it is possi ble to
formulate, in a ded uctive way, everything the sol itary consciousness may
see fit to demand: freedom, a utonomy, reflexivity, and so on. The meta
physica l interpretation ma kes this partia l ity stammer, but what this inter
pretation alludes to is not a truth that would ena ble us to escape partial
ity. The stammering is that of humor, the mode of intellectual feel i ng that
exhibits the possibility of a ffirming what matters, without, for a l l that,
having to a ffirm that it must matter.
   Whitehead ian humor thus thwarts the temptation of making a big deal
of the cosmological perspective. There a re enough dramatic scenes in hu
man lives; there's no need to add more. And i n the process, it points out,
in a rather sa lutary way, that no Idea will defend the person who is pos
sessed by it from the i nsensitivity and rigid ity that can degrade good
people, and great creators, i nto pigs . The fact that what lurks in the i nter
stices may come to be translated in terms of a hostile or contemptuous
stance against the societies that condition these interstices, and that so
cial norms may lead a battle aga inst the creatures of creativity to whom
it gives shelter, are the risks of the adventure. Whitehea d 's singularity, the
very meaning of the circular workings of his thought, may be attention to
that risk. " Nothi ng in excess ! " Such attention forbids nothing, but con
stra ins us to consider at the same time the a rrow that leaves the ground
of our habits and that ground that will confer its meaning, without ap
peal, upon what escapes it.
   Unseasonable art is analogous to an unseasonable joke, namely, good
in its place, but out of place a positive evil. It is a curious fact that lovers
of art who are most insistent on the doctrine of "art for art " are apt to be
indignant at the banning of art for the sake of other interests. The charge
of immorality is not refuted by pointing to the perfection of art. Of
course it is true that the defence of morals is the battle-cry wh ich best
rallies stupidity against change. Perhaps countless ages ago respectable
amoebae refused to migrate from the ocean to dry land-refusing in de
fence of morality. One incidental service of art to society is in its adven
turousness (AI, 26 8 ) .
   Adventure: this i s the term Whitehead proposes, where a pocalyptic
visions haunt our imaginations, where " a rt for art" or " the defense of
4 9 6   C O S M O LOGY




society " clash in titanic combats that make the foundations of the earth
tremble as their imprecations rise towa rd heaven . To combat pious, con
formist, or hateful opinion is part of the risks of philosophy, but the test
Whitehead proposes for philosophy is to fight it by "saving " it, by ad
dressing it as if it were capable of partici pating in the adventure. Chris
tians, Stoics, Nietzschea ns, Kantians are all accepted together, with the
co-presence of the others bei ng part of the test for each . The irresponsi
bility of Ca in, the creature of creativity, when he refuses to be his broth
er's keeper, and the responsi bi l ity that makes Q ua kers tremble when they
live each of their acts as what cond itions cosmic becoming: the point is not
to oppose them, but to situate them in a mode such that their coexistence
may be not a contrad iction to be resolved but a fact to be celebrated .
   There is a greatness in the lives of those who build up religious systems,
a greatness in action, in idea and in self-subordination, embodied in in
stance after instance through centuries of growth. There is greatness in the
rebels who destroy such systems: they are the Titans who storm heaven,
armed with passionate sincerity. It may be that the revolt is the mere as
sertion by youth of its right to its proper brilliance, to that final good of
immediate joy. Philosophy may not neglect the multifariousness of the
world-the fairies dance, and Christ is nailed to the cross ( PR, 337-3 3 8 ) .
    Heaven da nces with the fa iries, and rips open when Christ dies. And i f
philosophy needs God , it is precisely to resist the passion o f ta king sides
in this rega rd . The neutra l ity of metaphysics is not an imitation of d ivine
impartiality, for it has no relation of resemblance with the latter. It is an
audaciously concocted antid ote, not a functional definition. And l ike a ny
antidote, it designates how it matters. In fact, the way in which the rever
sa l of poles, which is Whitehead's great invention in theology, defines
God and the World, completes the circuit begun by the link between
metaphysics and neutrality. The fact that Whitehead spea ks of function,
not of freedom, with rega rd to God , of i nexora ble eva l ua tion and not of
enjoyment, of patience and not of decision, " simply " brings about a pas
sage to the limit of the imperative of nonconfusion of categories between
our " l iving val ues," what we care about, and importance as a generic
category. Dance is importa nt to fa iries, and the salvation of ma nkind to
Christ, but God does not let himsel f be described in terms of importa nce,
only of appetite, which is perpetual and ever-renewed . The experience
entertaining this last proposition would have to be characterized by the
most determined lack of appetite for relating ad ventures and apoca lyptic
va lues. And, correlatively, it should signify the importa nce of learning,
and of saying, which living val ues each adventure embod ies. Whitehead
meets up with Leibniz: dic cur hic.
                                           A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I D E A S   4 9 7




    I am suggesting that Protestant theology should develop as its founda
tion an interpretation of the Universe which grasps its unity amid its
many diversities. The interpretation to be achieved is a reconciliation of
seeming incompatibilities. But these incompatibilities are not hypotheti
cal. They are there on the stage of history, undoubted and claiming inter
pretation r . . . I The last book in the Bible illustrates the barbaric ele
ments which have been retained to the undoing of Christian intuition
[ . . . I Finally, the book only states, more pointedly and more vividly,
ideas spread throughout the Old Testament and the New Testament,
even in the Gospels themselves. Yet it is shocking to think that this book
has been retained for the formation of religious sentiment, while the
speech of Pericles, descriptive of the A thenian ideal of civilization, has
remained neglected in this connection. What I am advocating can be
symbolized by this shift in the final book of the authoritative collection
of religious literature, namely, the replacement of the book of the Revela
tion of St. John the Divine by the imaginative account given by Thucydides
of the Speech of Pericles to the Athenians. Neither of them is history: St.
John never received just that revelation, nor did Pericles ever make just
that speech (AI, 1 70-1 7 1 ) .
   We can always count o n Whiteheadian humor for a formula that inter
rupts prophetic momentu m. We had started out from the i nterpreta tion
of the Universe, and we wind up with Pericles. Yet no Whitehead i a n for
mula can be attributed to mere occasional humor or to wit. Understand
ing the Whiteheadian adventure also means accepting that Whitehead
was i ndeed much less interested in the Stoic fatum as a test aga i nst our
attachments than in the promises i ncl uded i n the success--concrete and
important to him-attributed to Pericles.
   According to Thucydides, Pericles addressed the Athenians as free citi
zens, that is, animated by d ivergent priorities, values, goals, all this with
out asking them to strip themselves of these attachments in the name of
what transcends them. At the same time, however, he add ressed them as
Athenians, on whose action the life of the city depends. Athens will only
be saved by its citizens, all together. And beca use he believed in the Athe
nians in their diversity, a nd not in Athens insofar as it transcends the
freedom of its i nha bitants, Pericles enabled them to rise to the height of
the occasion. He interpreted them as attached but not defined by, or sub
ject to, what attaches them, and therefore susceptible of a new type of
unity that would be Athens. And i ndeed, they became what they were
from the cosmic viewpoint: incompatibil ities demandi ng an interpreta
tion to reconcile them, not in general, but here and now, for the Athens
they henceforth brought into existence in a new mode.
4 9 8   COSMOLOGY




  The Periclean ideal is action weaving itself into a texture of persuasive
beauty analogous to the delicate splendor of nature (AI, 5 1 ) .
   If Pericles, a pol itician who succeeded in persuad ing the crowd of un
disciplined Athenians to act together without being constrained by vio
lence or legal coercion, should have the last word in the formation of the
rel igious spirit aimed at by biblical l i terature, it is beca use his success
is the paradigmatic example of what is meant, for Whitehead, by evil as
what may be overcome. Lack of discipline is not an evil in itself but des
ignates the multipl icity of individual enjoyments that constitute the pri
mordial truth of the world . Pericles does not deny this when he addresses
the crowd of Athenians, but he trusts in what " his" world is capable of,
that is in " hi s " fellow citizens qua able to feel, each in their own way, the
need for common action.
   For Whitehead, Plato, who despised democracy, is nevertheless an heir
of Pericles, whose trust he turned into a phi losophica l genera l ization.
This is why there is not the slightest contrad iction in the fact that this
philosopher whose a ffi nities with the Stoics, Nietzsche, or Deleuze I have
emphasized had, for his part, defined the European philosophica l trad i
tion as " footnotes " to Plato's text ( PR, 39). What " saves " Plato, for White
head, making him the fi rst philosopher, is the affirmation that the divine
element i n the world must be concei ved in terms of action that is persua
sive or erotic ( l ure), not coercive. This i mplies, correlatively, that human
beings a re defined by their susceptibil ity to the attraction of the true, the
beautiful, and the good .
   The fact that the power of the true, the bea utiful, and the good over
human souls is that of Eros thus constitutes, in the cavalier perspective
typical of Whitehead, a properly philosophical general ization of what
was fi rst attested by Pericles, persuading the Athenians to unite without
threats or reference to transcendent val ues to force them to it. Conse
quently, whatever may be the restrictive conditions, normative j udgments,
and unnecessary oppositions produced by the Platonic statement, Plato is,
for Whitehead, the first philosopher, because he defined the human being
as "capable of the Idea."
   Philosophy as footnotes . . . and i ndeed, the most misanthropic or the
most subversive philosophers, because they a re philosophers, may well
denounce the pettiness of humans, the stupi dity of opinion, the nastiness
and cowardice of conformism: they will sti l l inherit, a l beit in a critical
form, an ideal based on the intrinsic possibilities of the human. And all
this for the simple reason that what makes them live and think is called
"an idea," and that it belongs to the very concept of an idea to affirm that
humans are capable of accepting what ideas demand, without being con-
                                           A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I D E A S   4 9 9




strained by any force other than that of the idea itself. You who denounce
voluntary servitude, people refusing to come out of their cave, dic cur hic.
   Plato conceived the notion of the ideal relations between men based
upon a conception of the intrinsic possibilities of human character. We
see this idea enter human consciousness in every variety of specializa
tion. It forms alliances with allied notions generated by religion. It
differentiates its specializations according to the differentiations of the
diverse religions and diverse scepticisms associated with it. A t times it
dies down. But it ever recurs. It is criticized, and it is also a critic. Force
is always against it. Its victory is the victory of persuasion over force.
The force is the sheer fact of what the antecedent volume of the world
in fact contains. The idea is a prophecy which procures its own fulfill
ment ( AI, 42 ) .
   While fai ries dance, and fetishists have commerce with their divinities,
and mystics underta ke to die to the world, Whitehead, for whom what
matters is above all the Adventure of Ideas, fabricates a " self realizing
prophecy" to " sa ve" that adventure. Like Pericles' speech, this prophecy
is addressed to the " solitary consciousnesses " who define themselves as
humans and testi fy to the powers of ideas through the divergent and con
flicting adventures of religion, phi losophy, and science, but a lso of the
arts and of poli tics. And the common feature made manifest in this way,
turning the discordant multiplici ty of adventures into a singular, problem
atic one, is also a transformation of this common feature. The definition
associating the adventure of ideas with " solita ry consciousnesses " may
also correct the exaggeration inherent in this experience of solitariness.
Sol itude is not the last word .
   What is the last word, the one that closes the circle, and i ncludes
Whitehead in the ad venture ? God i s obviously not the ultimate, but nei
ther is creativity in this case, for i t i s only the ultimate of Whitehead's
philosophical construction, referring to his responsi bility as a thinker,
not to what ma kes him think. The ultima te of adventure, the only thing
that really matters, i s the question that inhabits this adventure of ideas:
the question of what those who define themselves as " capable of ideas "
are capable of. This is the question that always returns. It unites Job,
whose solitary cry rises up to God; Protagoras, who turns the gods into
fabricati ons of which man is the measure; Pericles, who knows that a l l
that matters is the greatness t o which the undisciplined crowd m a y rise;
Jesus, who announces the victory of love over death, but also those mer
chants who Jesus d rove from the Temple, insofa r as their practice
wagered on mutual persuasion and not on force; and finally Nietzsche,
whose hammer-thought undertook to destroy that Temple.
5 0 0   COSMOLOGY




    Whitehead's God is thus an idea, derived from the adventure of Ideas,
and its non-power, its functiona l cha racter that excludes all coercion,
designates the way Whitehead tries to save this adventure, addressing it
l ike Pericles addressed the crowd of Athenians. Pericles supposed this
crowd to be capable of actua lly becoming what they were abstractly: all
inhabitants of Athens . He supposed his auditors to be capable of accept
ing the proposition " we a re Athenia ns," in an experience henceforth
likely to contribute to saving Athens. Whitehead supposes that we a re
capable of tra nsforming the proposition that we have all set forth on the
same adventure into a feeling likely to transform it. And to transform, by
so doing, our own experience as sol itary consciousness . This transforma
tion has a Whitehea dian name, and the final pages of Adventures of Ideas
are devoted to " Peace."
    The Peace that is here meant is not the negative conception of anaesthe
sia. It is a positive feeling which crowns the "life and motion " of the soul.
It is hard to define and difficult to speak of. It is not a hope for the future,
nor is it an interest in present details. It is a broadening of feeling due to
the emergence of some deep metaphysical intuition, unverbalized and yet
momentous in its coordination of values [ . . . 1 The experience of Peace is
largely beyond the control of purpose. It comes as a gift. The deliberate
aim at Peace very easily passes into its bastard substitute, Anaesthesia. In
other words, in the place of a quality of "life and motion," there is substi
tuted their destruction. Thus Peace is the removal of inhibition and not its
introduction. It results in a wider sweep of conscious interest. It enlarges
the field of attention [ . . . 1 Amid the passing of so much beauty, so much
heroism, so much daring, Peace is then the intuition of permanence. It
keeps vivid the sensitiveness to the tragedy; and it sees the tragedy as a liv
ing agent persuading the world to aim at fineness beyond the faded level
of surrounding fact. Each tragedy is the disclosure of an ideal:- What
might have been, and was not: What can be. The tragedy was not in vain
[ . . . 1 The inner feeling belonging to the grasp of the service of tragedy is
Peace-the purification of the emotions ( AI, 2 8 5-2 8 6 ) .
  What Whitehead is describing may be what Spinoza called "knowledge
of the third kind," and this is a mode of experience that does not belong to
any particular human tradition, and which all no doubt celebrate in their
own language. Among "our" words, which the imperative question, or the
Idea, has launched into divergent adventures, haunted by the question of
the " intrinsic-possibilities-of-the-human," it is perhaps, purifying an overly
emotive relation to the truth, Leibniz's " Calculemus " that best expresses
the kind of habits in whose interstices Whiteheadian peace lurks.
                                            AN   A DVENTU R E   O F   I D E A S   5 0 1




   The commitment to the risk of calculation does not spell the end of
disputes, or reconcil iation in the na me of a higher truth-and especially
not the truth of "calcula bility." It is the deliberate a ffirmation of what,
for " us," is not an object of del i beration, si nce it is what has launched us
into ad venture, a trust we attest even in our denunciations and our an
gers. " That which may be," the possibility of saving our tragic and singu
lar ad venture, is not a matter of transcendence, but it belongs to the
" non-power of God," to the worship whose possibility is saved by the
God constructed by Whitehea d, but which is not add ressed to him, of
transforming each of the i ngredients of this adventure into an unk nown,
cal l i ng for add itions and condensations. To transform the i nterstitial
laughter of Nietzsche, the prophesy of Jesus, a nd the submission of Regu
lus to the social institution of the promise into so many explorations
testi fying to the same adventure.
   There is an iteration in calculus, just as there is a repetition in prob
lems which reproduces that of the questions or the imperatives from
which it proceeds. Here again, however, it is not an ordinary repetition.
Ordinary repetition is prolongation, continuation, of that length of time
which is stretched into duration: bare repetition [ . . . J However, who is
prolonged in this way? A singularity, as far as the vicinity of another sin
gularity? On the contrary, what defines the extraordinary power of that
clothed repetition, more profound than bare repetition, is the resumption
of singularities in one another, the condensation of singularities one into
another, as much in the same problem or Idea, as between one problem
and another or between one Idea and another ( D R, 259 ) .
  Speculative phi losophy as clothed, adequate repetition, perhaps a s a
vector of peace, of the discordant adventures of the Idea .
                                                                 CONC L U S I ON
