[page 39]

Sign and Cause

Final Causes

In Western cultures, there is a strong streak of voluntarism, an intense belief that human will — good or evil — is responsible for whatever goes on in the cultural world. Accompanying this (perhaps slightly arrogant) belief in and worship of human freedom, however, there is also a distinct determinism with regard to nonhuman nature. Here, the law rules to such an extent that many adhere to the belief that the ways of the world could not have been any other than what they actually are. In nature, absolutely no freedom is allowed.

These two beliefs can coexist with little opposition, so long as one thinks that Humanity and Nature are God’s separate creations, whose fundamental relationship is therefore determined by God. The moment that one accepts the theory of evolution, however — and with it the view that humans are produced from nature and are, indeed, a part of nature — then humanity’s freedom and nature’s total unfreedom are logically set on a collision course. For how can anything that is itself unfree ever generate something free?

Such an intransigent contradiction undoubtedly accounts for the continuing power of creationism in North American thought’ and, more generally, behind the mistrust of natural science that has grown so marked in recent decades across the entire Western world. For there are few who can fully accept the opposite solution — i.e., that humans in a profound sense are as unfree as physical nature — and this presumably is the belief many natural scientists would express, if one would closely question them.”

In this metaphysical landscape, the philosophy of Charles S. Peirce offers an original solution, a comprehensive and coherent cosmogonic philosophy, as he called it, though this is a solution that few know much about, and that

1 Recently a new and refined version of natural theology has seen the light of day: the intelligent design (ID) theory, whose main supporting argument is again nature's manifest quality of design — which does not fit well with natural science’s traditional view of nature's essential unfreedom (Behe 1996). And while ID theory is itself scientifically unsubstantiated, it must be admitted that natural science’s ontological biases provide legitimate targets for such religious revisionism.

2 As I will argue later, such materialism is in reality a disguised dualism (see Searle 1992).

[page 40]

fewer still have fully understood. The essence of this solution, as we shall see, is that on the one hand, natural laws are not absolute, because they themselves are products of an ongoing evolution, and on the other hand, humans’ cognitive processes in the deepest sense are of the same kind as all other processes in nature.

The extraordinary difficulty that philosophers and natural scientists have had in following Peirce along this path is attributable, to a large extent, to the fact that the Cartesian body-mind dualism — from which the nature-culture split is born — entirely lacks a concept of purpose that can free itself from its uniquely human connotations. For if one were to follow the underlying logic of Peirce’s cosmology, one would then have to accept the existence in nature of so-called end causes or final causes. But among those who have not freed themselves from Cartesianism, such an idea will quickly ring alarm bells. Must there be a purpose in nature? Are we not thus returning to religion by asserting this?

Now it is a fact that I, in writing these words, have a purpose in so writing. And it is also as nearly a fact as anything can be — in any case for the nonreligious — that I as a human being am, in the end, a creation of nature. It is, in other words, a proven fact that there are at least some purposes manifesting within nature, even if they are, as here, only connected with humanity. And yet the scientifically oriented mind, especially, should feel challenged by this nearly incomprehensible, and in fact unfounded, privileging of just one creation among all others endowed with the talent to operate with purposes. This talent must come from somewhere. If it is not from God, and human beings are themselves fully part of nature and nothing supernatural, then a scientific paradox obtains. And it is just here that Peirce’s solution comes into play: “It is a widespread error to think that a final cause is necessarily a purpose. A purpose is merely that form of final cause which is most familiar to experience” (CP 1:211; italics added), or in other words, “purpose is the conscious modification of final causation” (CP 7:366; italics added).

That which in the Cartesian tradition is integrated into one concept, the concept of purposive, consciously conceived end causes (and which in a strict sense has only validity in the human world) is thus in Peirce’s philosophy two things — one specifically human, and the other a general principle of emergent organization — that should not be confounded. Psychological end causes, such as the distinct purposes I might have in writing this text, are in Peirce’s thinking just a special subcategory of the much broader category of final causes — and these, according to Peirce, are at play in any sort of goal-oriented activity in nature, as well as in culture. For, to Peirce, a final cause is simply the general form of any process that tends toward an end state (a finale). Peirce expresses it in this way:

[page 41]

[A final cause is] ... that mode of bringing facts about according to which a general description of result [read lawlike system of regularity] is made to come about, quite irrespective of any compulsion for it to come about in this or that particular way; although the means may be adapted to the end. The general result may be brought about at one time in one way, and at another time in another way. Final causation does not determine in what particular way it is to be brought about, but only that the result shall have a certain general character (CP 1:121).

When one is socialized into the Newtonian world view — as are virtually all people today, whether they are conscious of it or not — then the idea of final causation is very difficult to accept. For the Newtonian view of causes is temporalized in a very thin one-dimensional thread. That event A is the cause of event B means that first comes A and then comes B, that is to say, event A happens at time t1 and event B at time t2, where t2 > t1. Yet according to this scheme of thinking, final causes imply that events that happen at time t1 are caused by an event that first takes place at time t2, which must be said to profoundly contradict both scientific and everyday experience.

In order to understand the idea of final causes, one must broaden one’s conception of time so that it contains more than just one dimension. Event B is not just caused by the preceding event A, for the very fact that A takes place is already part of a pattern of events — a pattern that also includes occurrences of type B — which in the end obeys general laws of a more compelling kind. Final causes in this sense have the character of natural law, as pointed out by Lucia Santaella-Braga (1999) with the important distinction that Peirce did not think that laws took precedence over the dance of randomness, but were the products of it.

For example, the natural law that goes under the name of the second law of thermodynamics expresses an entirely universal condition pertaining to all known physical existence, namely that the net amount of entropy will always increase with each spontaneous process that takes place in this universe. What this law determines, as Peirce observed, is not “in what particular way a given end is to be brought about, but only that the result shall have a certain general character” (CP 1:211). The second law of thermodynamics can be understood as

3 Thanks to Lucia Santaella (e.g., see 1999) for pointing out this and many of the following

points concerning final causes in Peirce’s thought.

4 Perhaps more than anyone else, Robert Rosen has, from a mathematical foundation, seen that

the Newtonian tradition rests upon a needlessly narrow concept of causality (Rosen 1991). Rosen defended a return to Aristotle’s broader understanding of causality, but suggested the term functional entailment in place of final cause, using functional in its biological sense (see below).

5 I will discuss this in some detail below.

6 It is worth remarking that this understanding of a final cause corresponds to the original

Aristotelian view of telos as “that ‘for the sake of which’ something exists or occurs or is done.” T.L.

[page 42]

one of the final causes that must be part of any satisfactory explanation of evolutionary phenomena in general, including Darwinian selection.

Relevance of the Second Law of Thermodynamics

The second law of thermodynamics, often called the entropy law, has a fairly ambiguous status in physics, perhaps precisely because it can be interpreted as a kind of final cause — as done here. Many physicists will probably object to this characterization and claim that we are led to this misinterpretation because we focus on the macro level (effects) and fail to follow the law back to its roots in microdynamics (interactions). But even doing so does not solve the problem, it turns out. For, as the Danish physicist Peder Voetmann Christiansen has pointed out, it is simply not possible to define an underlying microplan of any macroscopic system without proceeding from (and within) the preexistence of some boundary conditions — conditions which themselves are “given” thanks only to the macroplan that is the experimenter himself and, in the end, the ecosystem in which he or she exists and whose present state must necessarily be far from equilibrium (Christiansen 1999).

To get a grasp on all this, we must ask this first of all: What, in fact, should be understood by the phrase the micro level? Molecules can be divided into atoms, which can be divided into elementary particles. Elementary particles appear to consist of parts, and these parts again to consist of parts, and so forth. What is the bottom line in all of this? The traditional answer to this concern has been to say that the contribution from the submicroscopic parts is locked by virtue of the quantum character of energy, and that the smaller the parts are, the greater will be the separation between their energy levels.

Therefore, as tradition would have it, we are fully entitled to consider a gas at room temperature as a classic system consisting of stiff molecular particles, whose dynamics we can describe. In other words, we need not (and in fact must not) take the elastic properties of molecules into consideration. The irreversible growth of entropy thus does not reflect a true finality in the universe, but simply our human ignorance about the energy and movements of individual molecules — an ignorance that by its very nature increases every time something

happens in the system. Short (2002, 326) has expressed it this way: “The stock example is familiar: It is the nature of an acorn to grow into an oak, not into a spruce tree or a butterfly. The final cause, then, is a potentiality whether or not actualized.” This, however, is not the view of finality that one normally finds in the literature. Most often, final causes are there linked with human (or at least human-like) intentions or desires about the future. But for Aristotle, such causes are in fact efficient causes, that is, forces or energies that concretely make things happen in our familiar sense. Final causes, on the contrary, are general goods, desirables, that are the deeper causes of such actions of intentions (ibid., 325-26).

[page 43]

But notice that a strange subjectivity has unwittingly entered into the argument here. For had we, as human experimenters, chosen a system at a very high temperature instead of a system at room temperature, then we would have had to consider the elastic qualities of the molecules — and therefore the quantum mechanical laws — and at that point we would have to deal with _ another microdynamic. Thus, Christiansen (1999, 53) observes, “The very notion of [what constitutes a] ‘microscopic state’ depends crucially on our ability to heat and isolate systems, and this ability is not reducible to microscopic laws but depends on technology and intention. The physicists do not just isolate a natural system for closer study, but with their methods of preparation create the system, including the notion of microscopic parts and the laws that govern them.”

The fact that the Nobel Prize in physics in 1996 was awarded for the discovery of the He3 isotope’s superfluidity corroborates this point. Superfluidity can only exist at temperatures less than one thousandth of a degree above absolute zero. The universe’s background temperature is more than a thousand times higher than this, i.e., several full degrees above absolute zero. Thus we can, in Christiansen’s words, “be pretty sure that superfluid He3 only exists where there are physicists to study it” (ibid., 54).

Accordingly, then, the entropy law cannot be interpreted in purely epistemological terms — i.e., as an expression of a fundamental ignorance on our part — but must be interpreted ontologically as an expression of the universe’s intrinsic irreversibility. The entropy law thus implies that the universe finds itself in a state very far from equilibrium — which is why a flow of events continues to happen in it. Among other things, there is an irreversible flow of low-entropy (that is to say, well-organized) wave energy that goes out from the sun into cold space. The Earth receives a small fraction of this energy flow, which allows it to warm itself and set in motion winds and ocean streams and the dynamic geothermal cycle of water from ocean to ocean by way of fog, rain, snow, glaciers, floods, and so forth.

An even smaller part of this irreversible flow is captured by the chloroplasts of green plants — where photosynthesis sets another cycle in play by nourishing the cyclical web of food chains. The whole time, highly entropic energy is given off in the form of thermal radiation that exudes off into the universe. On Earth, the instreaming solar energy and the outstreaming thermal energy (it appears) are more or less equally great, otherwise the Earth’s temperature would be subject to radical changes, which apparently does not happen — or has not yet. But even if all the energy leaves the Earth again, its flow through the system has perpetually changed the microstates of the Earth system, and gradually it also changed the Earth’s macrostates, as witnessed by organic evolution and by the gradual emergence of a self-regulating biosphere.

[page 44]

Most interesting in this connection are the insights that were first formulated by the physicist Erwin Schrodinger (1944) in his famous book, What is Life? Schrodinger saw that life does not so much draw upon energy for energy’s sake — but rather that the energy flow through organisms allows organisms to get rid of the entropy that they themselves produce through the processes of life. The trick is to consume low-entropy energy and to transform it into high-entropy energy. In this way, life sidesteps the entropy law while it creates organized (low-entropy) structures — living organisms — without violating the thermodynamic requirement that entropy must increase with each spontaneous process. Entropy does increase, certainly, but all of the surplus is exported to

the surroundings and, in the end, to outer space.

Christiansen’s point is that physicists are subject to these thermodynamic conditions since they, too, like everybody else, must live forward in time. Rather than a paradox, then, this shows that the entropy law is actually a tautology: “For the prerequisite of being able to say anything is that the entropy of the universe is higher after the saying than it was before. The same entropic condition applies to any significant event, to every difference that makes a difference, i.e., rises appreciably above the noise level of fluctuations” (ibid., 58).

The expression downward causation is often used in this type of causal relationship, where a macrostate acts upon the very microstates of which it consists (Campbell 1974). The expression is probably an attempt to say the same thing as is meant by the expression final causes without linking oneself to the cultural inheritance of Aristotelianism, where the term carries so much baggage. But to the Newtonian mind, the idea of downward causation isn’t especially popular, either. Perhaps this is because many scientists are unwilling to let systems possess properties that do not, upon closer analysis, show themselves simply to be reducible to the properties of their component parts. Water can clearly be seen to be wet, which neither oxygen nor hydrogen are at room temperature in any case. But those physical characteristics of the

7 This last point was applicable, at least, until human-induced flows of energy began to create a

significant contribution to the energy economy of Earth (Hoffmeyer 2001b). I consider this idea further in Chapter 9.

8 Valentine Turchin’s work on meta-systems transition theory also examines the resulting top-down control of bottom-up processes, and Vefa Karatay and Yagmur Denizhan (2002) have shown the relevance of this work for biosemiotics.

9 Frederik Stjernfelt has noted that a second reason for natural science’s general skepticism

about the idea of downward causation could be that this form of causality, in contrast to efficient causality, does not function in the linear dimension of progressively sequential time. It is thus connected instead with formal — rather than final — causes in the Aristotelian scheme. (See more on this below.) And yet, to explain the kind of order we see in naturally occurring systems, modern-day physics has had to introduce the idea of the attractor state — which, of course, must be regarded as a genuine form of downward causation, if anything is.

[page 45]

water molecule that makes a person who puts his finger into a glass of water experience the sensory quality of wetness, it can be argued, could be fully accounted for in terms of the well-known properties of hydrogen and oxygen, and it is therefore not reasonable to describe water as a cause of the experience of wetness. Wetness, in this view, is not really a property at all, but an epiphenomenon.

The resistance of many physicists against ideas of final or downward causation may derive from a deeply held reductionistic intuition that phenomena are always caused or at least explained best by the dynamics that play out on the underlying levels (and thus, in the end, among elementary particles). But this intuition seems more and more forced — the more it becomes clear that there is no bottom line to such reductionism. As we have seen in the discussion above (Christiansen 1999), an ultimately deepest level cannot be identified even in principle.

What is worse, even the idea of some kind of finally elementary particles at the bottom level, from which all causality ultimately must derive, is at odds with other fundamental physical theories. Thus, according to quantum field theory, reality consists exclusively of fields, and elementary particles are to be seen as nodal points in such systems, that is to say, as purely topological occurrences that cannot be ascribed the property of substance (Bickhard and Campbell 1999). That particles are topological occurrences means that they belong to definite form categories that cannot gradually transform themselves into each other. A surface with a hole in it can, for example, gradually be reshaped so that it becomes a teacup but it cannot be gradually turned into a surface with two holes in it. In order for that to happen, the surface must be punctured, and that would create another topological category.

One could perhaps now think that the reductionistic intuition can live as easily by now simply positing quantum fields as its deepest layer as it has attempted to do by positing elementary particles. But fields don’t have the same independence of the patterns by which they exist as particles have. Mark Bickhard writes,

10 Epiphenomenality is often associated with the idea of supervenience, which implies that

there cannot be changes of the higher level without there being related changes on the lower level. That consciousness is supervening on the brain implies that changes in consciousness cannot take place without concomitant changes in brain processes. Sometimes a distinction is made between weak and strong supervenience (Kim 1990). We will not pursue this discussion here, as we associate ourselves with Mark Bickhard’s view that systems that find themselves in the thermodynamic state called far-from-equilibrium (such as organisms and ecosystems) are woven into unbreakable relationships with their surroundings, so that they cannot be characterized as merely supervenient. A flame, for example, is not simply dependent upon its constituents but also upon oxygen supply, temperature, and other factors (Bickhard and Campbell 1999).

[page 46]

The critical point is that quantum field processes have no existence independent of configuration of process: quantum fields are process and can only exist in various patterns. Those patterns will be of many different physical

and temporal scales, but they are all equally patterns of quantum field process.

Therefore, there is no bottoming out level in quantum field theory — it is patterns of process all the way down, and all the way up. Consequently, there is no rationale for delegitimating larger scale, hierarchical patterns of process — such as will constitute living things, minds, and so on.... The recognition that everything is organization of process — just at differing scales and with differing hierarchical organizations — makes the choice to see pattern and organization as of lower level, and thus to render properties of those patterns and organizations as epiphenomenal, a choice that renders everything epiphenomenal because there is no level at which anything is other than an organization of quantum field process, including even the smallest scale quantum fluctuations (Bickhard and Campbell 1999, 331-32).

But is the status of quantum field theory such that we could confidently base a rejection of the reductive particle ontology upon it? It is acknowledged, at least, that particles can both be created as well as disappear during observable physical processes. And this result is precisely what relativity theory brings about when it is used in the context of quantum mechanics. The merit of quantum field theory is that it allows us to handle these remarkable phenomena at the theoretical level. So even if one takes the modern and pluralistic standpoint that fields and particles are equally fundamental, one has already thereby subscribed to the idea that final causes (or their explanatory equivalent) may eventually have to be

considered. For the mere fact that fields are fundamental (even though for the

moment they must share this honor with particles) will imply that one cannot ignore the holistic configuration of those fields in the attempt to understand our physical universe.

We thus conclude that the rejection of finalistic interpretations of the second law of thermodynamics is based upon (largely unexamined) ideological positions as much as or more than it is upon compelling scientific arguments. And accordingly, we will not therefore let such hidebound ideology deter us from seeking out a broader idea of causation than has been current in natural science

since Newton.

For in ontological terms, reality does not consist in fundamental particles whose dynamic interactions cause the whole world. Instead, what I will advocate in these pages is an ontology whereby everything fundamentally consists of process organization, in which causality is a characteristic of such process organization.

11 The possibility of a particle interpretation of quantum field theory is dismissed by Halvorson

and Clifton (2002).

[page 47]

Final Causes in Biology: Utricularia floridiana

Let us now examine the problem of causality by studying a concrete biological example. With inspiration from the ecologist Robert Ulanowicz’s analysis in the 1997 book Ecology: The Ascendent Perspective, I choose here to look at the sophisticated feeding strategy of the water plant bladderwort, of the genus Utricularia.

These humble plants are found in freshwater lakes over much of the world where they feed themselves by eating small animals. The bladderwort’s leaves (Figure 3.1) are covered with a film of bacteria, diatoms, and blue-green algae called periphyton. Species of Utricularia in the wild are always covered with such periphyton, and some types of bladderworts excrete complex sugar compounds in order to bind algae to the leaf surface and to attract bacteria. Furthermore, the growth of bladderworts support the growth of the periphyton simply by providing an area substrate — which is necessary because the types of algae making up the periphyton are not adapted to a pelagic (free-floating) life.

A new trophic level now comes into the picture in the form of a number of small, nearly microscopic (about 0.1 millimeter) animals, collectively known as zooplankton, that graze the periphyton. The zooplankton include a range of various species, such as Daphnia and Cyclops (both are types of water fleas), Rotatoria (rotifers) and Ciliata (multicelled animals with hairy cilia which are used to gather food).

Occasionally the animals will hit a hair on the small bladders (the utrica, which gives the bladderwort its genus name). When this happens, an opening

Figure 3.1 Sketch of a typical “leaf” from Utricularia floridiana. The detail shows how the interior of the bladder contains an undigested prey (from Ulanowicz 1997).

[page 48]

will emerge at the end of the bladder — and because osmotic pressure is maintained inside the bladder, the small animals are then sucked up into it. The opening quickly closes again, and a slow digestion of the animal begins, whereby nourishment is released and taken up by the plant through the bladder’s walls (Figure 3.2).

This kind of interaction between different species is technically called indirect mutualism, because all the involved species benefit from the arrangement. For even if the bladderwort nourishes itself by eating the zooplankton, so do the zooplankton, despite all, derive great benefit from the opportunity to graze upon the phytoplankton layer — and the phytoplankton layer, for its part, gains by broadening its Lebensraum when the bladderwort’s surface area increases. Thus, by ensuring the bladderwort’s growth, the periphyton increases its own biomass, even in the very process in which it is itself eaten.

The bladderwort system is an example of a biological autocatalytic system. Ulanowicz points out that the generation of an autocatalytic cycle at the species level distinguishes itself from chemical autocatalysis, in that the entities that are involved in the cycle are themselves able to adapt. The result is a self-organizing autonomy that cannot arise in the corresponding chemical system. The systems possess a type of centripetality, says Ulanowicz: Each arbitrary change that

Figure 3.2 The Utricularia system's self-catalyzing cycle. The bladderwort plant provides the necessary surface for the growth of phytoplankton. Zooplanktons graze on the phytoplanktons and become themselves caught in a bladder (from Ulanowicz 1997).

[page 49]

randomly increases the speed by which material and free energy are carried to a given element in the system (for example, periphyton) will increase this element’s ability to catalyze the flow of nourishment and energy to the next element (for example, zooplankton), and the change will eventually be rewarded by increasing the growth of the whole system). Thus, the self-catalyzing ensemble becomes the organizational locus of the growing flows of matter and energy, which are drawn into the system: “Taken as a unit, the autocatalytic cycle is not acting simply at the behest of its environment: it actively creates its own domain of influence. Such creative behavior imparts a separate identity and ontological status to the configuration, above and beyond the passive elements that surround it. We see in centripetality the most primitive hint of entification, of selfhood, and id” (Ulanowicz 1997, 47-48). Ulanowicz then goes on to cite Karl Popper, who opined, “Heraclitus was right: We are not things, but flames. Or a little more prosaically, we are, like all cells, processes of metabolism; nets of chemical pathways.” I stated this in another way in Signs of Meaning in the Universe: We are “infinite swarms of swarming swarms” (Hoffmeyer 1996a, 125). Very few people will deny that a human individual is real in an ontological sense — and yet all of us consist of nothing but cells that, with the exception of our nerve cells, did not exist at all even seven years ago. As humans, we do not identify our self with the constituent units of matter that exactly at this moment make up our body. In the same way, we would ordinarily consider Beethoven’s Grosse Fuge as an autonomously existing phenomenon of our world, even in those cases (should they ever happen) where this particular piece of music were not being played anywhere on Earth, the whole has a genuine identity that is not exhausted by its immediate configuration. Nor is it a mere nominalism, as I will discuss below.

Likewise, we must attribute real ontological status to such self-catalyzing cycles as the bladderworts. Self-catalyzing systems generally outlive their constituent elements, which most often come and go as illustrated in Figure 3.3. Yet by their very existence, they have genuinely causal effects, because they constrain the number of possible sustainable adaptations and innovations available for the evolutionary process.

If we look at Figure 3.3d and ask how it has come to be that a certain species — for example, species D — is located in this ecological configuration, the answer must necessarily reflect the self-catalyzing system as a whole, for in the absence of the self-catalyzing system, species D most likely would not have displaced species B. It seems difficult to avoid saying that it is the relationships between species that causes these replacements to occur. Or, in other words, relationships and not individual species are carriers of causality. What takes place in the bladderwort’s system is, of course, fully determined by the material processes

[page 50]

Figure 3.3 Step-by-step shifting of components in a self-catalyzing cycle. (a) The original cycle. (b) Component D appears and is more effective in the feedback loop. (c) D eventually replaces B. (d) In the same way, C is replaced by E. (e) Finally A is replaced by F, so that none of the original components remain. The system endures; the components perish (from Ulanowicz 1997).

that happen within it — but these processes are grounded in a dynamic whose inner logic is dependent upon the way the system is structured, and upon the relationships among the populations in the ecosystem.

John Deely (1994, 15) calls this, interestingly enough, intersubjectivity: “This contrast between the intrinsic constitution of a thing and its relation to other things provides us with the fundamental contrast between the subjective and the intersubjective, between what things are in themselves and what they are as parts of a system, that is, relative to other things.” He notes that in the Middle Ages (and in most of the modern age), such intersubjectivity has not been considered to have independent existence. And here, I suppose, do we find the essence of what is called nominalism. This oft-contested doctrine holds that the relation between existing things is not itself part of what exists, but should instead be regarded as a mere construction in the mind of the observer. That a mammalian shoulder bone fits into the shoulder joint of the same animal is, according to this view, not part of reality, for fits into is a purely relational concept, and relations are not real things in themselves, only things like shoulder bones and shoulder joints are. The fitting-in relation, correspondingly, does not — to a strict nominalist — refer to any independently existing reality.

But as Deely (1994, 22) carefully explains, “What is at stake in this peculiarity of relation as an intersubjective mode of being is the very possibility of

[page 51]

semiosis — or, perhaps I should better say, the opening in nature to an action of signs not reducible to the more typical, or at least more widespread, brute force interactions of Secondness constitutive of [purely] subjective being and the physical environment of material objects.”

The tendency of natural science to deny the ontological reality of relations is probably the reason that some biologists in recent years have looked back to Aristotle’s more articulated understanding of causation (Rosen 1991; Salthe '

1993; Riedl 1997; Ulanowicz 1997; see also Juarrero 1998). Autocatalytic organizations such as the bladderwort can then be considered as an Aristotelian formal cause for species D’s existence in the bladderwort’s periphyton. And this overall cycle relates to its individual component parts in the same way that an organism relates to its cells, namely by establishing a set of organizational and interactional boundary conditions for the activity of its subunits — activities that persist far beyond the lifetime of the subunits.

Indirect mutualism of the kind seen in the bladderwort demonstrates the development of asymmetry in the ecosystem, as the flows of energy and nourishment are displaced from what is called equiprobability — i.e., the state where they are most equally distributed among different components and channels. Instead, the flows of matter and energy are drawn into those parts of the ecosystem where self-catalyzing cycles have established themselves. In this way, new structural organization emerges in the ecosystem demonstrating the self-organizing dynamics of the system. Ulanowicz (1997) shows, furthermore, that this “propensity to move away from a state of equiprobability” is a characteristic property of living systems in general. Thus behind the kind of formal causation that we have seen exemplified here, a more general propensity is at play — one which could be described perhaps as a general propensity of complex systems to self-organize.

As even Kant long ago observed, the self-organizing property of living systems obviously is in opposition to the physicalist conception of nature shared by most scientists. Kant, as a consequence, claimed that living creatures must always be understood teleologically. And it was for this reason that Kant maintained that biology was not a natural science. But rather than accepting Kant's radical renunciation of our possibilities for achieving a naturalistic understanding of life, biosemiotics follows Peirce in seeing the principle of final causation as a natural property of the world at large.

12 In using the term Secondness, Deely is referring to the Peircean categories of relation that I

shall be discussing in more detail shortly.

13 I discuss this problem more thoroughly in Hoffmeyer 2008a. See also the thorough analysis

of the ontology of relations by Paul Bains (2007).

14 This is discussed in Chapter 6 in the section, “Self-Organization, Semiosis, and

Experience.”

[page 52]

At this point, however, we must distinguish the semiotic conception of causation from the Aristotelian conception. Aristotle distinguished, as is well known, four kinds of causes: the material, the efficient, the formal, and the final. To illustrate this, let us again borrow an example from Ulanowicz's excellent treatment of the subject (Ulanowicz 1997). The example is a military conflict. Here the weapons constitute the material cause to the battle, the soldiers comprise the efficient cause, the armies’ placement with respect to the particularities of the landscape becomes the formal cause, and the final cause will consist of the actual intersection of particular social, political, and economic conflicts.

This example at once reveals the hierarchical dimension to the Aristotelian idea of causation. As Ulanowicz states, it is the officers who represent the battle’s most central level. Ulanowicz calls this level the focal level, which is precisely the level that is concerned with the formal causes to the course of the battle — e.g., the location of the armies in relation to the landscape. In comparison, the soldiers can only influence limited elements of the entire activity, whereas the heads of state for their part can mostly influence the events that take place before and after the actual battle. It is precisely this inherent hierarchical dimension of the Aristotelian concept of causality that was incompatible with the reductionistic and universalistic perspective that has been urged upon us by Newtonian science.

And ever since the Newtonian revolution, we have had to live with a natural science that almost exclusively concerns itself with efficient causality. Material causality, for example, is now accepted to a certain degree in biology, but most often only in the somewhat pre-causal role of initial conditions. Formal causes were difficult to avoid in practice since organizational structures obviously always influence the particularities of natural processes, but the predominant credo has been that formal causes can always be reduced to efficient causes. With regard to final causes, it must be said that an unquestionable taboo has ruled — a taboo that has been especially troublesome for biology, where it is difficult to avoid teleologic (often called functional) explanations of the following type: The heart beats in order to pump oxygen into the body. But this is an explanation that, strictly speaking, would imply that the heart would have to possess an intention of helping the body — an unacceptable thought, of course, if only for the simple reason that the heart has no brain, and cannot therefore possibly

know that it is located in a body in need of oxygen. As we shall see below, most biologists nevertheless consider themselves fully justified in using functional explanations of this kind — probably not even

15 In a deeper sense, however, the final cause in this case is the desirability of circumstances (e.g., wealth and power) that both of the involved powers cannot simultaneously realize; thus, they

have to fight over it (see Short 2002).

[page 53]

seeing it as contradicting the taboo against final causation. This is because it is assumed that such teleologic explanations could ultimately be justified reductionistically through the application of the principle of natural selection. For this principle is quite generally supposed to be responsible for any functional optimization of the gene pool that might arise, and for this reason, explanations of the kind discussed above are said to be teleonomic rather than teleologic.

Before we look more closely at the functionalist ideas of biology, there may be reason to warn against an uncritical adoption of the Aristotelian causal categories. For even if we accept the necessity to operate with formal and final causes in biology, this does not imply that we can adopt Aristotle’s understanding of matter as a passive victim of the form-giving principles of nature. This latent dualism of Aristotle’s, on the other hand, was easily incorporated into the compromise between Aristotelian philosophy and Christianity that was worked out by the medieval scholastics. It is perhaps not a coincidence that the alternative to this way of thinking has perhaps never been expressed more elegantly than by Giordano Bruno in the work Cause, Principle, and Unity, a book that more than anything else led to his execution by burning (by papal decree) in the year 1600. Here Bruno allows his hero, Theofilus, to get into a discussion with the orthodox Aristotelian Discono, who in dismay accuses Theofilus of implying that “matter is propre nihil [almost nothing], pure potency, bare, without act, without virtue and perfection.” Theofilus answers to this: “So it is. I claim that it is deprived of forms and without them, not in the way ice lacks warmth or the abyss is without light,” but as a pregnant woman lacks the offspring which she collects and expels forth from herself, and as this hemisphere of the Earth is without light at night, which it manages to reacquire by its turning around” (Bruno 1584 (2000)); translated by the author from the Danish version).

The Aristotelian matter-form dualism was itself originally a way of solving a philosophical problem that seriously occupied the minds of the philosophers in antiquity, the question of change: How can anything change without ceasing to be the thing it was? By positing the idea of a “form-giving principle that rules over matter,” it became possible to think of change as change in form only, thereby conserving the identity of matter in spite of the change. Change then, in the Aristotelian conception, was change in form, and as such, was brought about by the processes of formal causation.

But Aristotle saw formal causation itself as guided by final causation. And at work here is a somewhat questionable metaphysics in which nature's purpose is posited as harmony, perfection, or “the good.” In short, Aristotelian formal and final causation depends very much on a whole set of ideas that one should

16 See Genesis 1:2. “And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face

of the deep” (King James Version).

[page 54]

take care not to import into the contemporary scientific discussion when using these terms. In the Peircean conception of final causes, we find none of this. Quite to the contrary, Peirce believes on the most fundamental level that both randomness and irreversibility characterize final causes. Peircean final causation therefore is a very different thing from Aristotelian final causation, and the two should not be confused.

The Functionalist Idea in Biology

The identification of final causes with purposeful causes — where purpose is understood in the psychological sense — probably explains why the rejection of final causes has been, and remains, all but total among biologists. In a book entitled Nature’s Purposes, Colin Allen, Marc Bekoff, and George Lauder (1998) collected a group of key articles from the previous thirty years’ debate about teleology, functionality, and purpose in biology. Yet once one has already overcome the fear of, and defensive taboo against, the very possibility of final causes, as we have here, the subtle discussions in the perceptive and well-argued articles assembled in this volume feel a little strenuous to say the least. In fact, what these articles illustrate more than anything else is the absurdity of explaining away final causation in the workings of living systems. Like the more and more subtle play of epicycles invented by astronomers to uphold the geocentric universe, thoughtful biologists have had to invent more and more subtle arguments in order to uphold a view of organic evolution as obeying the irreproachable scheme of efficient causation as the only basic explanatory tool in the natural world. Rather than dwelling upon the many subtle details of this discussion, I’ll limit myself here to a short presentation of the main arguments.

Should we speak about a modern consensus among biologists concerning the question of functionality, this consensus would be best framed in the terms of Karen Neander’s etiological theory, where the point is that a trait or characteristic of an organism is functional if it derives from parents whose offspring survived through natural selection by virtue of exactly the function that this characteristic served for the parents. Or, in Neander’s (1991) own words, “It is the proper function of an item (X) of an organism (O) to do that which items of X’s type did to contribute to the inclusive fitness of O’s ancestors and which caused the genotype, of which X is the phenotypic expression (or which may be X itself where X is the genotype), to increase proportionally in the gene pool.”

17 This is one reason why I prefer to use the term semiotic causation for this phenomenon in my

own work. For although semiotic causation does, of course, imply some sort of final causation as an operative principle, it does not import the whole baggage of Aristotelian metaphysics.

18 For a very different discussion of this problem, consult Havel and Markos (2002)

[page 55]

There are divergent opinions about this, though, especially as concerns the very selectionistic conception of evolution expressed in the etiologic theory. For example, Amundson and Lauder (1994) note that the idea of homology is a pre-Darwinian concept that originally was based upon comparative anatomy and which therefore cannot be defined through a theory of functionality. For example, the forelimbs of humans, dogs, moles, whales, and bats are all homologous, but their functionality is totally different.

Against the etiological theory, they point to the wings of insects — which, according to all accounts, originally had no aerodynamic function, but only served the purpose of thermoregulation (a role they still can have, for instance, for bees). “If we identify the function of insect wings as the effect for which they were first selected, then we would say that the function of wings is thermoregulation” (Allen, Bekoff, and Lauder 1998, 357). Amundson and Lauder (1994) instead suggest that we base the definition of function upon the relevant trait’s causal role — as originally suggested by Robert Cummins (1975). This is to say that functionality must always be understood in relation to a task, and the function of the trait or characteristic must thus be understood as its contribution to the fulfillment of this task. A dove wing’s causal role is to contribute to the flying ability of the dove, which will thus be the function of the wing even in the hypothetical case where conditions change so much that flying skill is no longer of use to the bird in its quest for survival and reproductive success.

Cummins’s attempt to define biological functionalism in relation to causal roles was dismissed by philosopher Ruth Millikan who referred to the absurdity of maintaining that clouds have the causal role (i.e., function) of raining so that streams and rivers are filled with water, which — as part of the hydrologic cycle on earth — work to keep the soil moist so that plants can grow (Millikan 1989). For this is obviously a different idea of function than we are using when we say that it is the heart’s function to pump blood throughout the body, even if its placement in a system of interdependent causal relations looks, at a first glance, somewhat the same.

Seen from the biosemiotic standpoint, Amundson’s and Lauder’s suggestion has the advantage that functionality is ascribed to the lineage as an autonomous historical system. It cannot therefore be reduced to the bare rational reflection of external selective forces, but rather, follows its own inner (semiotic, I would say) dynamic of development. But since the authors do not explicitly set themselves apart from the commonly accepted mechanical model of causality in biology, it is difficult to see how they can defend themselves against objections of the kind that Millikan and others have put forward (Millikan 1989; Neander 1991; Sober 1993).

At this point, however, the etiological theory is better only in appearance. By linking functionality to an already selected effect, this “effect” may seem to

[page 56]

assume an aspect of value that in a crucial sense separates it from the raining that Millikan facetiously attributes as a “function” of a cloud. Insect wings with effective aerodynamic potential were selected (which is to say that they were in some sense favored) by nature, in preference to those insect wings that could only be used for thermoregulation. But if one looks closer into this favoring, called selection, then it is emphasized again and again that in the end, it too is all just a result of blind coincidence, and not purpose (see Andrade, 1999). Thus, functionality of this kind is scarcely different from the cloud’s raining; both are coincidental, rather than functional, in the normal sense of this word.

In this debate, it seems that only philosopher Ruth Millikan really avoids this vulgarization of the idea of causality, perhaps because her source of inspiration is not primarily biology, but rather problems in language philosophy and cognitive research concerning the eventual possibility (or impossibility) of intentionality in computers. Millikan (1998) thus has no fear in approaching the idea of purpose — on the contrary, she succinctly declares that “the definition of ‘proper function’ is intended as a theoretical definition of function or purpose.” And just as function is inextricably linked to purpose, so also, in her view, is purpose unbreakably linked to historical becoming: “The mouse may have a disposition to take measures that will remove it from the vicinity of the cat, but not if under water, at 1000 [degrees] Fahrenheit, in the absence of oxygen, while being sprayed with mace, or just after ingesting cyanide. Indeed, there are thousands of stressful conditions under which the mouse might be placed, which would extinguish its escaping behavior” (Allen, Bekoff, and Lauder 1998, 308). The point is that the escaping behavior of mice only works under normal circumstances. Functionality thus presupposes an idea of normal circumstances. But where, in turn, does that idea come from? “At the very least, we must make a reference to something like the conditions in which mice have historically found themselves, or better, found themselves when their dispositions actually aided survival.... Mice must be born of mice. Consider if a seeming mouse were born of a fish, what would set the ‘normal conditions’ for manifestation of its relevant disposition?” (ibid., 309). Millikan seems in no doubt that when a mouse flees, it does so with a purpose — but that this purpose is not planted in the mouse’s genes or in its brain in any kind of naive, simplistic sense. Rather, purpose here constitutes an aspect of the historic process in which the mouse is only a (short-lived) current participant or exemplar. And as with mice, so with humans. For us, too, our conscious and intentional actions stand under the influence of the inheritance from evolutionary history. We are, so to speak, historically formed by the world — and this is basically why we can learn to know it.” Accordingly, our “conscious inten-

19 We can only learn anything about the world because our inherited talent for forming intuitions (literally, from the Latin, “in-sight”) has been evolutionarily molded by the conditions

[page 57]

tions” are not something that develop de novo in an isolated brain; instead, they always emerge from historical relationships between the head and the world (which includes, of course, the actions of other similarly situated agents).

And although Millikan apparently is comfortable with natural selection as an explanation for the functionality exhibited by animals, her project nevertheless collapses the ontological barrier between “free” humans and “unfree” animals. In so doing, the door opens a crack to admit actual, nonpsychological, final causation as an operative force in nature. And, as we saw in Chapter 1, natural selection itself depends upon the existence of a deeper dynamic in the physics of the universe that can explain the emergence of agency in life:

That we can explain how living systems behave in order to become prolific does

not explain evolution in the deeper sense. How does this fertility come into being?

What temporal motive force is at play here? Selection theory also needs a theory about what kind of thing life’s agency would be and how that agency comes to be.

And so it appears that selection theory is only a surface structure built upon the foundations of a deeper theory of evolution that explains how life relates to the processes that are fundamental to the physical development of the universe. Thus, biological functionality has its roots in the universe’s fundamental directedness.

The Central Dogma

Natural selection could hardly maintain its credibility as an explanation of biological functionality if it hadn’t coincided so well with another one of biology’s authorized stories about the innermost nature of life: the Central Dogma. It was Francis Crick, one of the discoverers of the double-helix structure of DNA, who jokingly codified the dogma whereby information can only be transferred from DNA to RNA and further to protein, but never the other way around (i.e., from protein to DNA).

19 We can only learn anything about the world because our inherited talent for forming intuitions (literally, from the Latin, “in-sight”) has been evolutionarily molded by the conditions prevailing in our world, Peirce puts it this way: “Thus it is that, our minds having been formed under the influence of phenomena governed by the laws of mechanics, certain conceptions entering into those laws become implanted in our minds, so that we readily guess at what the laws are. Without such a natural prompting, having to search blindfold for a law which would suit the phenomena, our chance of finding it would be as one to infinity. The further physical studies depart from phenomena which have directly influenced the growth of the mind, the less we can expect to find the laws which govern them ‘simple, that is, composed of a few conceptions natural to our minds” (CP 6:10).

20 It has since been shown that there is a reverse-transcription enzyme that uses RNA as a

template for the synthesis of DNA, and therefore transmits information the “wrong” way. This, though, still leaves intact the fundamental principle of the Central Dogma, which is that genetic material cannot be created from, nor altered by, proteins.

[page 58]

Figure 3.4 According to the Central Dogma, the information flow in a cell is one way.

Information is passed from DNA to RNA and further to protein, but never in the reverse direction. In Crick’s own original formulation (1988, 109), the Central Dogma was simply this: “Once ‘information’ has passed into protein it cannot get out again.” But this glib formulation contains great ambiguity. First of all, of course, there is the question of what information actually is. Crick is himself fairly explicit in this regard. “Information means here the precise determination of sequence, either of bases in the nucleic acid or of amino acid residues in the protein” (ibid.). Information is to be understood, then, as a kind of specification. It is important to note here that this conception of information, which we may call the biochemical information concept, is decisively different from the concept of information that underlies Information Theory, or Shannon information. Shannon's information concept is a purely probabilistic measure that in principle can be objectively determined, and is deprived of any internal relationship to relevance or meaning.” A manuscript created by a monkey, for example, may contain more Shannon information than a manuscript of the same length created by a normal user of language. For a language user writes according to rules, which make her letters more predictable than a monkey's. The problem with the biochemical information concept is that a specification has no unequivocal or measurable reality. Even in the simplest cases, such as when we say that the RNA sequence AAA specifies the insertion of the amino acid phenylalanine into the growing protein chain, such specifications are hugely dependent on the prevailing present circumstances. A mutation might perhaps substitute a different amino acid in place of phenylalanine in the same location in the protein chain, and then suddenly the same information (AAA) would specify something entirely different. The question of the ambiguity of genetic information will be thoroughly examined in Chapter 5. Anticipating that discussion a little bit, we can say right now that generally, the problem is that a specificational information concept is one that is necessarily context-dependent — and thus, in the end, is necessarily dependent upon

21 One objection to this holds that the objectivistic interpretation of the information idea is

not, as such, implicit in Shannon's original idea, but rather is a consequence of its frequent use within closed systems that have well-defined realms of possibility. But Shannon himself clearly instituted this practice, stating that the semantic aspects of communication are irrelevant to the engineering problem.

[page 59]

what effect (or, in Peircean terms, interpretant) the information will elicit in the receiving system.

To see how this is so, we can, for example, following Sterelny and Griffiths (1999, 102), look at a simple system for information transmission such as a doorbell. By pressing the button, one specifies the message (out of a theoretical infinity of possible other messages) that there is someone seeking contact. The difference between the ringing sound and the contrastive quiet here depends not simply upon the capability of the ears of the resident — as, for example, he or she may be at that moment playing loud music or making some other kind of noise such as vacuuming or cutting grass — but also depends crucially upon such nonreceiver elements as whether or not the power is off, there is a loose connection in the circuit, or if the bell is in order. Here we naively presume that the source of the information is the pressure on the button, while all the other conditions fall under the subservient classification normally called channel conditions. But as Sterelny and Griffiths remind us, our thinking this so may not so much accurately reflect a fact about the world, but reflect, rather, “a fact about us. The sender/channel distinction is a fact about our interests, not a fact about the physical world” (ibid.). “What is noise and what is signal depends on what you are interested in. When you see a white dot passing across your television screen, it may be a tennis ball (signal) or it may be atmospheric interference or the cat sharpening its claws on the aerial (noise). But nothing in nature dictates that one dot is signal and the other is noise” (ibid., 103).

In Crick’s formulation, information stands forth as an indubitable category, virtually as a thing or a postal package that one can send anywhere in the world, without any change in its contents. And in the aftermath of Crick, biochemists have repeated this rather peculiar use of the word information such that it has now become so seemingly self-evident that no further explanation is needed. I quote as an example from a nearby biochemistry textbook on my bookshelf: “Of course, all metabolic reactions are controlled ultimately by genetic information, which specifies the structures and properties of enzymes” (Mathews, van Holde, and Ahern 1999, 876; italics added).

Typically enough, the next chapter in this textbook has the title “Information Readout: Transcription.” And so we have become so accustomed to this type of language use that now it barely surprises us. But, notoriously, it is somewhat other than normal to maintain that cells can read or that information can control. Both of these worthy activities usually presume cognitive abilities that biochemists will be the first to deny could occur in cells. And if we consider the word information in its everyday meaning, then we can, for example, say that there is some information contained on this page. But I hope that the reader doesn’t believe that she becomes controlled by this information. I hope the situation is rather that the reader feels inspired by the act of interpreting these words

[page 60]

as information and interprets them in relation to her own interests and needs.

Exactly the same is what is happening in cells and in organisms, I will argue,

when they act upon their inherent genetic material as information with which to survive and develop.

The idea that information can stream, flow, or let itself be transported through a channel derives from classical information theory as developed by Claude Shannon and Warren Weaver (1949), as mentioned briefly above. The starting point of the work of Shannon and Weaver was an engineering-related interest in developing telecommunications media, and consequently, in optimizing the ratio between signal and noise. What might be the meaning of the signals transmitted through channels was for good reason not a question that interested the fathers of information theory. The information that flows through channels is only defined in relationship to its external characteristic of non-noise.

Information transmission, of course, always depends on material processes. The words on this page can be read because of the patterning of black ink on the white of the paper, which is reflected onto the retina of the eye, as light bounces off it. (In writing for the blind, this optical technique is replaced by a tactile approach.) But as soon as we switch from an external to an internal approach to information, the explanatory viability of the transport metaphor ceases to be obvious. Shannon information can flow, stream, or pass, but in what sense can a specification flow?

The tacit transfer of the transport (or flow) metaphor of Shannon information to genetic information is not only meaningless (since genetic information cannot be understood independently of the particular context in which it is situated), it is also very misleading. If the expression genetic information shall be maintained at all, then what is at stake cannot be equated with such context-free (and semantics-free) information. Genetic information is deeply linked to the survival project of organisms and must be understood as a set of inherited instructions for the production and delivering of protein resources that can help one to function in the world. The transport metaphor has here the effect of objectifying genetic information, giving it a thingish character and a consequent autonomy that it does not possess. And this reification of information, for its part, opens the way to the misunderstanding that natural selection can optimize genetic information bit by bit. For when information is understood as bound to the gene and not to the context, the idea easily emerges that the population genetic combinatorics at the DNA level correspond with an equally unambiguous combinatorics at the semiotic level. In short, by considering information as genes, one eliminates the idea of genes — and life — as a semiotic phenomenon.

Such misplaced metaphor and oversimplification can hardly be expected

to survive the ever deepening scientific developments that, more and more,

[page 61]

demand a refined understanding of the massively complex and interdependent processes of life. A little maliciously, perhaps, one might compare the Central Dogma with the chemical theory of phlogiston of an earlier time (Hoffmeyer 2002a). For in a somewhat similar fashion, chemists of the eighteenth century reasoned that when substances burned, one was witnessing the liberation of a special internal substance called phlogiston. Flammable materials such as oil or coal, for instance, were thus considered to contain large amounts of phlogiston, and this accounted for their propensity to readily burn.

In 1794, however, the French chemist Antoine Lavoisier pointed out that, what really happened when something burned, was that oxidation was taking place — that is, burning (and rusting) material was not emitting some mystical phlogiston, but instead consuming (binding) oxygen. And the exact same process, he also helped to show, was soon proven to take place as well in the metabolism of animals. And just as the phlogiston theory, in its time, stood in the way of the further development of chemistry — we will soon see, I believe, that the idea of the transport of information within and between living systems today stands in the way of the development of a biology in keeping with the progress of the times.

For an up-to-date biology must acknowledge that the biochemical concept of information is just too impoverished to be of any explanatory use. Information isn’t just something that is transported or that streams through a channel; information is something that must be understood — and which therefore can be misunderstood. Recently, Eva Jablonka (2002, 580) has made a resolute attempt to save the concept of information through a semantic definition, by placing the concept in a functional evolutionary perspective where “the focus should be neither on the evolution of the signal ‘carrying’ the information, nor on the evolution of the final specific response. Rather it should be on the evolution of the system mediating between the two — on the interpreting system of the receiver.” However, even if Jablonka’s understanding of the information concept comes close to the biosemiotic concept of a sign, she strangely enough still thinks that it is important to preserve the notion of information as something that can be moved from one place to another.

But if information is to be understood as a relationship that involves an interpreting system, it is difficult to see what it could mean to say that information is transported. It is well known that if one looks, for example, at a little white disk on a red background, it seems to be green. Make a copy of the disk, place it on a blue background and the disk will appear to be orange. The disk’s color information travels as little with the disk itself, as the gene’s information travels with the DNA. Information, understood as a relationship between a cue and an interpreting system, is not itself an entity that can be transported. Still, the increased depth in Jablonka’s idea of information consequently parts ways with

[page 62]

a reductionistic approach whose ideas are still considered usable in the theoretical understanding of evolution that Jablonka is challenging.

Semiosis and Finality

Biosemiosis, the never-ending stream of sign processes that regulate and coordinate the behavior of living systems, depends upon the special receptivity that evolutionary systems over time have developed towards selected features of their environment. Peirce considered “the tendency [of things] to take habits” (CP 1:409) — or, in more modern parlance, self-organization (the tendency for ever new regularities to arise in natural systems) — as the most fundamental characteristic of nature. And living systems are examples par excellence of the tendency, to take notice, that is to say, to detect regularities in their surroundings that, if properly interpreted, might guide them to perform well.

The tendency to generate new habits is, of course, fundamental for all true learning, as well as for all cognitive activity. A bird must generate the habit of flying before it can find food, and a doctor must be in the habit of deciphering X-ray pictures before he can decide that a given shadow is a tumor. For Peirce, this law of habit formation, which he also called the law of mind, was more fundamental even than the universe's current physical laws — for these latter are themselves the product of the former.” And here we have come upon an element in Peircean cosmology that at first might seem somewhat counterintuitive. And yet, upon a closer look, the idea is strikingly modern.

In opposition to the natural science of his time, Peirce considered indeterminacy and chance as the primordial condition of the world. Given this starting point, the real “mystery to be unravelled” about our world is not so much

that it contains an unbelievable mass of ungovernable activity, but that there is

any stable order in it, at all. For very good reasons, science has set itself the task

of explaining the events and structures we find in our world as being in all cases

the outcome of natural lawfulness. And, although scientists are generally confident that aberrations from the determinacy of natural laws will ultimately be

22 “The law of habit exhibits a striking contrast to all physical laws in the character of its commands. A physical law is absolute. What it requires is an exact relation. Thus, a physical force

introduces into a motion a component motion to be combined with the rest by the parallelogram of forces; but the component motion must actually take place exactly as required by the law

of force. On the other hand, no exact conformity is required by the mental law. Nay, exact conformity would be in downright conflict with the law; since it would instantly crystallize thought

and prevent all further formation of habit. The law of mind only makes a given feeling more likely

to arise. It thus resembles the ‘non-conservative’ forces of physics, such as viscosity and the like,

which are due to statistical uniformities in the chance encounters of trillions of molecules” (CP 6:23; italics added).

[page 63]

explained in good manner, it remains a striking fact that natural systems are — as they are actually found in nature, not as they may be reductively described in the classroom or textbook — are “an unruly mess,” as ecologist Peter Taylor (2005) has succinctly put it.

Yet if indeterminacy and chance are the basic properties of our world, rather than determinacy and order, such, in fact, is exactly what might be predicted.

And if so, the mystery that has to be explained is that in this swarming jumble, there are nevertheless domains where one can meaningfully talk about lawfulness. The task for natural science is thus not so much to corral the slimy and

messy diversity of life into the straightjacketed uniformity of natural law. The

task is rather to explain how ordered structures emerge out of unordered, chaotic diversity. Peirce (CP 6:12-13) writes,

Uniformities are precisely the kind of fact that need to be accounted for. That a

pitched coin should sometimes turn up heads and sometimes tails calls for no particular explanation; but if it shows heads every time, we wish to know how this

result has been brought about. Law is par excellence the thing which wants a reason. Now the only possible way of accounting for the laws of nature and the uniformity in general is to suppose them results of evolution. This supposes them not to

be absolute, not to be obeyed precisely. It makes an element of indeterminacy, spontaneity, or absolute chance in nature (italics added).

The italicized sentence — Law is par excellence the thing which wants a reason — is the key to Peirce’s critique of natural science. He asks us to consider why natural science is not interested in the most central question: How is it that there can be natural law in the world at all? It is precisely in his quest for the answer to this question that Peirce comes to formulate his admittedly provocatively titled law of mind as the most general (and even as the only possible) source for the emergence of lawfulness. In his presentation of this “law” Peirce used a terminology that is suitable for provoking all alarm bells to ring in the mind of a modern scientific reader. For, read through contemporary lenses, the implicit anthropomorphism in the Peircean ascription of feelings or habits to natural systems will shock many who are accustomed to an absolutely rigid wall between humanity and freedom on one side, and nature and necessity on the other side. But it is exactly this dichotomy that Peirce would have us transcend in his deliberately provocative use of terms. When Peirce says that nature possesses mind, it is not a cheap anthropomorphism, for Peirce’s idea of mind is not linked to the human mind. Rather he sees the human mind as a special instantiation of a general principle in the universe, the law of mind: “The psychologists say that consciousness is the essential attribute of mind; and that purpose is only a special modification. I hold that purpose, or rather, final causation, of which purpose is the conscious modification, is the essential subject of psychologists’ own

[page 64]

studies; and that consciousness is a special, and not a universal, accompaniment of mind” (Peirce 1902; CP 7:366, italics added). Peirce’s law of mind, his cosmogonic philosophy, is described as follows: “In the beginning — infinitely remote — there was a chaos of unpersonalized feeling, which being without connection or regularity would properly be without existence. This feeling, sporting here and there in pure arbitrariness, would have started the germ of a generalizing tendency. Its other sportings would be evanescent, but this would have a growing virtue. Thus, the tendency to habit would be started; and from this, with the other principles of evolution, all the regularities of the universe would be evolved” (CP 6:33). Thus, Peirce sees natural laws as habits that emerge from prior — and then serve to structure subsequent — interactions in nature. These habits then self-reinforce and can ultimately freeze into more or less fixed patterns, a process that will gradually broaden the domain of necessity and natural law. And Peirce notes that, seen from the standpoint of semiotics, such habits can be considered to be interpretants, and here we see how the determination of final causation lies at the root of Peircean philosophy:

By thus admitting pure spontaneity of life as a character of the universe, acting always and everywhere, though restrained within narrow bounds by law, producing infinitesimal departures from law continually, and great ones with infinite infrequency, I account for all the variety and diversity of the universe, in the only sense in which the really sui generis and new can be said to be accounted for.... At the same time, by thus loosening the bond of necessity, it gives room for the influence of another kind of causation, such as seems to be [also] operative in the mind, in

the formation of associations, and enables us to understand how the uniformity of

nature could have been brought about (CP 6:59-60).

This other kind of causality alluded to by Peirce is exactly what I have suggested we call semiotic causality, i.e., bringing about things under guidance of interpretation in a local context (Hoffmeyer 2007). Semiotic causality cannot be reduced to efficient causality but, on the contrary, is dependent upon the workings of efficient causality, since interpretation, even in its most primitive modes, is of no need if not followed by habit formation, or, in other words, by anticipatory action — and action unquestionably depends on efficient causality. Semiotic causality thus gives direction to efficient causality, while efficient causality gives power to semiotic causality. Their reciprocal relation is one of interdependence, not one of exclusion.

But the exclusion of semiotic causality as an explanatory tool is exactly what the traditional scientific ontology induces in the scientist. The discussion in this chapter has served to clear the passage for the workings of this other kind of causality to be explored. By undermining the belief in natural selection as a

[page 65]

sufficient explanation for the existence of agency and functionality in the world, we have observed the necessity to consider the more deeply buried directedness of our universe as stated by an ontological reading of the second law of thermodynamics. We have shown then, that the banishment of final causation from the accepted ontology of science is not a necessary consequence of physical knowledge such as we have it, but is derived rather from old ideological bindings of science such as the past wars between science and church.

Peirce’s definition of sign, writes the German semiotician Helmuth Pape, actually constitutes a general description of the inner structure of final causality. Pape (1993) elucidates, “There cannot be a sign process without there being a final cause involved in it” (cited in Santaella-Braga, 1999). In the biological world, certainly, signs incite the generation of interpretants in the form of actions which are future-oriented, inasmuch as living beings always seek signs for survival and for reproduction. That organisms react to signs necessarily implies that these signs are meaningful, and that they are directed toward latent activities, whether now or later. Even a historian doesn’t study his history for history's sake, but because he hopes that it can help him to earn money, to build a career, or perhaps even to become wiser about the world.

Firstness, Secondness, and Thirdness

At the same time that semiotics always involves finality, it necessarily also makes use of ordinary efficient causality. To more precisely define this relationship, we must look more closely at Peirce’s idea that the world contains three and only three fundamental categories of phenomena, which he laconically called Firstness, Secondness, and Thirdness. This categorical system is deeply original and can be seen as a realistic turning right-side up of the human-centric Kantian categorical system. For while Kant’s classification is based upon the formal characteristics of human thought, Peirce’s classifications analogically rediscover natural categories and their cognizable patterns.

Most profoundly, Peirce’s realism is thus based on an evolutionary intuition: “Thus it is that, our minds having been formed under the influence of phenomena governed by the laws of mechanics, certain conceptions entering into those laws become implanted in our minds, so that we can readily guess what the laws are. Without such a natural prompting, having to search blindfold for a law which would suit the phenomena, our chance of finding it would be as one to infinity” (Peirce 1955, 317).

This, of course, does not mean that there is any simple isomorphism between our scientific theories and that part of reality that they seek to describe. Rather, Peirce was a conceptual realist — but not in the kind of naive way that is so often

[page 66]

seen in natural science circles in the form of an unlettered arrogance about philosophical “speculation.” About truth, Peirce (CP 5:565) writes this: “Truth is that concordance of an abstract statement with the ideal limit towards which endless investigation would tend to bring scientific belief, which concordance the abstract statement may possess by virtue of the confession of its inaccuracy and one-sidedness, and this confession is an essential ingredient of truth.” In keeping with this pragmatic criterion of truth, Peirce’s idea of realism consists in the claim that ideas shall be known by their consequences (but not just consequences as they are judged here and now, but such as the common efforts of the scientific community will, with time, come to approach closer and closer).”* In this way, neither individuals nor scientists should attempt to substantiate ideas in any other way than by an evaluation of their effects: “In order to ascertain the meaning of an intellectual conception one should consider what practical consequences might conceivably result by necessity from the truth of that conception; and the sum of these consequences will constitute the entire meaning of the conception” (Peirce 1905; CP 5:9)

Accordingly, Peirce (1955, 322-23) describes the three fundamental categories in his system in the following way: First is the conception of being or existing independent of anything else. Second

is the conception of being relative to, the conception of reaction with, something

else. Third is the conception of mediation whereby a first and a second are brought

into relation. To illustrate these ideas, I will show how they enter into those we

have been considering. The origin of things, considered not as leading to anything,

but in itself, contains the idea of First, the end of things that of second, the process mediating between them that of Third.... In psychology feeling is First, sense

of reaction is Second, general conception Third, or mediation. In biology, the idea

of arbitrary sporting is First, heredity is Second, the process whereby the accidental characters become fixed is Third. Chance is First, law is Second, the tendency to form habits is Third. Mind is First, matter is Second, evolution is Third.

Relations belonging to the category of Firstness are generally characterized as

including potentialities — possibilities, simple and uncompounded (for could they be broken into components, they would already be relations of Secondness) (Dinesen and Stjernfelt 1994, 14). In perception, for example, Firstness thus also denotes pure quality, such as redness or the stench of rotten cabbage — provided that these expressions are not understood as being also attached to a concrete existence.

23 The “deplorable degeneration” of the pragmatist’s truth criterion to a sort of “practical

validity criterion as judged in the here and now” caused Peirce to later insist upon distinguishing his own ideas from James's and Dewey’s pragmatism by re-christening his own conception pragmaticism.

[page 67]

Relations of Secondness manifest as separateness, rupture, opposition, manifestation, existence, and quantity, and appear as soon as quality is imposed

upon, or adheres to, something else. “Secondness encompasses Firstness and can

be said to be its realization, which is a ‘brute fact,’ and where the First is only the

possible, the Second is the necessary,” write Dinesen and Stjernfelt (1994, 15). Relations of Thirdness occur in and with the establishment of a connection between the universe of possibilities that is Firstness and the plethora of events that is Secondness. Thus, relationships of Thirdness emerge as habits, whereby quality and quantity are themselves put together in a relationship. Cultural, linguistic, and biological habits are all thus relationships of Thirdness. The significance of these reflections for our discussion of causality follows from the recognition that actions or processes can either play out within relations of Secondness or within relations of Thirdness (but not, however, within relations of Firstness, which are as yet potentialities). The processes that take place at the level of Secondness are dyadic and constrained, and these are the types of processes that are controlled by efficient causality. Peirce characterized such actions as “brute, unintelligent, and unconcerned with

the result” (CP 6:332). As an instance of mere Secondness, a dyad is a discontinuous fact occurring “here and now,’ writes Santaella-Braga: “there is

nothing general about it. As an efficient causation, it is brute force or compulsion, an effective action, blind, nonrational, singular in occasion, just a

factual compulsion and the hic et nunc of an event” (Santaella-Braga 1999, 501). Consequently, one should not confuse efficient causality with deterministic causality, which presupposes a lawfulness that is not yet present on the

level of brute Secondness.

When we speak about lawful processes, we are already dealing with phenomena at the level of Thirdness, and it is only on this level of relations that we

will, according to Peirce, encounter the organizational principles of final causation. But it must be remembered that even this, for Peirce, does not entail

any sort of fixed and unchanging determinism — since such natural law itself

arises only within the processes of evolution, and as such is necessarily incomplete. The oft-conflated relationship between final and efficient causality in contemporary science now becomes distinguishable and clear: Efficient causality is

in effect the raw power that final causality needs to impose itself upon events.

Lucia Santaella-Braga (1999, 502), paraphrasing Peirce, explains it this way:

A law is something general and for that reason it is not a force. “For force is compulsion; and compulsion is hic et nunc. It is either that or it is no compulsion. Law, without force to carry it out, would be a court without a sheriff; and all its dicta would be vaporings.” Thus the relation of law, as a cause, to the action of cause, as its effect, is final, or ideal, causation, not efficient causation (CP 1:213).... Final causation without efficient causation is helpless, but efficient without final is worse than

[page 68]

helpless “by far, it is mere chaos; and chaos is not even so much as chaos, without final causation; it is blank nothing” (CP 1:200). Semiosis, sign action, is necessarily embedded in sensory material processes, and therefore has both a dynamic side, which allows a process of communications to take place, and a complementary logical, or mediating, side. The first of these sides stands under the force of efficient causality, and the second expresses the controlling agency of final causation. Natural and medical science’s systematic reduction of the domain of Thirdness to the pure and simple indexicality or Secondness — as it is subject to the coercive raw power of efficient causation — unquestionably has won many victories for these sciences. But uncountable numbers of plants, animals, and humans have had to pay the price for the failed visions of these sciences, that for centuries saw it as the highest wisdom to treat all living beings as asemiotic devices. Lately, and in an attempt to counter the inherent unworkability of this short-sightedness, science has added the information metaphor to its theoretical repertoire. But as we have seen throughout this chapter, since even the information metaphor, whenever it is operationalized, is again consistently deprived of every trace of the dimensionality of the embodied relations of Thirdness that characterize living organisms, I believe that in the end this futile metaphor will only serve to pull the wool over the eyes of ourselves and others.

24 The term agency is being used here as a general concept (see chapter 2, note 22), for I explicitly reject the common contention of the humanistic tradition, since Brentano, that humans alone are privileged with regard to the possession of intentionality and agency. At most, they may be unique only insofar as they are able to use the tools of symbolic reference to be able to conceptualize this fact (see Deacon 1997).

25 It is necessary here to specify that a law, a natural law, clearly possesses relations of Thirdness

in terms of Peirce’s categories, but that Peirce was an implacable critic of modern science’s way of viewing natural laws as purely mechanical laws whose essence is to be absolutely unbreakable, or a “grand principle of causation which is generally held to be the most certain of all truths” (CP 6:68). Santaella-Braga elaborates on this: “In clear opposition to this deterministic notion of causation based on a conception of law as absolute, Peirce conceived of law as a living power founded on a peculiar conception of habit giving room for chance, growth, and evolution” (Santaella-Braga 1999, 505). In Peirce’s thought, natural laws belong to the category of Thirdness, but it is precisely this dimension of natural law that was cut from modern science’s concept of a law per se.
