[page 111]

5 The Semiotics of Heredity

The Logic of Mortality

Because living systems are mortal, they cannot therefore persist in the same way as rocks or celestial bodies persist — e.g., by internal cohesion or chemical resistance enabling them to withstand the unending flow of physical change. Yet even rocks and celestial bodies will disappear eventually — and when they do, that is definitively the end for those systems as such. Living systems, on the other hand, have found a way to continually persist — not as the autonomous physical entities that are living at any one moment, of course — but as templates that can be used to recursively and adaptively re-create the system. These DNA templates function as messages that are read and reread over time, and are lodged within small capsules (such as eggs), each of which contains a fully capable set of interpretive tools that allows them to retrieve the hidden message coordinating the ontogenetic process, resulting in the birth of a new creature of the same kind. The innermost principle of heredity is thus semiotic survival — survival via a digital description coupled with an analog (or time-space continuous) set of functionally interpretive tools.

A big advantage of this kind of persistence (relative to that of rocks or celestial bodies) is its flexibility and adaptive capacity. The flip side of the coin is that each single living entity must die; survival concerns the living system as type not as token. Yet even as a type, such systems may not continuously survive in the long run, since each one always runs the risk of becoming extinct or, suffering the form of death characteristic to flexibility — i.e., irreversible change.

The proviso that living systems must necessarily die, however, is fortunate when seen in the light of organic renewal and adaptation. And because organisms, such as the reader and myself, depend on the uninterrupted functioning of a subtle interplay of some fifty trillion cells, it is obvious from a biochemical point of view that such finely coordinated systems must necessarily be fragile.

According to evolutionary biologist Stanley Salthe (1993), there is also a more fundamental infodynamic necessity that dictates the death of living systems. Infodynamics is the designation for a set of ideas that integrate thermodynamics and information theory in the attempt to describe biological evolution

[page 112]

in light of the known physical dynamics of the universe's development (Brooks and Wiley 1986-88; Goodwin 1989; Weber et al. 1989; Salthe 1993; Weber 1998b). The essence of infodynamic theory, as it has been developed by Dan Brooks and Ed Wiley, is that the irreversible expansion of the universe involves an ongoing generation of new systems — in far-from-equilibrium states — that consequently possess the potential for self-organization.

For Salthe, this core insight is closely linked to Peirce’s notion that nature tends to reinforce habits (CP 7:15). The self-organizing tendency that infodynamics sees in nature implies a continuous establishment of new informational constraints at the same time that the space of possibilities tends to become steadily diminished due to the growing sum of such constraints.’ In the beginning we have vagueness and flexibility, but gradually habits (decreasing the possibilities of what may happen next) grow denser as the system becomes more and more rigid and ultimately dies. Salthe sees the universe as emerging through an endless succession of developmental processes where the fundamental theme is the same: a movement from immaturity through maturity to senescence and death — which then becomes the substrate for new beginnings. This phasic scheme plays out on all levels of complexity, that is to say, not just for individuals, but also for ecosystems and species, families, and even higher taxonomic categories.

As far as the semiotics of heredity is concerned, however, Salthe’s very generalized perspective points to a potential inconsistency — for the finely elaborated dynamics of heredity that one finds at the level of individuals does not seem to be paralleled in other types of dissipative systems. A digital code that can bring back, in a sense, no-longer-existing system states, is a very special phenomenon that is not found outside of the life sphere — and even there, in organic evolution, such digital codes have been “invented” only rarely. A dissipative system such as, say, a tornado may perhaps be said to exhibit some kind of self-reference, but here, as in other nonliving systems, the self-referential activity is not based on digital codifications (Hoffmeyer 1998a) — and thus tornados always die out without leaving offspring capable of exhibiting individualized kinship relations.

Seen as a dynamic mechanism, code-duality is the essential link that connects individual and population. Reproduction implies that in each generation, the interplay of analog-coded phenotypes in the population's ecological space leads to the formation of cohorts of digitally coded genotypes (or kimfloks, 1 Milan Kundera paints a nice picture of this relationship in The Unbearable Lightness of Being, when he compares life to a symphony. In the beginning the symphony is wide open, so that many thematic strands still can be taken up and woven in, however, as the composition proceeds through stages, the composer becomes more and more bound to choices already made, By the end of the symphony’s last movement, freedom has become fairly limited.

[page 113]

a somewhat specialized term that I will explain below). Each of these then becomes recoded or “back-translated” into phenotypes (phenotypic codes) via the ontogenetic process. The mechanism behind these perpetual codings and recodings is the subject matter of the present chapter. Here I shall claim that these processes of coding and recoding do indeed reflect a general infodynamic tendency in our world — but also that the “invention” of the digital code instituted a whole new creative dynamic which is unique for life and cannot be described in the generalizing terminology of currently formulated infodynamic theory.

Rather, events in code-dual systems are individualized to an extent that makes analysis based on quantitative measures (such as averages or concentrations) inadequate. And because of the incredible combinatorial power of digital coding systems, organic evolution emerges as an open, semiotic, and (in a deep sense) unpredictable system. This openness cannot be captured in the infodynamic description that instead operates on the idea of inherent attractors in our universe as the ultimate directional powers behind the evolutionary process.

To understand evolution, I shall claim, requires a biosemiotic conceptual frame.

Acetabularia acetabulum

The unicellular algae Acetabularia acetabulum is an absolutely singular creature. Biologist Brian Goodwin (1995) spends almost a whole chapter discussing this animal in his book on the principles of morphogenesis in biological systems, How the Leopard Changed Its Spots, and as can be seen in Figure 5.1 this unicellular organism has a life cycle that brings it through a sequence of distinctive forms. The full-grown alga is three-to-five centimeters long and its bottom consists of a root-like structure (called the rhizoid) by which it attaches itself to rocks in shallow, subtropical waters. This rhizoid is the zone of the cell where the nucleus, and thus the genome, is localized. Through an outgrowth from this area, a stalk is formed, and at the other end of this stalk, there is a graceful cap with a diameter of about one-and-a-half centimeters. An analysis of this gigantic cell throws an interesting light upon the relation between genes and cellular structure.

If an experimenter makes a cut through in the middle of this stalk, the lower part (with the genome) will regenerate a new cap identical to the old one — and it will continue to do so, even if the experiment is repeated many times. The upper part, on the contrary, will only live for a few weeks longer and will then die. This result corresponds well to conventional wisdom, since the information about morphogenesis is thought to reside exclusively in

[page 114]

the digital code of the genome. If, however, the algae is cut through in three parts — rhizoid, stalk, and cap — the cap and the rhizoid will again behave as already described, but now the stalk exhibits a capacity to regenerate a new cap. Still, under these conditions, the stalk cannot repeat this performance and will also die after some time.

The conclusion to be drawn from this experiment is clear enough. The morphogenetic process is not the direct product of the genes alone, since, in the stalk, it continues to go on without the genes. The stalk, on the other hand, is dependent on gene products (proteins) that can only be produced when a nucleus is present (i.e., only in the rhizoid). When the stalk has used up its store of protein resources for the morphogenetic process, this process comes to a standstill. The digital code, thus, is necessary for the continuation of life, because it is needed for the formation of new proteins — but the analog codes in the cytoplasm of the stalk are responsible for the concrete execution of morphogenesis.

As is depicted in Figure 5.1, the life cycle of Acetabularia begins with the fusion of two isogametes thus named because they are all of the same size and structure (iso=alike, gamete=germ), contrary to the relatively tiny spermatozoa's and huge egg cells found in species with sexual differentiation. The product of this fusion is called a zygote, and when this zygote has been formed, it will slowly sink to the bottom where, thanks to a gluey substance excreted right

Figure 5.1 The life cycle of Acetabularia acetabulum showing the main stages of development from zygote formation through stalk growth to the formation of the mature form, followed by cyst formation and release of isogametes as the cycle starts again (from Goodwin 1994, 75, with permission).

[page 115]

after fertilization, it will attach itself to whatever rock it happens to land upon. From the bottom of the otherwise symmetrical zygote is now formed a little outgrowth destined to become the rhizoid zone, and from the opposite end the stalk will appear. The difference in light between the two ends of the zygote is the releasing factor for this differentiation process. Goodwin explains, “There is something about the internal dynamic organization of an egg that makes spherical symmetry unstable, so that any perturbation, an internal fluctuation of ions, say, or an external stimulus, will get it started. What light and the other stimuli do is influence where the axis will appear, but it is not the cause of axis formation itself. It is just a trigger that initiates something that is poised and ready to go, like a sprinter at the start of a race” (ibid., 41).

The self-organizing semiotics of the cytoplasmic structure is thus in control of the morphogenetic process right from the earliest beginnings of new life. The protein specifying resources of the genome are needed for this process to succeed, but considered, as it so often is, as a self-sufficient blueprint for ontogenesis, something very essential is missing. Digitally coded descriptions are, as already stated, only partial: they support the journey of the zygote through its life cycle in much the same way a musical score supports the work of a symphony orchestra. In both cases, the digital codifications must be there, but they are not themselves in charge of events (and, in fact, can themselves do nothing at all, as they are both inanimate). Certainly, they do not specify their own interpretation in the real world of spatio-temporal continuity. This is where living, analog codifications must take over, (A noteworthy difference to the orchestra metaphor, it should be pointed out, is that — unlike the performance of a symphony orchestra— the ontogenetic process doesn’t need a centralized conductor. The bodily semiotics of cellular interaction is in this regard considerably more self-sufficient than the semiotics playing out among musicians in an orchestra.)

The Semiotics of Reproduction

It is this tight interdependence of the digital and the analog that the geno-centric perspective systematically overlooks. Reproduction does lead to changes in the gene pools of populations — but these changes do not, as such, tell us much about what goes on at the locus where organisms actually live and die. Here, we find that the concrete result of reproduction is, as we saw, the formation of new cohorts of genomes, each of which is embedded in the nucleus of an actual zygote. It was just these cohorts that Claus Emmeche and I tried to make visible by giving them a designation of their own, kimflok — from the Danish, kim = germ, flok = crowd (Hoffmeyer and Emmeche 1991). The result of reproduction, as seen in the light of evolution, is simply the formation of

[page 116]

ever new unique kimfloks — for the term kimflok both includes the concept of life cycle at the population level, and constitutes the basic temporal unit of a lineage (the generation).’ And it is at this level that the process that is retroactively called natural selection takes place — for it is not nature as an abstract entity that selects.

Darwin was careful to underscore the fact that that natural selection was not similar to artificial selection as known from breeding stations, for natural selection is a selection without a selector. Nature has no overseeing breeder. ‘The very expression,

natural selection, thus contains a semantic contradiction that may well be the main

source for the continued confusion that Darwinism has occasioned — inside as well

as outside of biology. On one hand, science vehemently maintains a conception of

nature that makes it nearly unthinkable that anything like value could possibly be a

part of it, And then, on the other hand, scientists easily talk about this odd concept,

natural selection. But how could one (i.¢., the presumed subject of the term, nature) select without somehow basing this selection on criteria of one sort or other, and thus on some underlying system of value? Is it possible that the extreme metaphoric strength of the designation natural selection is due to its successful concealment of this blatant semantic contradiction — one which in our unconscious imagination

(and in our emotional fundament) endows the concept with causal and volitional

capabilities that, as a matter of fact, we perfectly well know that it does not possess?

Since most of us in biosemiotics do not share the ordinary scientific reluctance to deal with the eventual occurrence of value as a genuine relation in the workings of the natural world, we don’t have any troubles in placing the value where it belongs, which is at the level of the code-dual system, the lineage. It is the lineage — seen as a historical and transgenerational subject® — that acts as the selective agent via its overall reproductive patterns. By virtue of the genetic texts carried forward by its individual members (i.e., the kimflok) the lineage is maintaining — and continuously updating — a selective memory of its past that in most cases will be a suitable tool for dealing with the future.

To say this differently, the lineage’s present is evaluated relative to an inter-

nal standard based on past successes — and the logical structure of such a process is very much like the logical structure of the human act of selection. When

2 The word lineage here is used in the conventional sense of a succession of ancestors and descendants, parents and offspring.

3 Populations are, contrary to lineages, coterminous with the concrete individuals living here and now. The lineage is a historical subject and has a kind of collective agency as such, since its destiny as a temporal integrative structure is continuously influenced by the collectivity of interactions of its single units with their environments — much in the same way that multicellular organisms are integrative structures interacting with their surroundings via the activity of individual cells.

[page 117]

a teacher, for example, selects the boys for the class football team, he naturally bases his selection upon a set of values that reflects his expectations of how to optimize the chances of winning matches. The present (the set of pupils at hand) is evaluated relative to the past, as reflected in the teacher's previous experiences coaching football games. So if we accept the metaphor about selection in nature, the lineage (i.e., the spatio-temporal continuum of changing kimfloks) must be the entity occupying the logical position of the selector in the process.

The activity of the kimflok in its dealings with a variety of conditions will be reflected in the overall outcome of reproduction and, thereby in the genotype pattern of the next kimflok. The lineage thus, by way of its kimfloks, incessantly scrutinizes the ecosemiotic niche conditions and through this activity automatically brings about the formation of new interpretants in the form of a concrete reproductive pattern as manifested by the next generation's kimflok. Seen in this way, it turns out that natural selection is at heart a semiotic process, whereby single organisms — both enabled and constrained as they are in their activity by their belonging to the overarching project of the lineage — act as semiotically competent agents in the survival game of the code-dual system.

Seen in this light, it follows that speciation (the processes whereby new species come into existence) does not necessarily have to be a gradual process whereby new hereditary material (e.g., mutations) slowly accumulate in the gene pool of a population. It might as well, or perhaps even more likely, occur via the establishment of new intra-specific interpretive patterns — as I will be discussing in Chapter 6.

In our discussion so far, however, we have not focused on cases of asexual reproduction such as budding, root suckers, or offshoots. But even in species with widespread vegetative reproduction, there is most often some point in the life cycle where sexual reproduction does take place. Apparently, sexual reproduction results in a considerably more extended reshuffling of the genetic material inside the population. And from a semiotic point of view, sexual reproduction is particularly interesting because a variety of subtle semiotic interaction patterns have evolved to make sure that relevant mating partners (or their sex cells) are recognized and attracted while less relevant mating partners are ignored or rejected.

This is the case, for example, in two species of tree-living crickets with closely overlapping habitats in the eastern United States: Oecanthus quadripunctatus and Oecanthus nigricornis. In general, male crickets attract females by the sounds of the “songs” that they create while rubbing their specialized forewings against each other, producing series of fast pulses that endure for several minutes at a time. Yet the members of these two species reproduce at the same time of the year. It is therefore important that females do not confuse the songs of their own males with the songs of males from the other species. The key to this

[page 118]

problem turned out to be pulse rate; the songs of O. nigricornis had a much higher pulse rate than the songs of O. quadripunctatus. The pulse rate is augmented in both species when temperatures are rising, but this doesn’t bother the females — rather, they merely shift their preferences accordingly, and now are safely attracted to even faster pulse rates (relative to one another) than before (McFarland 1987, 339-60).

It is alpha and omega for the efficiency of sexual reproduction that the two sexes find each other and mate at the right time, and the literature is actually bulging with descriptions of intricate semiotic mechanisms to assure this. Let me here just mention the surprising case of cooing in ring doves of the species Streptopelia risoria (Cheng 1992) that we have elsewhere described as follows:

Before a female ring dove lays her eggs, she and her mate go through a series of courtship displays. As courtship proceeds, hormonal changes in the female trigger the growth of follicles in her ovaries, each of which eventually bursts to release an egg. Recent experiments have shown that if a female dove is operationally hindered in making the so-called “nest coo,” she will not be able to ovulate, despite enthusiastic courting by males. In control experiments, tape recordings of nest coos were played to females with no males present. Now follicles began to grow. The conclusion is simple: Female doves that coo during courtship are not (only) cooing at the male — they are cooing at their own ovaries, to trigger the release of eggs.

One can only guess, of course, how such a strange mechanism has actually evolved. But at least it seems to indicate, that the set of habits involved in courtship and thus the cooing was in fact more safely correlated with the timing of mating, than any simple endogenous release system would have been. The obvious although speculative explanation is that the cooing behavior is a measure of the state of the relation between two birds, which is superior to a simple measure of the state of the female organism itself (Hoffmeyer 1998c).

The ring dove example is only one of probably millions, but it highlights how the subtlety of synchronizations and chemical communication that must be reciprocally tuned between organisms involved in social behavior is stunning — yet scientists at present are only scratching the surface of this new area of biosemiotic study.

Epigenetic Heredity

It is a strangely overlooked fact that genes are not the only important hereditary contribution from one generation to the next. Environmental conditions and the social heritability of learned behaviors often prove to be just as vital hereditary factors, insofar as the very viability of the offspring will often depend critically on both the parental choice of breeding place and parental care in general. But there

[page 119]

is also another kind of heredity that is directly connected to reproduction and yet is not caused by genes. This kind of heredity is called epigenetic heredity.

One of the first to track this kind of heredity was the American biologist Tracey Morton Sonneborn (1905-81), who for most of his life worked on the little unicellular protozoa Paramecium (Figure 5.2). In Paramecium, reproduction is mostly vegetative: cells simply divide into two daughter cells. At intervals, however, Paramecium will enter a process called conjugation, where two Paramecium cells create a cytoplasmic bridge between them. They then use this bridge for an exchange of haploid (half chromosome) micronuclei — a process that formally corresponds to sexual reproduction.

Sonneborn noticed that some Paramecium strains, which he dubbed killers, produced a toxic compound that might kill other Paramecium strains, and, through breeding experiments, he showed that the competence to produce this toxic compound was dependent on genes in the cell’s nucleus. But at the same time, his experiments showed that a cytoplasmic element called kappa was involved. This cytoplasmic element had the effect of making the killer strains resistant to their own toxic compound. When kappa was lost from the cells, those Paramecium strains would then become sensitive to the toxic compound. Many years later, it was learned that kappa was, in reality, a symbiotic bacterium capable of sustaining life inside the cytoplasm of Paramecium (Preer 1996).

This phenomenon is called endosymbiosis and occurs in many species. In fact, all modern cells, called eukaryotic cells, are endosymbionts — since it has been shown that important cellular organelles like mitochondria and chloroplasts (and possibly several others) are all but certainly descendants from once free-living bacteria that have now lost the ability to survive and reproduce outside of a eukaryotic cell (Margulis 1970).

The inheritance of cytoplasmic endosymbionts may at first seem to be a somewhat unusual kind of cytoplasmic inheritance, yet it may possibly be quite widespread, Sonneborn, certainly, showed genuine cases of cytoplasmic inheritance in Paramecium, and his discovery is worth considering in detail here.

Figure 5.2 Paramecium. The surface is covered with rows of cilia (from Goodwin 1994, 7, with permission).

[page 120]

As can be seen in Figure 5.2, the surface of Paramecium is covered by cilia — hair-like protrusions that can move around like small whips. There are hundreds of these cilia sitting in long rows from the front to the back of the organism, and thanks to the coordinated movement of all these cilia, the Paramecium can move freely around in the water. Eventually, Sonneborn discovered that one of his Paramecia had an unusual stripe that, upon closer scrutiny, turned out to be caused by an inversion of one of the rows of cilia. Sonneborn then showed that this new trait (dubbed melon stripe) was heritable.

The really interesting discovery, however, came when he tried to see what would happen if he operationally turned around one of the rows of cilia in a normal Paramecium. Surprisingly, he found that in this case the new trait was inherited by daughter cells, even though here the genes were untouched by the intervention. What happens in this case is that when a Paramecium is extending its surface structure in preparation for the division, it uses the already existing structure as a template. New molecular units are assembled using the model of the old surface, so that the inverted row of cilia will automatically be copied to the daughter cells. So here again we find, as we did in the above-mentioned case of Acetabularia, that the concrete 3-D morphogenetic processes are not exclusively predetermined by the genome, but are controlled equally (if not more so) by extragenetic factors in the cytoplasm or membrane structures.

This should not surprise us, really, as the cells in a multicellular organism are often very different from one another and only a very limited fraction of the genes is actually transcribed by any one of them, Early on in embryogenesis, almost all cells lose their totipotentiality — i.e., their potential to become virtually any kind of cell at all. A determination (more properly, a series of determinations) takes place whereby the cells, bit by bit, become more and more specialized with each division, so that after a certain point in time, a given cell can no longer become, say, a liver cell, but only a nerve cell. Sophisticated mechanisms exist to make sure that once such a determination event has occurred, it will be conserved in that cell line.* Thus, the Italian embryologist Marcel Barbieri has observed that in addition to the genetic DNA memory, there also exists an epigenetic cell memory (Barbieri 2001, 109).

The mechanisms that bring about this stepwise epigenetic cell memory are not well-known, but they depend, among other things, on enzymatic modifications of the chromatin — i.e., the complex of proteins and DNA whereby the DNA double helix is fixed into a more or less compact 3-D superstructure. DNA sequences that end up inside this compact superstructure are quite inaccessible to the enzyme complexes involved in transcription. Thus, according

4 A cell line consists of any given cell and all the daughter cells that ever derive from it.

[page 121]

to the current view, genes that are not supposed to be transcribed in a given cell line may perhaps be “put away” — coiled into those compact regions of the DNA (see Figure 5.3).

The classic example of such chromatin marking is what is called parental imprinting, whereby one of the two X chromosomes is permanently inactivated in this way. Specifically, mammalian females are born with two copies of the X chromosome, one inherited from the father and the other from the mother, but one of them — either the father’s or the mother’s — is always inactivated right from the beginning by chromatin marking. This inactivation is then passed on to the daughter cells so that in the end, the X chromosomes of all the cells in the body will be of either maternal or paternal origin.

In addition to chromatin marking, there also occurs a widespread methylation of the DNA —an enzymatic process whereby a methyl group (CH,) is attached to specific “letters” (bases) in the DNA. This methylation seems to be an essential mechanism for the tissue-specific inactivation of distinct genes throughout embryogenesis — and thus for the determination process whereby different cell lines in the growing embryo end up as different types of tissue. How cells manage to re-methylate newly formed chromosomes at the exact right positions after each cell division is not known. Yet, so they do.

Figure 5.3 Heterochromatin is the designation for inactive regions (nontranscribed regions) of the DNA that are coiled up into a compact structure (modified from Solomon, Berg and Martin 1999, 301).

[page 122]

It was long believed that epigenetic inheritance systems only applied to somatic cells, and that the meiotic division leading to the formation of gametes (haploid sex cells) would wipe the slate clean (i.e., remove methylations and chromatin markers). But increasingly this fine picture is starting to crack. At least in plants, chromatin markings may sometimes survive meiotic purification to influence the expression pattern of the genes in the next generation — a phenomenon called paramutation (Hollick, Dorweiler, and Chandler 1997; Sternberg 2000).

From a theoretical point of view, it might be noted that what was not too long ago characterized as the self-replicating and deterministic entity of the genome has increasingly become understood to be a changeable and flexible point in an ongoing process. Yet, after all, what should have hindered nature in profiting from the obvious possibility for evolutionary innovation that springs from chromatin reconfigurations’ vast potential for inheritance?

Chromatin reconfigurations exhibit an interesting case of analog coding that supersedes or builds upon a prior digital codification. The analog coding of the DNA superstructure doesn’t destroy the underlying digital coded specifications. Rather, it (in effect) plays with them, tentatively organizing them into new patterns of decipherment. And only time and investigation will show how far such mechanisms have been realized in living systems.

The Genome

The genome, i.e., the totality of genetic hereditary material in a cell of a given organism, is an impressive piece of chemistry. In eukaryote cells, the genome is divided into a number of distinct units (chromosomes) each of which is constituted by a linear DNA molecule (a double helix) looped around spherical complexes of protein units (with a diameter of eleven nanometers) called nucleosomes. Certain domains of the helix (the heterochromatin) are packed into an even denser hypercoil structure with a diameter of thirty nanometers (for comparison, the diameter of the DNA helix itself is only two nanometers). Yet, in spite of the compact folding, it remains fairly astonishing that approximately three meters of DNA can be packed into a cellular nucleus with an average radius of no more than one one-hundredth of a millimeter.

Only a minor part — some 5 percent — of the genome is occupied by actual genes in the form of DNA sequences that will eventually be transcribed into proteins, and it is far from clear what the rest of the DNA is good for. Yet as we have already seen, there are some regulatory potentialities connected to the macrostructure of chromatin which might contribute to the need for an abundance of DNA. Perhaps there might also be unknown tasks of DNA connected

[page 123]

to cellular division. Furthermore, some nongenetic areas of the DNA are taken up by pseudogenes that have interesting potentials for the evolutionary process, as we shall see later in this chapter. In any event, research on DNA sequences and structure proceeds extremely rapidly in these years, and answers to such questions may soon be forthcoming.

What has been learned recently is germane to our discussion at hand, for biochemists have been surprised to find that there is very little difference among taxonomic groups concerning the total amount of DNA per cell. Apart from bacteria (which are prokaryotic cells), and yeast and fungi (that clearly have less DNA), there is no systematic increase in the amount of DNA per cell to be found amongst the other main groups of living systems. A toad, for example, has more DNA than a human. And even though the average content of DNA in insects is lower than it is in mammals, it is easy to find insects that have much more of “the glorified compound” than we have ourselves. One could perhaps think that this apparent disproportion might be due to the low percentage of protein-coding DNA, but as we shall see, the numbers don’t get much better if we shift to a comparison of the content of the true genes’ across the groups.

Considered as a digital code, DNA consists, as is now well known, of sequences of four nucleotide bases, conveniently abbreviated to A, T, G, and C. Thanks to the base pairing mechanism, whereby A and T, and G and C, respectively, are paired with each other through weak forces (hydrogen bonds), one may — at least in principle — explain how new strings of DNA or RNA can be formed as replicas of the already existing strings. (It should be noticed, however, that DNA molecules, when seen from the standpoint of biochemistry, consist of electrically loaded three-dimensional atomic shapes, rather than just of sequences.)

When considered at this level, the difficulties connected to explaining how a gene may be transcribed to RNA and later translated to protein are conspicuous. To take just the first of these two processes, it involves, first of all, the disentangling of the DNA string from the chromatin complex it is bound to in order to allow the enzyme RNA polymerase II (which catalyzes the formation of the primary RNA transcript as a copy of the DNA) to get past the nucleosomes. The DNA helix must then be cut through at the exact place where the gene is situated and the two strings must be physically unwound from each other to keep pace with the movement of the enzyme down along the DNA strings.

The accomplishment of these tasks presupposes a precisely coordinated spatio-temporal interaction between the active surface domains of many proteins and transcription factors — as well as the precise spatio-temporal interactions

5 As we saw in Chapter 4, there is no simple definition of a gene — thus, by true genes in this context I simply refer to the biochemical genes as traditionally defined: those sequences of DNA nucleotides coding for a protein.

[page 124]

between transcription factors and the specific area of the surface of the DNA helix. Sometimes this implies a cooperative interaction between elements of the DNA molecule that may be separated from each other by up to a thousand base pairs (see Figure 5.4).

The formation of the initiation complex itself (Figure 5.4) is semiotically controlled in ways that are yet only barely understood. First and foremost, a range of extracellular signals may eventually be bound to receptors at the cell surface, and thus release an intracellularly mediated activation or inhibition of the transcription factors. In some cases, hormones can pass directly through the cell membrane and take part in the process via their bindings to transcription factors — while proteins released through transcriptive processes at other localities at the DNA molecule may inhibit or enhance the formation of the initiation complex.

The reason why I have been dragging the reader with me through the minutiae of biochemical complexity involved in the regulation of transcription has

GS Se ze > Za oy TT fee, ee in ead Ce CH 53 aa “SS TBP) oA = = ——

Figure 5.4 Initiation complex formation for a structural gene in a eukaryote cell. The DNA thread is seen to loop around a nucleosome (an aggregate of proteins) so that in one direction (towards the 3'-end) it is bound to a transcription complex consisting of the transcription enzyme polymerase II (or, POL II), and a range of different transcription factors. Among these should be mentioned the TBP (TATA-binding protein), that bind to the sequence of the DNA string called the TATA box, which defines the locus for initiation some twenty to thirty base pairs away (here indicated as a small white rectangle encircled by POL II). Thanks to the looping around the nucleosome, other sequences of the DNA string, called enhancers (ENH) — separated from the TATA box by perhaps several thousands of base pairs — are brought close to the initiation complex, which they may possibly influence through the mediation of regulatory proteins (TAFs and Act) (Modified from Mathews, van Holde and Ahern 1999, 1094).

[page 125]

been to make it clear that digital codes necessarily are extremely complex — and that their modus operandi is dependent on difficult and energy-consuming systems. Again, were it not for the fetishization of the gene as a kind of self-replicating controller (a thoroughly incorrect conception on every count, as I argued in Hoffmeyer 1996b), none of this should be surprising. Indeed, we can recognize the true dynamics of the process from our own experience with such codes. It usually takes a child approximately two years to learn the digital code of spoken language and — as observed by the neurobiologist Terrence Deacon (see Chapter 8) — this always takes place in a strongly supportive linguistic milieu including other active interpreters —in the absence of which, one might well doubt that a child could learn to master the art of linguistic reference at all.

Similarly, when the concrete spatio-temporal complexities involved in digital-analog recoding processes are considered in detail, it becomes much harder to accept the everyday jargon of genes for this or that trait in human psychology (e.g., promiscuity, alcoholism, and xenophobia). For as soon as one tries to invent concrete biochemical models to explain how a fraction of a molecule (here, DNA) could possibly be the cause of such disparate and long-distance effects, the conceptual difficulties begin piling up exponentially. Recently, the biochemist and philosopher Lenny Moss has suggested that we distinguish between two different concepts of the gene. Moss calls these concepts gene-P and gene-D — where gene-P is the ordinary phenotype-related gene concept, such as the gene for blue eyes (or for a distinct defect of the drosophila wing), while the gene-D concept refers to the gene perceived as a transcriptional unit, inside of which is contained a molecular template serving as a resource base for the production of gene products (RNA molecules or proteins), This is the gene that draws our interest from an ontogenetic point of view, as D genes are determined by their molecular sequence of nucleotide bases, but undetermined with respect to their phenotypic effects.

Now, it could happen that occasionally a P gene and a D gene may be one and the same — but such a case would turn out to be a lot rarer than many people would expect (especially given the widespread tendency to mistakenly think of D genes as P genes). For example, the gene for cystic fibrosis may appear at first glance to be a gene-P — but this gene-P would in most cases, as we now know, be related to a gene-D that describes the sequence of amino acids of one of a family of proteins that are used for trans-membrane ion channels (Moss 2001). While gene-Ds are often molecularly well defined, gene-Ps are most often postulated from very indirect evidence (e.g., purely statistical evidence) and the confusion of the two gene concepts into just one concept of the gene tends to conceal the vague status of those gene-Ps (eg., “the gay gene”) that so often appeals to the public imagination — and that thereby spreads the general misunderstanding that genetics has a much firmer grip on human psychological traits than in reality it has.

[page 126]

For almost a century now, genetics has been focused almost exclusively on the transmission aspect — i.e., the question of how the genes become transmitted and their frequencies changed down through the generations — at the expense of the

functional aspect — i.e., the question of how genes actually bring about those traits of the organism that they are claimed to cause. It is only now —now that we are finally beginning to get a clearer picture of our human genetic constitution through a number of big mapping projects like the Human Genome Project — that we are gradually becoming aware that the gene does not fill its not-too-long-ago supposed role as the ultimate (bordering on magic) explanation for biology.

Caenorhabditis elegans

In a way, the simplistic picture of genes as unambiguous determinants for phenotypic traits was already beginning to crack as work progressed in mapping the relation between genes and behavior in the little one-millimeter-long nematode Caenorhabditis elegans (usually called C. elegans, since almost nobody remembers this long name). In the mid-sixties, Sydney Brenner — one of the leading scientists behind the detection of the genetic code — selected C. elegans as a model organism for the genetic studies of behavior, on the basis that its short life cycle and small size (less than one thousand cells in total) made it an excellent candidate for genetic analysis. Brenner’s ambition was to make a complete mapping of the structure of the nervous system in this worm, and then to relate this map both to the organism's genes, as well as to its behavior. Brenner (1974, 72) optimistically put it this way: “In principle, it should be possible to dissect the genetic specification of a nervous system in much the same way as was done for biosynthetic pathways in bacteria or for bacteriophage assembly” (cited in Schaffner 1998) — and this quote may well serve as a prime example of the reductionistic credo that dominated biology in the second half of the last century. That the dynamics of the nervous system should, at least in principle, be “inscribed” in the genetic machinery in the same way that metabolic processes are in bacteria, was the basic premise for the project. But Brenner saw that if one was going to prove this, the fruit fly — with its hundred thousands of nerve cells — would already be much too complicated. In C. elegans, on the other hand, there is, as we know now, exactly 302 nerve cells.

Today, forty years later, it can safely be said that C. elegans is the most fully scientifically described multicellular organism on Earth, More than two hundred research teams — or approximately one scientist per cell — have helped in studying this little worm. Every single cell has been named and described and even all of the approximately five thousand synaptic connections between nerve cells are known. (These synapses are uniform from animal to animal, but not totally

[page 127]

identical with one another.) Moreover, a complete map of the organism's entire hereditary material has been constructed, partitioning its 19,900 genes in the precise sequence that they appear upon its mere six chromosomes (Schaffner 1998).

The project has been closely followed by the philosopher of science Kenneth Schaffner, and here we shall stick to the thorough review of the project that Schaffner (1998) gives in Philosophy of Science. An important aspect of this work concerns the response of the worm to various chemical compounds — that is, taste and smell and the behavior connected to these senses. As intensely studied by Cornelia Bargmann and her team, C. elegans is able to distinguish between at least seven classes of compounds which either attract it or repel it. Only two pairs of sensory neurons are engaged in this task, and only approximately twenty genes were shown to be necessary for the normal functioning of these neurons. Still, however, it has not been possible to establish any simple correspondence between gene and behavior in this case. In 1993, Bargmann’s group reported the following:

One way to identify genes that act in the nervous system is by isolating mutants with defective behavior. However, the intrinsic complexity of the nervous system can make the analysis of behavioral mutants difficult. For example, since behaviors are generated by groups of neurons that act in concert, a single genetic effect can affect multiple neurons, a single neuron can affect multiple behaviors, and multiple neurons can affect the same behavior. In practice these complexities mean that understanding the effects of a behavioral mutation depends on understanding the neurons that generate and regulate behavior (Avery, Bargmann, and Horovitz 1993, 495, cited in Schaffner 1998).

Based on the available evidence, Schaffner distilled eight general principles, or rules, said to account for all the possible relations between genes and behavior in “this extraordinarily well-worked-out simple organism” (Schaffner 1998, 220), and he sums up these rules in the table given here as Table 5.1.

Under Schaffner’s conception, these eight rules —rules that, in fact, only generalize the already known principles of genetic pleiotropy, genetic interaction, neuronal multifunctionality, plasticity, and influences from the environment — ought to count as standard assumptions for the continued study of the relations between genes and behavior in more complex organisms as well.

Yet most interesting to note in a biosemiotic context is the fact that, even in this extremely simple organism, one cannot completely explain behavior without also considering the aspect of learning. Thus, for instance, C. elegans exhibits a remarkable plasticity in its behavior when it is starved, or if the density of the populations grows too great. “Water-soluble chemicals that are strong attractants to naive animals are ignored by crowded, starved animals,’ writes Sengupta

6 Pleiotropy is the designation for the phenomenon whereby one single gene has an effect of several different phenotypic traits.

[page 128]

Table 5.1 Rules for the relation between genes and behavior in C. elegans (modified from Schaffner 1998, 301).

1. Many genes -> one neuron.
2. Many neurons -> one type of behavior.
3. One gene -> many neurons (pleiotropy).
4. One neuron -> many behaviors.
5. Stochastic development -> different neural connections.
6. Different environments/histories -> different behaviors.
7. One gene -> another gene -> behavior (combinatorial effects).
8. Environment -> gene expression -> behavior.

The arrow can be read as “affect(s), cause(s), or lead(s) to.”

Sengupta et al. (1993, 243) write that “these changes induced by crowding and starvation persist for hours after the worms are separated and fed” (cited in Schaffner 1998). It has furthermore been shown that if C. elegans is exposed to fatigue or diminished food intake during its development, it may enter a dauer state — meaning that the larval phase is extended, so that the worm may survive for four to eight times longer than it would be able to in the normal (post-larval) state. And pheromones emitted by the worm itself are implicated in the process.

One interesting aspect of C. elegansOne interesting aspect of C. elegans’s biology that Schaffner does not himself address is that the worm is a very “brainy” creature: nearly one third of its cells are nerve cells! This is significant, because it takes a lot of energy to run a nerve cell. Humans at rest, for instance, spend 18 percent of their metabolic energy just to maintain the nervous system — even though it occupies a mere 2 percent of their total body weight. The burden of maintaining a brain is relatively more demanding in small animals like birds and monkeys, since the brains of those animals make up nearly 10 percent of their body weight. Brain size, in fact, most commonly correlates with the social and behavioral complexity that the animal has to cope with, and only reflects body size to a limited extent. It simply takes a certain amount of neurons to coordinate a given activity such as breathing, running, or singing — and this burden can often be so high that the brain size of an animal species will be limited by the amount of food energy the species typically is able to procure for its progeny (since early brain growth makes such particularly high demands on the access to metabolic energy).The evolution of suckling in mammals some two hundred million years ago, therefore, was very likely a decisive prerequisite for the later development in these animals of much bigger brains.

It is therefore no surprise that the number of neurons in C. elegans is very accurately controlled. The loss of a single nerve cell in a nematode may make it unable to leave offspring because it consequently cannot lay eggs. But an increase

[page 129]

in the number of nerve cells is also potentially lethal, because the increased drain of energy leaves the worm without sufficient strength to leave offspring. Accordingly, C. elegans does what nearly all other animals do. It produces far too many nerve cells relative to what it needs and it then gradually kills those cells that show themselves superfluous through the process of programmed cell death or apoptosis (which I will discuss below). Neurons that do not yet exhibit sufficient synaptic activity after a certain period of time has elapsed are treated as superfluous, and only those neurons that have proven to be functional are kept alive. The integration of this communicative logic into the general growth dynamics of the larva apparently is so efficient that the number of surviving neurons invariably ends up as exactly 302. It is worth noting that this apparent determinism does not depend on rigid genetic predetermination, but results from an organizational principle rooted in the semiotic interplay of neurons in the growing brain, in their ever-changing contextual situation. We shall call this organizational principle semiotic emergence and examine it in some detail in Chapter 7.

For now, it will suffice to consider what Schaffner calls “the principal take-home lesson” in his summation of the analysis of the C. elegans project — the realization that “genes act in complex interactive concert and through nervous systems, systems that are significantly influenced by development, and exhibit short- and long-term learning that modifies behavior. The environment plays critical roles in development and also in which genes are expressed and when. Characterizing simple ‘genes for’ behaviors is, accordingly, a drastic oversimplification of the connection between genes and behavior, even when we have the (virtually) complete molecular story” (Schaffner 1998).

In short, it seems that the reductionist credo that Brenner expressed in 1974 — “In principle, it should be possible to dissect the genetic specification of a nervous system in much the same way as was done for biosynthetic pathways in bacteria or for bacteriophage assembly,’ a credo that apparently has nourished the extraordinarily generous flow of funding to such gigantic research programs for the last forty years — was, it turns out, not only a gross oversimplification, but was false. The dynamics of the nervous system cannot reasonably be said to lie inscribed in the genes in the same way metabolic processes in bacteria are inscribed in their genes. And to get to the bottom of what really may be going on here, such simplistically causal assumptions and methodologies are going to have to be replaced with much more sophisticated ones, as I shall argue at length below.

The Human Genome

The assumption that a map of the human genome could be equivalent to the book of life or even to the holy grail of developmental biology is a message that has been industriously circulated by both grant-seeking scientists and

[page 130]

story-seeking journalists. Again and again, we have been told that our genes are the hidden keys to our psychic and physical well-being or lack thereof. And still —long after most scientists have abandoned their initial overestimations for the project — newspapers regularly announce in big headlines that now scientists are close to identifying this or that gene for major health threats such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, alcoholism, or even cancer and vascular disease (in addition to even more outrageous claims linking genes to such nonbiological phenomena as racism, musical talent, and likability).

And the message has gone through. For now a large majority of people in the Western countries unquestioningly believe in this myth. Apparently, the general public did not see the significance of a February 11, 2001 news release issued by the scientists behind the Human Genome Project — the project that for over a decade had been engaged in mapping the human genome, gene by gene. The announcement made that day revealed that not only did the sum total of human hereditary material contain thirty thousand genes (or less than one-third of the expected number) — but even more striking, that it was found that most human genes are not unique to our species at all, but are also identically present in other species. Indeed, it now turns out that only a few hundred human genes will not also be present in closely related forms in other mammals, such as the mouse. Craig Venter, president of Celera, one of the leading forces involved in the Human Genome Project, admitted, “This tells me that genes can’t possibly explain all of what makes us what we are” (Strohman 2001). With as few as a hundred unique genes at our disposal, one does not need a deep study of the catalog of human shortcomings to conclude that there cannot possibly be one diseased gene for every sin.”

The hegemonic status of “DNA-ism” probably owes a lot to some rare but nasty diseases, such as muscular dystrophy, that do in fact depend on a deficiency in only one gene. The disease gene in this case specifies a deficient protein, dystrophin, which muscle cells cannot deal with in a normal manner, and so the carriers of the dystrophin protein-producing gene become seriously ill. But monogenetic diseases such as muscular dystrophy are atypical. Indeed, they make up less than 2 percent of our total human disease load. To the extent that genes are “responsible” for major disease patterns, many more than one gene in isolation are always involved — and these gene complexes form part of a lifelong dynamic interplay with the body and its myriad of ongoing, nongenetic processes (Strohman 2001).

Moreover, it has been shown that even a clearcut monogenetic disease like PKU (phenylketonuria) exhibits a considerable range of variation as it is manifested at the phenotypic level. For instance, not all patients suffering untreated

7 Perhaps, rather, there is one for each human virtue, as Claus Emmeche has playfully commented.

[page 131]

PKU will demonstrate any disturbed cognitive development. This is so because the concentration of phenylalanine in the brain is dependent on a diversity of factors that influence the efficiency of the blood-brain barrier — and so not all patients’ brains reach toxic levels of the nondegradable amino acid (Scriver and Waters 1999).

All this raises the question of how a few hundred genes can determine whether an egg will become a baby or a mouse? The explanation must be that genes do not — as previously supposed — correspond to distinct functions in the organism. Rather — and both embryological and neurobiological research bears this out overwhelmingly — genes function as signposts in a dynamic interplay with each other and with the network of proteins and membranes in the growing embryo. It is not the genes per se, but their interplay and interpretation in the cell that counts.

And again, current research in molecular genetics increasingly shows us that this is so. Noncoding repetitive sequences of DNA are everywhere involved in the coordinative processes that decide (in a genuine sense — more on that forthcoming) which genes in a cell will or will not be transcribed at a given time. James Shapiro (1999, 26) has suggested that these repetitive sequences are the parameters that determine the “system architecture” characteristic for different species and he claims that “resetting the genome system architecture through reorganization of the repetitive DNA content is a fundamental aspect of evolutionary change... [a] resetting process that can occur without major changes in the protein coding sequences.”

To illustrate how an understanding of the workings of genes as signposts (rather than as causes or blueprints) facilitates an understanding of why it does not necessarily take many unique genes to assure that a given fertilized egg develops into a human being rather than into a mouse, let us consider the growth of an embryonic tissue layer in the virtual organism Scitoi mesoib. We shall specifically observe the dynamic growth of a neural tissue layer called sizap that normally is regulated by the concentration of a signal molecule, sizapin, which gradually builds up due to its excretion from an underlying embryonic cell layer (Figure 5.5, top and middle). Normally, when sirapin reaches a certain concentration inside the cells of the sirap layer, further cell divisions — and thus further growth — will come to a stop.

Now, suppose that a mutation hits the gene sir which specifies the enzyme (sirapin synthetase) that catalyzes the formation of sirapin in the underlying tissue layer. Such a mutation might eventually cause a slight decrease in the catalytic activity of the enzyme, and the mutated embryo would therefore produce sirapin at a slower rate. Consequently, the sirapin concentration in the sirap layer will stay below the threshold value for an extended period and, accordingly, the relative size of the sirap neural tissue will be increased (Figure 5.5, bottom).

[page 132]

Figure 5.5 Fetal development of sirap tissue in the virtual organism Scitoi mesoib (see text).

This simple yet realistic model easily explains how small mutational modifications might eventually provoke severe changes in morphology or instinctual behavior in an individual or a species. Large-scale morphological change may therefore take place without any new genes being involved at all — and in cases where such changes affect the eventual formation of brain architecture, it follows that new behavioral patterns may appear simply through the modification of already existing genetic material.

Very probably, the addition of new genetic functionality had been a major theme in early evolution — say, for the first three billion years. Yet when those lineages that would become, respectively, H. sapiens and C. elegans separated some hundred million years ago, most of the fundamental genes that modern species carry were already present. Protein evolution since then has mostly been variations upon the same ten thousand to twenty thousand basic themes, where small adjustments in the properties of proteins have changed the interplay of the settings for embryogenetic semiotic control.

[page 133]

The key here is the idea that the ontogeny of morphological and behavioral traits is secured through a sophisticated mechanism of semiotic scaffolding — and thus is only in a very indirect and mediated way, based essentially on genetic scaffolding. For to modify genes is to change the way that different processes are “tuned to one another” — and the product that results from such a process bears no simple relation to the mutation itself. From a semiotic point of view, what happens in the sir-mutant is a weakening of the signal involved in fitting the growth of one cell layer to another. Thus, in the case of the mutant Scitoi mesoib, the cells in the sirap tissue layer do not recognize the signal in time, and this delay in the interpretive response has the effect of allowing the growth of this to continue for an extended period of time.

Genes, then, do not specify traits in the adult organism, and in a way they do not even specify proteins. They do, of course, mechanistically determine the amino acid backbones of given proteins (although it should be remembered that a plurality of processes — such as RNA editing, protein folding, and protein targeting — all contextually interfere in the simple causality of this otherwise seemingly deterministic process). However, since proteins are not just molecules, but are always also semiotic tools, what the genes really do specify is the efficiency of semiotic modulators. They serve to adjust the screws, as it were, in the biosemiotic machinery of the organism. Therefore, in order to adjust the predominant metaphors by which we think about the relations between genetic regulation and the semiotic reality of life, let me suggest a model of the genetic system as a computerized inventory-control system — i.e., a system for ascertaining that the appropriate stock of molecular resources are always present when the cell or organism needs them for its never-ending semiotic interactions. In this inventory-control system, individual genes appear like the ever-present (though largely unseen) application options that only become available for use through the activation of different menu bars in our computer software applications. In these “menued” gene ensembles, there are application options for chromatin structure, application options for the proteins involved in the cell-division apparatus, application options for catabolic and anabolic enzymes, application options for membrane related proteins and other structural components, etc.

Decisions on which application menus should be activated, as well as which options made available through the activation of these “menued” gene ensembles should actually be realized at any given time, will depend on the intricate semiotic interplay of the total cellular system as it may be biased in any given moment by the relative concentrations of important modulatory proteins. This context-dependent event is most properly referred to as a decision in this sense, for that term highlights the fact there is no one element deterministically causing one thing to happen over another, but that the selection is a function of the system state and its needs at any given moment.

[page 134]

In this heuristic, every activated application option functions as a release mechanism whereby the production of a new resource is initiated and stored in the proper department of the cell. Mechanistically, this initiation corresponds to the RNA polymerase reaction whereby a particular gene is transcribed into RNA. As long as the given menu option is activated, the corresponding mRNA production will continue and protein synthesis will go on. But the moment it is interrupted, mRNA degradation will naturally ensue and this will rapidly bring any further synthesis of that particular protein to an end.

Spam

In addition to the operational genes that most people equate with the very concept genes, the genome contains huge stores of hidden, never sought-after menu items —what scientists call pseudogenes —that potentially may be brought into circulation, and thus may come to play a role in evolutionary changes. Pseudogenes are areas of the genome that are nonfunctional in the sense that they are not available to the transcription process — but which nevertheless exhibit remarkable similarity to known functional genes in their base sequences.

Thus, before the mid-1970s, DNA was considered a very static molecule. But it has become very clear since then that there exist quite a number of mechanisms whereby sequences on the DNA molecule may be duplicated and even change positions on the chromosome. Such mechanisms have led to the formation of gene families — i.e., families of narrowly related functional genes, as well as pseudogenes.

Pseudogenes are of evolutionary interest because, unlike functional genes, they are not expressed and, therefore, are not subject to natural selection. Since they do not in any way contribute to the success or failure of their carrier organisms, they are free to undergo mutation without incurring the selectional consequences that normal genes do, (For normal genes mutate just as frequently, but those mutants that express functional deficiencies are accordingly sorted out.) Pseudogenes therefore represent a tacit resource base of latent proteins with unexplored properties — from which natural selection may eventually pick up new functional genes.

The hemoglobin gene family nicely illustrates this dynamic. Since oxygen diffuses through tissue slowly, animals beyond a certain size must find a way to solve the challenge of getting enough oxygen into their tissues. Insects have solved the problem by developing small air channels (trachea) but this solution only works because insects’ body mass is so small. (Conversely, this may be the reason why insects never become big.)*

8 It is interesting that in the Coal Age, more than three hundred million years ago, dragonflies with a wingspan of more than sixty centimeters flew around. The explanation might be that the atmospheric oxygen pressure (concentration) was higher then than it is now.

[page 135]

In vertebrates, however, the solution to this same problem is hemoglobin — a highly specialized protein molecule with a capacity to carry forward a small iron-containing molecule (a porphyrin) that will bind oxygen reversibly — meaning that it will take up oxygen wherever there is plenty of it (for instance, in the lungs) and give it off where it is lacking (for instance, in tissues). The delicate biochemical task that the hemoglobin molecule performs is to keep the highly reactive oxygen molecule safe inside the 3-D protein structure while it is transported around the body. In molecular models of hemoglobin, the iron porphyrin (called hem) can be seen to consist in a nearly flat structure enclosed within a hydrophobic depression of the protein molecule.

The oxygen molecule extends perpendicular to this plane — but is cut off from entering into unwanted interactions thanks to a well-placed unit of the amino acid histidine that safeguards the configuration. A corresponding histidine unit fixes the hem group on the other side of the plane. These two histidine units occupy position numbers 93 and 64, respectively, in the sequence of 150 amino acids that make up the hemoglobin chain (as counted from the N-terminal, i.e., the end of the polypeptide chain that carries a free amino group — NH,). And it is exactly these two amino acids that have remained unchanged by natural selection throughout the five-hundred-million-year-long history of hemoglobin evolution (whereas changes have occurred on almost all of the other positions).

I have not digressed into the discussion of these biochemical details because I expect the reader to nourish a sudden longing for an understanding of hemoglobin biochemistry. Rather, I have done so because these details hold an important key to unraveling the intricate interplay between digital and analog codes, as disclosed by mapping the evolutionary history of this and other gene families. Human hemoglobin is in reality a complex (a tetramer) of four subunits each of which is a protein chain of just under 150 amino acids. All four subunits are derived from the same ancestral protein chain but pairwise they are now slightly different and are called alpha and beta chains respectively.

Significantly, the early embryo doesn’t form any of these two subunits, but instead forms zeta and epsilon chains that deviate somewhat from the alpha and beta chains of the adult hemoglobin. Towards the end of embryonic development, a fifth chain is made called the gamma chain — this is because the oxygen supply for the embryo comes through the placenta, and it therefore needs a special hemoglobin tuned to this temporary — but life-sustaining for that time period — condition. And for a short period around birth, the newborn baby even produces a sixth chain of proteins called the delta chain.

Such variety in the kinds of hemoglobin chain formation found through the embryogenesis of one individual is a relatively recent phenomenon, in terms of evolution — as is disclosed by comparing hemoglobin chains from a number

[page 136]

of different species, as in Figure 5.6. This figure shows that the original oxygen-carrying protein was a monomer not very different from the protein, myoglobin — a protein that nowadays is used for storing oxygen in muscle cells. Approximately five hundred million years ago, the gene involved in the protein synthesis of myoglobin underwent a duplication, where one of the gene copies became the ancestor of the myoglobin genes found in all higher organisms today, while the other gene copy, in time, developed (probably as a pseudogene) to become a proper oxygen transporter — and this gene thus became the progenitor of all the world’s hemoglobin genes today. Thus, all later species in this lineage have separate genes for myoglobin and hemoglobin.

In retrospect, it is easy to see this evolutionary development as a reflection of a new “size strategy” in evolution. In the small animals of early evolutionary time (e.g., the protozoans and flatworms), there was not much need for an oxygen transporter, since the distance to the surface of the animal would always be insignificant, But as animals increased in size, and as a result began to feed on smaller animals for their nourishment, oxygen transportation became a major challenge. Four hundred million years ago, a second gene duplication occurred through which the ancestral forms of alpha and beta chains were established. Since then, all organisms in the lineage have both alpha and beta chains in their hemoglobin. In natural history, this corresponds with the divergence into sharks and bony fishes, and the evolutionary line of the latter that led to the reptiles and eventually to the mammals.

Similarly, the gene duplications behind the divergence of the specialized fetal hemoglobin chains occurred some two hundred million years ago, which roughly corresponds with the appearance of placental mammals — where the particular oxygen-binding properties of these chains would be needed for the special tasks of ensuring an adequate supply of oxygen to the embryo. And thus the numbering of the chromosomes in the upper part of Figure 5.6 refers to the positions of the different hemoglobin genes on the human chromosome as they are today. Like the musical motifs of a classical symphony that are interwoven in a variety of ways to form the experience of a unified whole, so we see how evolution little by little has managed to weave the hemoglobin themes into one another to form a functionally optimal unity. But contrary to the product that is the symphony, here there is no composer behind this evolution, and its dynamics must be explained by means of natural processes. Again, we shall search for the explanation in the dynamics of code-duality, the digital mutability and combinatorics of pseudogenes coupled to the incessant process of trial and error exhibited by the kimflok in its interaction with its niche.

* The code-dual dynamics that take place in this evolutionary process are not all that different from the code-dual dynamics that play out in cultural evolution — and the modern-day phenomenon of e-mail spam throws an interesting

[page 137]

Figure 5.6 An evolutionary tree for human hemoglobin. Above is shown the arrangement of human hemoglobin genes over three different chromosomes. Sequences that are still transcribed are shown in dark gray. The very light areas are no longer transcribed in humans, but are now pseudogenes. Below is shown a time axis (in millions of years) indicating approximately when different hemoglobin genes appeared (modified from Mathews, van Holde, and Ahern 1999, 234).

light upon the dynamic operations of code-duality. All over the world, this word spam has come to signify the widespread interruption of privacy caused by the invasion of one’s electronic mailbox by unwanted and unauthorized ads. Yet few persons outside of the English-speaking world know that this new signification of the word spam originated with Monty Python's Flying Circus. In that one of their comedy routines, a group of Vikings in a diner sang a chorus of “SPAM, SPAM, SPAM, lovely SPAM, wonderful SPAM” in an increasing crescendo, drowning out other conversation, much like unsolicited e-mail drowns out other e-mail in one’s in-box. Likewise, the song's endlessly repetitive lyrics suggest an endless repetition of worthless text, similar to what is contained within the e-mail variety of spam.

Now, technically the term spam is a portmanteau (or telescope word) formed by the contraction of spiced ham and was invented as a marketing name for a line of canned meat. But although this term was consciously invented, it is safe to say that neither the original inventors of the brand name, nor the Monty Python troupe, had any idea of the particular worldwide fame awaiting the word as a referent for something which would not even exist until long after the time that these two groups were using this one term to serve totally different ends in two totally different contexts.

[page 138]

The metaphoric transformation of spam from the Monty Python setting to the Internet vocabulary was a creative act, but the reason that it stuck was that it happened to hit an unfilled locus in linguistic space — i.e., a nonverbalized but increasingly general experience in modern society. And through this metaphorical transformation onto the experiential space of the Internet, the term has now become a semiotic actor in its own right, generating a whole range of new spam-related habits, Because of it, we can now engage in making rules for Internet services to eliminate spam or discuss and administer punishments for what might be called spam perps. And we may eventually expect further conceptualizations to develop on top of the original concept (e.g., tele-spam or bio-spam). In this way, new terms are scaffolding devices for cultural development.

The point is that the coining of the term spam was a creative response to the needs of a new cultural situation. But as such, it was not the result of some single thinker’s conscious deliberations and action. Instead, it grew out of already existing linguistic resources, more or less spontaneously, by a sort of tacit consensus. And because of this, I want to argue that one can see the appearance of the term spam as a prototype case for the origin of new digitally coded signs not only in culture, but also in nature — most specifically, in evolution. The digitalization of the Monty Python sketch in one simple phonetic sequence served to scaffold a complex social experience by making it an easy general resource for communication. And this kind of informative and novelty-generating scaffolding, I suggest, is exactly what genes in general are good for.

New genes may often be formed through very much the same kind of scaffolding conversions that we have seen to be instrumental in furthering the inclusion of new words in a language. Thus, in the case of the new term spam, the decisive point was the conjunction of pointed meaning (submitted by Monty Python) and social need (created by the widespread experience). Likewise in the biological realm, we can suppose that gene duplication that was accompanied down through generations by what geneticists call the “hitchhiking” unexpressed copy as nonessential or “masked” genetic material (and thus prone to all kinds of nonlethal mutations) would assure the availability of a rich resource base for potential future genes.

The decisive cause of the birth of a new functional gene would be a lucky conjunction of two events: 1) an already existing nonfunctional gene might acquire a new meaning through integration into a functional (transcribed) part of the genome, and 2) the gene product would hit an unfilled gap in the semiotic needs of the cell or the embryo. In this way, a new gene becomes a scaffolding mechanism, supporting a new kind of interaction imbuing some kind of semiotic advantage upon its bearer. It would thus be proper to refer to this phenomenon as semiogenic scaffolding. For by entering the realm of digitality, the gene’s new semiotic functionality becomes available not only to the cells of the

[page 139][page 139]

organism carrying it, but also to future generations — and, if we allow for horizontal gene transfer, even to unrelated organisms. Digitality in the life sphere assures the sharing (objectifying) of functions (and, in the human case, ideas), and thereby also their conservation through time. —

But this very function is itself dependent on the relative inertness of the genetic material and its very indirect and highly sophisticated way of interfering with the worldliness of cellular life. Genes, like human words, do not directly influence the world around them (which is why we do not believe in the power of spells), but have whatever causal efficacy that they have only when — and for so long as— some living system interprets them. And just as inert, intrinsically meaningless words serve to support human activity and communication, so do inert, intrinsically meaningless genes support cellular activity and communication. In the next section, I will explain in detail how this can be so — and why genes and words are the two most marvelous scaffolding tools ever created by nature.

Organic Codes

Translations of sequentially coded messages used to support dynamic activity in space and time — e.g., from the passive world of genes to the active world of proteins — are necessarily complex, multilayered processes. And so far we have only touched upon the initial complexities of this process: the transcription step from the string of DNA nucleotides to the complementary string of RNA nucleotides. Yet the real difficulty begins when one has to assure the correct coupling between molecular surfaces belonging to combinatorial sets of very different kinds of monomers — i.e., nucleotides and amino acids, respectively. For there is no chemical or molecular isomorphy between genes and proteins — and thus the problem of gene to protein translation has been solved only by the development of specific molecules, transfer RNAs (tRNAs) that can build a bridge between them.

Embryologist Marcel Barbieri has suggested the term organic codes for these molecular “bridges” and in 1985 introduced his idea of semantic biology: “The function of an organic code... is to give specificity to a liaison between two organic worlds, and this necessarily requires molecular structures — the adaptors— that perform two independent recognition processes,’ writes Barbieri

9 Barbieri (2003, 94) notes the following three general characteristics of codes: “1) They are rules of correspondence between two independent worlds, 2) they give meanings to informational structures, and 3) they are collective rules which do not depend on the individual features of their support structures.” An organic code is thus a more restrictive concept than the concept

[page 140]

Prototypes of organic codes in this sense are the small tRNA molecules that are often (conveniently) depicted as a kind of cloverleaf structure. One of its loops carries an anticodon, i.e., a triplet that is complementary (re base pairing) to a distinct signifying triplet, or codon, on the mRNA molecule — while at the opposite end of the tRNA, there is a binding site for the particular amino acid that has become associated with the codon in this case. For example, to codon UUU on the mRNA, there will be a distinct tRNA with the anticodon sequence AAA — which, on its opposite end, has a binding site for the amino acid phenylalanine. The base-pairing mechanism (AAA UUU) thus assures that this specific tRNA will be attached to UUU triplets (and nothing else) on the mRNA.

The role of tRNA molecules here is to act as adaptors. These molecules cannot themselves bring about the translation of mRNA to protein, any more than an electric adaptor by itself could connect a European plug into an American socket. Rather, somebody must see to it that the plug and the socket come into contact with the adaptor and with each other in the right way.

Likewise, to carry out the task of connecting mRNA to tRNA and its amino acids, cells create and keep at their disposal a specialized and very complicated aggregate of RNA and proteins called a ribosome, that (in synchrony with a host of interdependent enzymes) assures the correct ordering of temporal and spatial relations throughout the translation process (Figure 5.7). This ribosome travels down along the mRNA string at an amazing speed, recognizing each codon and arranging the specific tRNA molecule with the corresponding anticodon in such a way that the amino acid on the other end comes into a position to form a peptide bond with the amino acid from the preceding tRNA placement. The nascent and still growing protein chain is thereby gradually left free behind the ribosome as it travels its way along the string.

Considered as a semiotic process, this translation process whereby the mRNA sequence is converted to a sequence of amino acids (i.e., to a protein chain), is a strongly ritualized process that does not seem to leave much interpretive freedom to the ribosome, and therefore to the cell. But when studied in more detail, complexities appear that may change this initial and far too simple image.

For example, recent experiments have shown that the termination of the translation process is not the well-defined process it was once thought to be. Under certain conditions, the ribosome apparently may bypass the stop codon of analog codes used in this book, and one might perhaps consider Barbieri’s organic codes as an intermediary form between the digital and the analog. In the Peircean sign taxonomy, such organic codes belong to the category of symbols. The research horizon of biosemiotics, however, reaches far beyond just symbolic codings and includes all and every kind of semiosis going on in nature. Still, Barbieri’s analysis does throw light on many of the same phenomena that we are concerning ourselves with here.

[page 141]

Figure 5.7 The translation process; see text (modified from Solomon, Berg, and Martin 1999, 268).

which would normally signify an end to any further prolongation of the newly formed amino acid string — and as a result, an unexpected tail of amino acids can become joined to the protein chain (Gallant and Lindsley 1998). Possession of this “tail” in turn, causes the protein to be very short-lived since the cell’s “internal quality control system” (the proteasomes) will now more easily pick it out for scrutiny and degrade it. Moreover, depending on which protein we are talking about, many other effects may result, including the formation of a malignant cell line.

Another interesting locus for possible contextual interaction is at the initiation of the translation process. Topologically, the translation process usually takes place right outside of the nucleus, which is connected to the rough endoplasmatic reticulum. The immediate RNA transcript that is formed when the enzyme RNA polymerase II transcribes a segment of the DNA must therefore be transported to the cytoplasm through pores in the nuclear membrane. But because the genes of eukaryotic organisms contain a number of introns — sequences that do not code for amino acids “meant to” enter the protein — the RNA transcript must first undergo a complicated editing process whereby these introns are cut out, and the remaining parts of the RNA transcript (the exons) are successively spliced together in the correct order.

[page 142]

Figure 5.8 RNA splicing. U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6 designate different small particles that are themselves complexes of proteins with snRNAs (from Barbieri 2003, 103, with permission).

This process is taken care of by a spliceosome, an immensely complicated molecular machine that, again, 15 assembled by the cell itself and that in size resembles the ribosome. It also, like the ribosome, does its job through the use of a smaller adaptor molecule called small nuclear RNA (snRNA or snurps). Here, too, this process 1s analogous to (RNA translation, as snRNA likewise contains two independent recognition sites — one for the initiation point of an intron and one tor the end point of the intron. “The two recognition steps are independent because

[page 143]

Figure 5.9 Alternative splicing. Splicing of the alpha-tropomyosin gene (in rats) illustrates how many exons may be spliced together in different ways to form different mRNA transcripts in different tissues (modified from Mathews, van Holde, and Ahern 1999, 1100).

the first step could be associated with different types of the second one, as demonstrated by the cases of alternative splicing, writes Barbieri (2003, 104).

In alternative splicing, exons are spliced together in an order other than the one in which they originally may have appeared on the chromosome. Alternatively, one or more exons may be cut out in some cells, but not in others. A dramatic example of this is found in the gene coding for the protein alpha-tropomyosin — a protein that plays a regulatory role for the actin-myosin complex responsible for contractive processes in organisms, e.g., in muscles. As seen in Figure 5.9, the twelve exons contained in this gene may be combined in at least seven different ways in different tissues. How cells in striated muscles “know” that they are supposed to splice alpha-tropomyosin together in one way, while cardiac muscle cells “know” to splice the molecule in another way, is unknown — but presumably cell-specific proteins interact with the spliceosome. And the number of known eukaryotic genes exhibiting alternative splicing tendencies is presently well over a hundred and still growing.

In some cases, the process of splicing is supplemented with a real editing of the mRNA, whereby certain nucleotides are added to or removed from the

[page 144]

string — or are exchanged with other nucleotides. Such an editing process is known, for example, from research into human apolipoprotein B — a protein that is excreted to the blood from the liver or, to a lesser extent, from special glands in the intestinal tract. Lipoproteins is the name for a group of proteins that assist in the transport of lipids in the blood stream. And while the gene apoB, which codes for apolipoprotein B, is edited to become a mRNA of 14,100 base pairs (resulting in a protein consisting of 4,536 amino acids) in the liver, the same gene in the glands of the intestinal tract is edited to become an mRNA consisting of 7,000 base pairs, resulting in a protein of only 2,152 amino acids.

The reason behind this, it has now been shown, is that the shortened length of the intestinal apolipoprotein B is the result of an enzymatic intervention that leads to the formation of a stop codon (i.e., a sequence that marks the end of the translation process) in the mRNA. This enzymatic intervention is a deamination of a cytosine unit at position 6.666, which is thereby converted to a uracil unit, resulting in the formation of a stop codon (Chen et al. 1987). The two versions of the apolipoprotein B have the same capacity as far as transport of lipids is concerned, but the short intestinal protein is removed from the blood much faster than the liver version, and because of this, the intestinal version does not have the additional role of activating another enzyme involved in lipid biosyntheses (LCAT = Lecithin:Cholesterol Acyltransferase). RNA editing thus is used to modulate the properties of gene products in order to tune them to the needs of each particular tissue

The Cellular City

While DNA spends most of its time sitting passively and rather tightly packed inside the nucleus, the vast majority of vital life processes actually take place in the many various structures of the cell that, somewhat misleadingly, are lumped together under the term the cells cytoplasm. This term is inherited from a time when our technical instruments had not yet made it possible to see the complex inner architecture of cells in terms of organelles, membranes, and filaments that are present in this so-called plasma. And yet, it is precisely the subtle, never-ending interplay between the nucleus and these internal membranous structures that makes the cell a holistic organizational unit in itself. In the absence of these differentiated structures and their functions, the genomic specifications would not make any sense. One way to illustrate this complexity, as I have previously suggested, would be to compare the cell with a big city:

If we think of the cell as a city like Manhattan, the nucleus of the cell would per-

haps cover the area of Central Park while the membrane around the cell would be

situated about as far from the center of the cell as the Bronx is from Fifth Avenue.

[page 145]

In such a city, a protein molecule would be the size of a family car. And it would

have almost less freedom of movement within the cell than a car has in Manhattan.

Membranes and stop signs steer every single protein round and about in well-

ordered patterns (Hoffmeyer 1996b, 73).

The semiotics of this intracellular traffic is one of the most fascinating topics in modern biochemistry. We have, in the preceding pages, followed the route of the genetic specifications from the closed chromatin structure of the DNA to the ribosomal protein-synthesizing machinery bordered by the nuclear membrane. And precisely here is where two questions arise that, upon further scrutiny, show themselves to be closely connected: (1) How does the protein string fold up to form the highly specific three-dimensional structure that it does? (2) How do the proteins know how to get to the right spot in the cell — or, to put it in the figure we used above, how do the cars find their way around Manhattan? The answer to both questions appears to concern a class of protein complexes that have been given the name of chaperones — a suitable designation, since these protein complexes have, as their task, to make sure that newly formed (or, more generally, unprotected) proteins do not “get into trouble.”

At first glance, one should think that the folding of a protein into the right conformation would be a nearly impossible process. The biochemist Cyrus Levinthal once calculated that the enzyme ribonuclease, consisting of 124 amino acid units, will have approximately 10^50 possible conformations — and thus if one imagined that the molecule could “test” 10^10 possibilities per second, it would still take 10^40 years to work its way through a considerable part of this vast possibility space. And yet, it has been shown experimentally that ribonuclease in vitro folds up correctly in approximately one minute. The solution to Levinthal’s paradox (as to many other paradoxes of this kind) seems to be that the folding process occurs through a series of intermediary steps that are not given beforehand — but which are all energetically “downhill” processes — thus leading to the correct conformation, as if the folding process itself had been led down through an imaginary and irregular funnel.

Newly formed peptide chains do nevertheless find themselves in a somewhat vulnerable condition in vivo, since their hydrophobic areas have an inherent propensity to aggregate with the hydrophobic areas of other peptide chains. This is where chaperone protein complexes enter the picture, as they protect newly formed chains against such unwanted interference. For example, if the virgin protein is intended to serve inside one of the cellular organelles (e.g., the mitochondria), its N-terminal end will carry a specific signaling sequence that signifies to the relevant chaperones that it needs help. The chaperones then “protect” the unfolded chain from aggregation with the nearby peptide chains, and deliver it at specialized receptor loci on the surface of the organelle where passage through the outer and inner membrane will be allowed. Such passage

[page 146]

Figure 5.10 Protein targeting. Proteins intended to work in the cell membrane or lysosomes are processed in several steps that take them through the lumen of the endoplasmatic reticulum and the membrane sacks of the Golgi complex (modified from Mathews, van Holde and Ahern 1999, 1107).

This occurs through interactive gate mechanisms in the membrane, with the help of specific transport proteins that discriminate between proteins destined for the cell lumen, membranes, or matrix. (In some cases, chaperones are also involved inside these organelles.)

Proteins intended for use in the cell membrane, or in the lysosomes — or that are destined for excretion into the extracellular space — undergo a rather more complex series of transfers. Here also, amino acid sequences at the N-terminal end elicit the relevant cue for other interlocutors in the process — which in this case is routed through the rough endoplasmatic reticulum (RER) and the Golgi complex, as depicted in Figure 5.10.

Let us take the opportunity here to briefly comment on these peculiar compartments of the eukaryotic cell, the RER and the Golgi apparatus. While bacteria send degradative enzymes out into their surroundings so that they literally swim in a soup of nutrients “like maggots in a piece of cheese” (to use Christian de Duve’s pithy expression), eukaryotic cells instead ingest morsels of their surroundings and degrade the eventual nutrients they might contain through endocytosis.

In endocytosis, a confined cavity is gradually formed through the invagination of the membrane. Then, through a combined fission and fusion of the cell membrane, the cavity is eventually released to the cell’s interior as a vesicle (Figure 5.11). Christian de Duve has suggested that endocytosis was an important ingredient in the evolution of the eukaryotic cell. For in the eukaryotic cell,

[page 147]

Figure 5.11 Vesicle formation through membrane invagination.

the ratio between surface and volume is a mere one-twentieth of the ratio that it is in bacteria. The eukaryotic cell therefore can only maintain sufficient flows of nutrients and waste compounds to and from the surroundings because of its extended internal area of membranes — these enclose sacks of internal space that topologically are part of the extracellular space with which it stays connected, through the constant flow of vesicles derived from the outer membrane.

These “sacks” are the structures that in the eukaryotic cell form the rough endoplasmatic reticulum (RER), the Golgi complex, and the endosomes and lysosomes. Thus, while the plasma membranes of bacteria are simultaneously engaged in virtually all of the cell’s internal and external activities, eukaryotic cells have, thanks to these internal organelles, evolved a division of work so that the metabolic processes (including protein synthesis) are relegated to the internal membranes — whereas the outer membrane has been set free to take care of communicative tasks in interaction with the external surround.

Most characteristic of the eukaryotic plasma membrane is that it is almost exclusively adapted to communication and exchange with the outside world. It is fitted with a variety of transporters, pumps, channels, and gates; and, especially in animals, it veritably bristles with receptors of various kinds hooked onto sophisticated transducing machinery, All in all, the eukaryotic plasma membrane appears as boundary organelle of enormous complexity, in keeping with the almost irreconcilable requirements of cells obliged to be continually or intermittently open to a variety of substances would probably have

been impossible with a plasma membrane cluttered by biosynthetic and translocation systems, let alone respiratory chains and photo systems (de Duve 1991, 67).

The synthesis of proteins that travel through the RER begins, as usual, in the cytoplasm, but in this case the first sequence to be synthesized is a special

[page 148]

N-terminal sequence destined to be recognized by a special signal recognition particle (SRP) thar is itself a complex of both protein and RNA. SRP binding immediately stops the continued prolongation of the protein chain and thereby makes sure that the protein will not be formed at the wrong place — i.e., outside of the RER. And at the same time, SRP operates as a chaperone for the nascent peptide chain.

SRP assures the recognition of a definite protein at the RER that will be capable of binding the ribosome in such a way that the signal sequence at the N-terminal end is eased into the RER. Having brought about these benefits, the SRP is then released, allowing the translation process to be resumed. And at that point, the protein being synthesized is actually pulled through the membrane where it is finally set free and the signal sequence is eliminated.

While the newly formed protein is still inside the RER, a very important process takes place: this is the process of glycosylation — i.e., the formation of a covalent bond” between the protein and a carbohydrate (sugar). Carbohydrates are a richly varied group of compounds in which various sugar units are chained to each other. In monosaccharides, the sugar unit appears alone; in disaccharides they are chained two and two; in oligosaccharides there are only a few units in the chain; and in polysaccharides there are many. Carbohydrate chains are not necessarily linear, as are polypeptide chains making up proteins, but are often branching. When carbohydrates are bound to proteins, the resulting molecules are called glycoproteins — and these glycoproteins constitute more than half of all proteins in eukaryotic organisms.

The glycosylation of proteins implies a significant increase in their structural diversity and makes them suitable for use in communicative tasks. The intracellular and extracellular recognition tasks (whose complexity and importance to the organism is only now becoming a major focus of modern biochemistry) are often entrusted to glycoproteins. Likewise, it is the carbohydrate endings of glycoproteins “displayed” on cell surfaces that direct the interactions of cells both with other cells and with their surroundings — and that, therefore, are responsible for the precise migrations of cells during embryogenesis, for the control of cellular growth, for endocytosis, and for the often fatal oncogene transformation whereby a normal cell is converted to a cancer cell,

Glycosylation, as mentioned, starts little by little in the RER, but the major part of this task is carried out and completed in the multilayered membrane enclosures of the Golgi apparatus — where each enclosure is, in fact, a miniature

10 A covalent bond is the name for an ordinary chemical bond in which two or more atoms share electrons —this in contrast to the much weaker hydrogen bonds characteristic of base pairing in DNA,

[page 149]

glycosylation factory of its own. The transport of proteins from the RER to the Golgi complex occurs via a process where a protein-filled vesicle buds off from the RER and begins traveling towards the closest unit of the Golgi complex (called the cis-end). After having been processed in the cis, Golgi-sack proteins are sent further on to the next Golgi sack, again by means of a vesicle, where they are further processed, and so on through the row of intermediary Golgi units, until the proteins finally arrive in the zrans-end. From there, they are either delivered into the cytoplasm as functional organelles (e.g., lysosomes, peroxisomes, or glyoxysomes); to the cell membrane; or perhaps to be excreted into extracellular space.

Significantly, each and every one of these transport processes is accompanied by a labeling process so that each vesicle, on the one hand, contains a load of proteins to be used at an identical destination — and, on the other hand, will be both recognized and accepted at precisely this address. For that purpose, specific molecular protein signs are attached to the membrane of the vesicle, in functional anticipation of a complementary protein awaiting a corresponding segment of the membrane at the destination. This latter protein, in complement with the first protein, assures that the fusion occurs at the right position. These complementary pairs of proteins have been given the telling designation SNARE proteins.”

Signal Transduction

We have now discussed the apparatus at the disposal of the eukaryotic cell for the interpretation of its own genomic messages in some detail. But we have only sporadically dealt with the question of how the cellular context —the matrix of tasks a cell must confront at a given time in a particular tissue (or if it is a free cell, ina particular environmentally conditioned situation) — might itself exert true causal efficacy over this interpretive process.

For example, we have seen how the ontogenetic determination of cell lines for specific roles in the tissues may be caused by specific methylations of DNA, as well as by chromatin markings. We have also seen how a whole set of transcription factors have to work together just for the formation of an initiation complex that could bind to the DNA at the location where transcription shall begin — or, in other words, for the cell to get an answer to the question: Where on the chromosome is the message stored that describes the protein that is needed right now?

11 For those who like to know such things, these are called soluble N-ethylmaleimide sensitive {fusion protein attachment receptors. Note, t00, the two irreducibly biosemiotic terms sensitive and receptor embedded in this mainstream biochemical nomenclature.

[page 150]

We have seen that different tissues are capable of using the same gene as a recipe for quite different mRNA molecules; we have seen how this can be done by the complex editing and splicing of exons together in different ways; and in order to explain this latter process, we referred to the presence of cell-specific proteins.” And, finally, we have followed the widely distributed network of semiotically marked routes of the protein-synthesizing apparatus crisscrossing in and out through cellular organelles. Thus, we must conclude that there is no lack of “screws to adjust” if signals from the cellular surroundings should be allowed to interfere with the interpretation of genomic recipes.”

Collectively, the processes responsible for the canalization of messages from the surroundings to the interior of the cell are called processes of signal transduction. Luis Bruni has thoroughly analyzed the biosemiotics of signal transduction — and his work is one of the most fascinating examples of how a semiotic understanding of biochemical processes may open our eyes to the holistic-dynamic coherence of cellular life that remains rather hidden in the traditional descriptions (Bruni 2003, 2007).

Signal transduction is a remarkable process because it does not, as one might perhaps naively suspect, imply that signals from the outside somehow find their way into the cell, and then successively instruct the cellular machinery to initiate distinct activities.’* Instead, what happens is much more interesting and semiotically complex, and typically consists in the following three steps: 1) the primary molecular signal is received at the surface of the cell because it is recognized by a specific glycoprotein, a receptor; 2) the receptor responds to the signal by changing its conformation which then activates a mediator protein in or at the cell membrane; and 3) the mediator again activates a secondary signal on the inside of the membrane, initiating the cascade of processes which will then take place 12 Recently it has been shown that microRNAs (miRNAs) have regulatory influence on how cells handle mRNA. Hundreds of microRNA genes have been found in different species. “With miRNA roles identified in developmental timing, cell death, cell proliferation, haematopoiesis, and patterning of the nervous system, evidence is mounting that animal miRNAs are more numerous, and their regulatory impact more pervasive, than was previously suspected,” writes Victor Ambros (2004) in a review article for Nature. So, of course, the story of life, we keep findineantincendectenend cence enes 13 For, of course, there are also a multitude of other “screws” that I have refrained from describing to the reader. For example, termination of transcription factors were only briefly mentioned. Yer one very important factor in the regulation of how the cells make use of the protein resources available to them through transcription and translation is the urnover times of proteins ~ i.e., the question of how short- or long-lived they are. And as we can see from the footnote above, the list of mediating factors being discovered between the gene and its expression is growing every day. 14 Oddly enough, it should be noted, itis precisely this kind of description that is so rife with hidden anthropomorphism—assigning communicative and directive signal status to zhings in themselves — that is posited (without objection) in mainstream materialist science, and rejected in biosemiotics!

[page 151]

within the cell. Taken together, what occurs is a kind of translation of a signal caught at the cell surface to a message formed in the intracellular molecular sign system of the cell. This process may be seen as a case of what Barbieri has called an organic code — here, it is a signal-transduction code (Barbieri 2003, 110).

An even more surprising aspect of this process is that the secondary signal is normally one out of just five molecular agents — namely, cyclic AMP, cyclic GMP, inositol triphosphate, diacyl glycerol, and calcium ions. At the biochemical level, it therefore looks as if an abundance of riches on the sending side (where more than a hundred different primary signals are known, such as hormones, growth factors, and neurotransmitters) is met by a thought-provoking poverty at the receiving side. Yer, a bit of reflection shows that this circumstance is actually the strength of the system, because the key to the critical dynamics that are involved is a semiotic one, and not a merely chemical one.

When the body is stressed and orders the adrenal medulla to secrete epinephrine, a multitude of different things will occur simultaneously in different tissues. In the lungs, a relaxation of muscles will take place; in the liver, free sugar units will be mobilized from the carbohydrate stores of glycogen; fat tissue cells will start degrading their lipid stores; and cells in the intestinal canal will react by dampening peristaltic activity. One and the same molecule (epinephrine) thus releases a range of different responses and different activities in different kinds of cells, exactly as when the conductor of a chorus gives just one hand cue and gets sopranos, altos, tenors, and basses respectively to respond with four different intonations. And when one and the same sign can signify a range of different things to different cells, even though these cells are genetically perfectly homogenous, it is because all cells in the adult organism are descendants of embryonic cells that at some stage in development became determined for just one distinct cell destiny — a process that also comprised a fixation of the frame for the semiotic receptivity, or interpretance, of the cell line.

For illustration, let us now pursue the path taken by the signal-transduction process released by epinephrine. Whether we talk about muscle cells, liver cells, fat cells, or cells of the intestinal tract, the epinephrine molecule is always recognized by the same kind of beta 2-adrenergic receptors that, via a mediator called a G-protein, activates the formation of the secondary signal — which in this case, is always cAMP. In eukaryote tissues, cAMP has the quite general effect of activating a protein kinase — i.e., an enzyme that activates other enzymes by attaching phosphate groups at distinct amino acid locations. And this is the point in the process where the cellular “memory” — fixed, as it were, through the embryonic processes of cell determination — will make a difference.

For cells in different tissues often have very different enzyme profiles. Thus, whereas the protein kinase in liver cells causes activation of the enzyme phosphorylase b kinase —the activity of which causes an activation of the enzyme

[page 152]

phosphorylase, an enzyme that catalyzes a cascading degradation of glycogen —the same kinase in fat tissue cells (adipocytes) will activate the enzyme triglycerol lipase, thereby initiating degradation of their lipid stores. The takeaway lesson here is this: Instead of equipping cells with sophisticated sensitivities towards multitudes of signals, evolution has chosen to provide them with an ontogenetically canalized interpretive diversity — based on a diversity of tissue subcultures, each with its own characteristic receptivity.

But exceptions to this rule do occur. Steroid hormones (hormones from the adrenal cortex and sexual hormones), for example, are soluble in lipid and therefore capable of penetrating the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane on their own. Inside the cell, the steroid hormone binds to a specific mobile receptor that helps it to penetrate the nuclear membrane, where the steroid molecule attaches itself to certain hormone-responsive elements on the DNA — and this allows the hormone to influence the transcription rate of nearby genes. In this case, we must conclude that early ontogenetic determination has created a tissue-specific sensitivity. The difference in the modes of operation between steroid hormones and other hormones reflects the physiological fact that the effects of steroid hormones are supposed to last for a long time.

‘Thus, while epinephrine takes care of bodily reactions to suddenly appearing situations that demand extraordinary efforts — situations that most often disappear as suddenly as they appear — a steroid hormone such as estrogen exhibits a cyclical pattern over a period of several weeks. Correspondingly, the role of the adrenal cortex steroid hormones (glucocorticoids) is to assure long-term adjustments of the metabolism. The point is that the effects of epinephrine play out through an activation (and in some cases, an inhibition) of already available hormones — whereas the steroid hormones have to re-activate dormant pathways or activate new transport systems.

We must now deal with a complication that we have so far kept out of the discussion, namely the concentration effect. Receptors of all kinds exist in vast numbers at the cell surfaces — on the order of 10^4-10^8 receptors per cell — and the effect of external signals caught by these receptors depend on the degree of saturation, i.e., the percentage of present receptors that actually bind the signal molecule. Cytosemiotic signs are almost never single molecules, then, but the relative concentration of these molecules (Kilstrup 1998). But this does not imply that the cellular response is numerically proportional to the concentration of the molecular sign. As we shall see below, biochemical response depends on a balance between synthetic and degrading processes, and enzymatic activity normally has an S-formed dependence on concentration, where the steep midsection of the curve corresponds to a very small interval on the concentration axis. Concentrations below this tiny interval will elicit insignificant amounts of enzymatic activity — while concentrations above it cannot

[page 153]

produce any further increase in the activity. The result is a kind of enzymatic digitizing of the response into only two possible options: response or no response.”’ It is often said that epinephrine starts a cascade of degradative processes, whereby glycogen is split into its individual sugar units — but the implied meaning always is that epinephrine is present in a sufficiently high concentration for the saturation degree of beta 2-adrenergic receptors to reach above threshold level.

Cellular constituents, signal molecules included, exist in a constant flux of degradative and synthetic processes, and in order to increase the concentration of a signal molecule (e.g., cAMP), the rate of its synthesis must exceed the rate of its breakdown. Thus, if the saturation degree of the receptors is below the critical value, the formation of new cAMP molecules cannot compensate for the constant cellular degradation — and protein kinase activity will then not be activated. The effect, rather, will be comparable to pouring water into a wash basin with no plug in it. In order to keep up even a minimum water level, the faucet must be turned up enough so that its input into the wash basin compensates for and exceeds the constant outflux down the drain..

Of special interest in this connection are the mediators that transmit the messages between the primary and the secondary signal molecule. Often these mediators consist of a G-protein (thus termed because it binds to guanosine diphosphate, or GDP). When the beta 2-adrenergic receptor is activated by epinephrine, the G-protein is stimulated to exchange GDP for GTP (guanosine triphosphate) and this elicits the conformational change in the G-protein that activates its neighboring enzyme, Adenylate cyclase, to produce the secondary signal molecule, cAMP. And here comes the point: The G-protein itself possesses a catalytic activity that results in a slow conversion of its newly acquired GTP to GDP, and it thereby inactivates itself. The result is that each receptor that is hit by an epinephrine molecule causes a short-lived peak production of cAMP. Consequently, the number of receptors hit by an epinephrine molecule per time unit is decisive for the release of an effect; either there will be a response or there won't. And this number directly reflects the concentration of hormone in the surrounding blood.

A dramatic illustration of the physiological significance of the G-protein is seen in patients suffering from cholera, a disease caused by the bacterium Vibrio cholerae. This bacterium excretes a compound that inhibits the GTP-splitting activity of the G-protein. This has the consequence that the G-protein of the intestinal cells cannot get rid of its GTP and, as a result, continues to stimulate cAMP synthesis. Among the many regulatory tasks of cAMP is to control the

15 The characteristic, but lonely, exception to this rule is the digital signs of the DNA molecule that are actively kept away from the metabolic processes of the cell

[page 154]

intestinal excretion of water and sodium, and the effect is the virulent diarrhea so well-known in cholera.

Here too, and as we've seen in so many different signal-transduction processes, different kinds of G-proteins are available for one and the same receptor— and the same G-protein may service different kinds of receptors. The cellular response to a signal will therefore depend not only on the concentration of the signal molecule, but also on which other internal signal-transduction cascades may be occurring simultaneously at that particular time. This occasions an interesting increase in the interpretive variability and semiotic freedom of the cell (freedom understood here as a loosening of the rigid causal bonding of one signal to one response).

For now, however, we must leave behind the cellular city at this point, even though we have only skimmed the surface in describing some of the many aspects of its complex, sleepless traffic. Other interesting cytosemiotic themes that I have not touched on here include apoptosis (induced cellular suicide), the production of antibodies, and the cytosemiotic breakdown that leads to the formation of cancer cells. I shall however, return to treat these themes in the chapter on endosemiotics (Chapter 7).

Before leaving the fascinating level of the cell, however, it must be emphasized that even though the cell is usually thought of as a mere subunit in a multicellular organism, it is much more accurate to acknowledge that each individual cell functions as an integrated unitary autonomous and autopoietic system’* based on finely tuned sets of coordinated semiotic control loops."” The interpretants generated through the cytosemiotic processes must therefore be understood as holistic cellular configurations in time and space.

The Semiotics of Ontogeny

At this point, we have seen how genomic instructions are channeled into the chain of semiotic relations that, taken together, incorporate the cell into a destiny determined by its topological position in the early embryo. To complete our

the genomic instructions further on to the production of the kimflok — from which the instructions themselves were originally derived one generation earlier. To do this is essentially to analyze the semiotic relations governing the developmental process of the individual.

As a first step along this path, we must consider the process whereby the individual is formed—the process of fertilization or conception. The 16 I use the term autopoietic here in the sense given it by Maturana and Varela (1980).

17 Exceptions to this rule are the degenerated red blood corpuscles or cancer cells.

[page 155]

modern idea of the individual as the focal point of the life process is quite new. Traditionally, rather, the family (what biologists call the genus) was seen as the emotional or organizational center of life. As mentioned earlier, biosemiotics will posit the family — understood as the lineage of related individuals — as evolution’s individual.

Single individuals are carriers of a code-dual dynamic that is played out in the semiotic field made up of both individual and population; this field cannot be reduced to comprise only one of these two units. This consideration is not meant to challenge the legitimacy of the individual as the central unit of life, nor shall I in any way deny my own personal acquaintance with the emotional roots of this idea. The consideration may, however, be justified to the extent that current debates more and more often invoke belief in “the inviolability of the individual” on biological conceptions of humanness. Such an invocation, for example, often occurs in the context of ethical debates on modern reproductive techniques, and especially as an argument against free access to selective abortion (which will be further discussed in Chapter 9). Seen from the biology of biosemiotics, however, a human life does not necessarily start at conception. For conception is the term designating the passage from a haploid to a diploid existence. For each individual diploid human being, this passage is of course decisive — because for him or her it initiates an irreversible journey that necessarily ends by death and annihilation. The same however, is not necessarily the case for haploid human life — i.e., life as a germ cell, whether sperm or egg. In fact, in our sex-cell-producing tissue, every one of us carries cells that — through an unbroken chain of cell divisions — descend from the earliest forms of life on Earth.

These germ cells do change down through generations (or else there could be no such thing as evolution), but considered as cells they constitute a rather infinite and unbroken chain of divisions. No sex cell in existence today came from anywhere other than this unbroken chain. For one of the first things to happen in human development is, as we have seen, that the cell lines destined to become sex cells (gametes) are segregated from the rest of the cells and kept clear of those determining processes that impact so decisively upon all the other cell lines. And if we have children, one or a few of these particular cells will live on for yet another generation. Thus, our haploid sex cells are, presumably, the closest we will ever come to eternal life.

The first task of the egg in relation to conception is to make sure that sperm from foreign species cannot penetrate the egg wall, Especially in species where conception takes place in an unprotected milieu —as, for example, in sea urchins —this poses a problem. The sea urchin egg is enveloped in a protective membrane of vitelline that is surrounded by a gel of the same kind of glycoprotein that we discussed in the previous section, and this membrane effectively prevents the penetration of sperm cells. However, since species-specific fertilization

[page 156]

should not be so prevented, evolution has left a few cracks open in this fortification of the egg.

Sea urchin sperm cells are activated by certain compounds in the membranes of the egg, and these compounds also attract the sperm cells chemotactically. Cheered up by this promising reception, sperm cells now break down their own acrosomal membrane, releasing a bucketful of degradative enzymes that help the sperm cell travel through the protective glycoprotein gel and penetrate the vitelline membrane. Making the process even more fine-grained (and spectacular), the plasma membrane of the egg is equipped with multitudes of microvilli (small extensions from the membrane), and when the sperm cell approaches, some of these microvilli lengthen and then veritably envelop the sperm head and

fuse with it, at the same time drawing the sperm head inside the egg, creating a fertilization cone, Within three seconds, the cell membrane is now depolarized, which prevents additional sperm from fusing with the plasma membrane — and thus prevents polyspermy. This fast-acting blockage is followed by a somewhat slower excretion of enzymes that, by different biochemical paths, establish an efficient and lasting blocking against further fertilizations (which might lead to chromosome numbers that the cellular machinery couldn't handle).

Only the cell nucleus of the sperm cell enters the egg, whereas its midsection — containing the mitochondria that furnish the energy for sperm movement — and its flagella are left outside. At conception, the two haploid nuclei fuse under the formation of a diploid individual, as waves of calcium ions are simultaneously released from stores in the endoplasmatic reticulum of the egg cell. These waves serve as an activation signal for the fertilized egg that it can now initiate the developmental process. Most importantly for our purposes, it should be noted that the interaction between the sperm and egg here is thus in no way a simple fusion process. Rather, the almost billion-years-old semiotic game of accomplishing conception here seems (if the reader will allow me the image) to possess that mixture of eagerness and thrill that will, much later in evolution, come to characterize the mating rituals in animal species — not the least of which, our own.

From Egg to Individual

In Chapter 2, we looked at Hans Driesch’s famous experiments from 1892, in which he separated the first cells from a sea urchin embryo, and observed that each of them developed to become a pluteus — a normal if somewhat small, larva."" The results of this experiment posed a fundamental problem for biolo-

18 Since that time, Driesch’s experiments have been reproduced in many laboratories the world over with positive results. But they are not valid for all kinds of organisms, In most invertebrates,

[page 157]

gists — for how can life attain its variegated multicellularity if each single cell in the embryo can by itself develop to become a whole organism? The answer to this question is simple but decisive: Cells communicate. Colloquially put, each single cell will, from its interactions with its neighbors, learn to give up its ambition of becoming a whole individual and, instead, be content to be a specialist in the task of serving as part of just one small area of tissue.

‘The phenomenon whereby a cell that can yet become anything becomes, in fact, this or that, is called induction — and the phenomenon plays out in numerous clever ways throughout the branching chain of events that constitutes the developmental process. Positive induction is at work, for example, when the early notochord (the embryonic vertebral column) in amphibians induces the overlying ectoderm layer to develop as nerve cell rather than as skin cell. Conversely, negative induction is at work when the inductive course of events is inhibited due to a too large number of neighboring cells (Gilbert 1991b).

I have already mentioned Leo Buss’s fascinating theory about the evolution of multicellularity as a compromise between a survival struggle among cell lines and a survival struggle between individuals. Here it is in his own words:

The thesis developed here is that the complex interdependent processes which we

refer to as development are reflections of ancient interactions between cell lineages

in their quest for increased replication. Those variants which had a synergistic effect and those variants which acted to limit subsequent conflicts are seen today as patterns in metazoan cleavage, gastrulation, mosaicism, and epigenesis. The conservatism of early ontogeny is held here to reflect the interplay between selection at the level

of the individual and selection at the level of the cell lineage, under the strong influ-

ence of ancestral constraint... The principal epigenetic interactions defining cell

fate — those of induction, competence, and cell death — are all interactions in which

one cell lineage acts to limit the replication of another, while enhancing its own

(Buss 1987, 29-30; italics added).

In order to fully comprehend the logic of Buss’s theory, one must be acquainted with a peculiar circumstance about metazoan cell biology — that is, the fact that the cells of these organisms cannot both move and divide. Eukaryote cells usually move by the use of either flagella or cilia’®. These are whip-like extensions filled with bundles of long tube-shaped structures called microtubules. These microtubules are fastened at their base to a structure called the microtubule organizing center that operates like a motor to drive the flagella or cilia around. The microfor example, early embryo cells are already allotted their future destination, thanks to asymmetries in the original egg, Due solely to their positions in different zones of this egg, therefore, cells immediately receive their basic determination. Development in more complex animals, as wwe have seen, does not work so straightforwardly.

19 Cilia are shorter than flagella and execute coordinated movements little like rowing the cell forward, Flagella function rather as propellers, with wavelike movements.

[page 158]

tubule organizing center is also sometimes called the basal body, or the centriole, or even the kinetosome — the plurality of terms reflecting the fact that this body may be located at quite different positions in different cells, and that researchers have not always been aware that these different findings referred to one and the same organelle!

Most relevant to our concerns is the fact that microtubules also function as hardware in the internal cellular transport system in a variety of ways, and most importantly as threads that extend from the microtubule organizing center to attach to the chromosomes to draw the two homologous chromosomes, each to their respective daughter cell, during the critical processes of cell division. Thus, both the formation of flagella and the mitotic division require the presence of a microtubule organizing center. Yet, as shown by Lynn Margulis, this structure does not have the ability to execute both tasks at the same time — at least not in those unicellular organisms from which multicellularity originally descended (Margulis 1981). (Indeed, this may be why ciliated cells from metazoans may well regain the capacity to divide, but to do so they must first get rid of their cilia.)

Many contemporary species of simple metazoans deliver their gametes directly into the surrounding sea water, where fertilization takes place — at which point the egg traverses the usual divisions that lead to formation of a morula, a solid ball of undifferentiated cells. At this stage, cells acquire cilia and organize themselves as blastula (Figure 5.12). And here is where the trouble begins; having developed cilia, the cell cannot divide anymore. (In some taxonomic groups, a solution to this problem was never found, writes Buss.) Instead, those organisms evolved ways to skip the blastula stage and complete their development without ever moving by cilia. More commonly, however, most metazoans did find a solution, the most popular of which consisted in a functional partitioning—whereby a minor fraction of the cells don’t develop cilia and therefore maintain the ability for division instead:

Figure 5.12 Development of blastula in amphibia. The figure shows the three layers, ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. (Modified from Luria, Gould, and Singer 1981, 320).

[page 159]

These cells, however, can proliferate in only one direction. Since the primitive form is a sphere traveling in water, the proliferating cells cannot grow into the water column without producing a mass of cells which would certainly increase drag on the embryo, interfering with further movement. Neither can the proliferating cells grow over the surface of the sphere, for to do so would obliterate the ciliated surface necessary for locomotion. Only one alternative remains. The only remaining place for these cells to move is into the sphere itself. The movement and subsequent proliferation of cells from the blastular surface into the center of the blastular sphere is gastrulation. Animal gastrulation is the metazoan solution to the requirement of simultaneous development and movement (Buss 1987).”

In turn, the gastrula undergoes a symmetry break that divides it into three distinct layers with different destinies: ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. Cell lines derived from the ectoderm become skin or nerve cells (including the cells of the sensory organs); cell lines from the mesoderm end up in bones and muscles (including the cardiac muscle, the heart) or in the vascular and reproductive systems; and cell lines from the endoderm come to constitute the structures of the intestinal tract.

Seen from Buss’s neo-Darwinian vantage pointSeen from Buss’s neo-Darwinian vantage point, the premium in the ancestral competition between cell lines was to become a sex cell, with the implied chance of continued life for yet another generation. This favorable position, however, is only open for a small minority of embryo cells — the rest must suffer the wrong of differentiation and the loss of all further expectations for eternal life. This then leads Buss to pose the following question: “How could an organism evolve such that some cells in that organism abandon their own capacity for replication?” (ibid., 53).

Even if one does not embrace Buss’s strong adherence to the competitive

schema of evolutionary mechanics, this question seems basically to be a fruitful one. Individual cells in our body have no idea that we exist — but they nevertheless collectively reproduce us from second to second throughout the entire seventy-five-plus years of an average human life. Indeed, we would not be here now to ponder the question if this were not the case— but this doesn’t make the enduring “unselfishness” any less strange.” For we are so accustomed to thinking of ourselves as unitary entities, that it may be useful sometimes to be

20 Most students of biology have wondered at this peculiar process whereby the blastula flattens at one pole and then invaginates itself under the formation of a gastrula (similar to what happens when you push a tennis ball to form a cavity in it — Figure 5.12). But according to Buss, this simply was the most effective way to solve the basic dilemma of the metazoan cells in our remote water-living ancestors.

21 Selfish in the biological sense means merely “that done for the continuation of one’s own survival” — thus describing basically every single act that an individual cell normally does (e.g. grow, metabolize, reproduce, self-repair). How any of this could become “sacrificed” and “subsumed” under the workings of some other priority is the profound question at issue here.

[page 160]

reminded that each one of our fifty trillion cells possesses a significant degree of autonomy — a fact that is sadly confirmed by the eventual occurrence of diseases such as cancer. Cancer is the out-of-control population explosion that precisely appears when ordinary somatic cells stop letting themselves be persuaded to stay in their fixed and — seen Darwinistically — unpromising position in the tissue.

From our ancestors among the protists, each one of our body cells has inherited the entire machinery needed for unicellular life: the genetic code, transcription and translation enzymes, highly organized but flexible cytoskeletons, etc. And, as Buss writes, “The cells of a developing metazoan embryo follow the same rules governing any self-replicating system: They divide until some external force limits their further replication” (ibid., 77-78). This “external force” is biosemiosis and consists in the informative (and sometimes disinformative) messages emitted from other cell lines — messages that are capable of influencing growth processes in neighboring cell lines. Buss writes, “The metazoan innovation is the evolution of epigenetic controls on the growth of developing cell lines, which provide restraints on their inherent propensity for self-replication in a precise cascade such that cell lineages organize themselves into a functional bauplan” (ibid., 78, emphasis added)”.

The establishment of these semiotic intercellular control mechanisms was not an easy process, as evidenced by considering how rare the appearance of the multicellular life form has been in evolution. The first eukaryotic cells may be dated back approximately nine hundred million years (Bitter Springs formation) and some two hundred million years after this, we find metazoans that are supposed to have belonged to extinct, but known, phyla. The property of multicellularity has arisen in seventeen out of the twenty-three monophyletic protist groups,” but only in three of these seventeen multicellular taxa (specifically, only in plants, fungi, and animals), has cellular differentiation developed in more than a handful of species (ibid., 70). The real difficulty for evolution, then, was thus not to develop viable multicellular forms of cellular life. The problem was to find a reproducible dialogical process inside the growing clone of cells descending from the same zygote — a semiosis that could make sure that some cell lines undertook (or perhaps more properly, could be fooled into undertaking) somatic duties on behalf of the common weal, even though they themselves would thereby die as individual existents.

In a certain sense, it is the differentiated multicellular organisms that introduce death as a common fate of living things. A protist, say an amoeba, does not die as a natural outcome of its life cycle — for it won't stop existing just

22 Such epigenetic controls form a subset of what, more broadly, may be called semiotic controls

23 A monophyletic (Greek, “of one race”) group consists of a common ancestor and all its descendants.

[page 161]

because it divides; rather, it now continues its existence doubly as two units (and then four, and so on). And even if individual amoebae regularly end up as food for other organisms, the surviving divisions of those very same amoebae will almost certainly have spread over the area. With the metazoans, however, this kind of survival is no longer possible. The differentiation process creates a new kind of “self” — one that is bound to a particular cellular architecture that cannot persist in the same simple way that free cells persist. Buss (1987, 78) writes, “Metazoan development today is manifestly a process of the sequential origin of, and interaction between, cell lineages arising in the clonal progression from the zygote. The fact that metazoans develop via a complex of epigenetic interactions between cell lineages is prima facie evidence that the principal modes of metazoan development arose as variants in the course of ontogeny.”

As an illustrative case, Buss refers to the ontogeny of the eyeless mutant of the axolotl salamander — which, as the name implies, produces an individual without eyes. Here we see that, under normal conditions, the amphibian eye is produced by chemical interactions between the newly formed optic vesicle and the embryonic ectoderm layer. A chemical inducer produced by the optic vesicle is used for the scaffolding of this interaction. What happens in the eyeless mutant of the axolotl is that this step is disturbed because the ectoderm of the mutant does not respond properly to the inducer —so that no eye is formed and the mutant emerges blind. However, this is not the only problem that this poor creature has to cope with — for it is also born lacking the capacity for leaving offspring.

This incapacity results because the eyeless mutant develops a secondary deficiency in the region of the brain called hypothalamus, which will only properly develop through induction via signals that are sent to it from the developing eye. In the eyeless individual, no eye exists to direct the development of the hypothalamus, and thus the hypothalamus does not develop to the point that it can produce gonadotropin hormones — and in the absence of these hormones, the individual becomes sterile. I have commented upon this state of affairs elsewhere as follows:

The deficiencies of the eyeless mutant clearly illustrate the tinkering ways in which

ontogeny has become scaffolded by evolution. There is presumably no reason why

the development of the hypothalamus should depend on the presence of a functional eye, other than that the eventual formation of the eye takes place in a location that happens to be anatomically close to that region of the brain where the hypothalamus is normally developed in this lineage. Making the development of the hypothalamus dependent upon the prior formation of an eye effectively assures that the hypothalamus will become constructed at exactly the right moment in embryogenesis. And this is precisely the situation that is not the case, of course, in the eyeless mutant. But rare mutants are statistically of little concern in evolution. Rather,

[page 162]

Figure 5.13 The normal sequence of steps in the development of the amphibian eye (modified from Coulombre 1965).

the axolotl eye just happened to be in the neighborhood of the nascent hypothalamus region in normal individuals — and it is most likely for no other reason than this that evolution managed to exapt the eye for a secondary role as an ontogenetic switch for the initiation of proper development of a hypothalamus. As Buss says, “Ontogeny must reenact the interactions which gave rise to it” (Hoffmeyer 2007, 157; Buss 1987, 97).

In the terminology of this book, one might say that ontogeny is safeguarded by the myriads of semiotic scaffolds that depend on one another in long chains of successive and deeply interdependent steps.

The Individualized Brain

“Evolution is a process of tinkering rather than of engineering,” as Francois Jacob (1982) famously proclaimed. And items constructed in a tinkering way typically bear witness to the detours taken on the path of their construction. A part that was formerly used for one purpose might somewhere along the path have been

[page 163]

recruited for some other purpose without thereby losing the structural property that made it functional for the original purpose. Likewise, in evolution, markers of the ways that organisms were originally constructed are often maintained in the present form of the organisms as testimony to the unique historical route that evolution took in creating them. And one might also formulate this realization the opposite way around, as Walter Garstang (1922) did when he turned Ernst Haeckel’s famous dogma on its head by claiming, “Ontogeny doesn’t recapitulate phylogeny, it creates it” (cit. from Gilbert 1991b, 346).

Induction plays a constructive role in evolution by facilitating evolutionary changes that affect sets of finely tuned relationships between different functionalities. Exactly because the formation of organs is coordinated via the inductive communication between parts (i.e., through biosemiosis), changes in one place in the process may often cause compensatory changes in other places. Raissa Berg has introduced the expression correlation Pleiades for this phenomenon (Berg 1960).’* One fascinating example of a correlation Pleiades is the variety of snout forms in dogs — from the narrow jaw of the German Shepherd Dog to the flat face of the Chow Chow or Bulldog. These variations are genetically fixed and each of them represents a new harmonious arrangement of many bones fitted to each other as well as to the attached muscles. And, in spite of the bizarre forms that dog breeders have excelled in bringing into being, all these snout forms, even the Bulldog’s, are capable of carrying out normal and critically important dog activities, such as moving the jaws, shaking the head, or barking.

Thus we see that embryogenesis exhibits an inexhaustible fund of sophisticated semiotically controlled adaptations. Here, however, we shall consider just one: the growth of nerves in the embryo from their source in the spinal cord to the peripheral muscles and organs they eventually connect with. Nerve cells grow by extending their axons from an area in the tip called a growth cone that literally feels its way forward along the cell surfaces it passes by. This occurs with the help of small protrusions from the growth cone called filopodia that extend or contract themselves depending on the kind of signals that they receive from the surfaces of other cells or from the extracellular matrix (see Figure 5.14).

Developing nerve cells are not given any kind of geographic genetic information beforehand that could tell them where to go to and what to connect up with in the body. Nevertheless, all the muscles and organs of the body end up being correctly connected to their corresponding nerve cells. Considering the

24 The Pleiades is a fascinating group of stars that can hardly be discriminated with the naked eye — as though they belong together!

25 An exception to this rule, though, concerns dogs with a very short face (such as the bulldog) where, apparently, it has not been possible to compensate for the alterations in skin area through corresponding alterations in bone structure — which now leaves the dog with the well-known look of extra skin hanging off of its face.

[page 164]

Figure 5.14 Filopodia (modified from Wolpert, Beddington, Jessell, et al. 2002, 354).

Vast distances that nerve cells must sometimes overcome to reach the peripheral muscles, it is clear, however, that all this precisely targeted growth cannot be based just on local signposts. Thus, the initial phase of axon growth is safely guided via a trace of chemical attractors — and this explains why nerve cells initially are assembled in those thick bundles, that we call nerves.

As the growth cone approaches the peripheral tissues, however, genuine exploratory search behavior sets in, as nerve cells individually attempt to find a destination that needs innervation. The embryo here uses a principle that is found throughout development: it creates a number of nerve cells that far exceeds the number eventually needed — and this causes a kind of Malthusian/Darwinian competition between nerve cells to find a useful connection. Correspondingly, organs or muscles that need innervation excrete an aptly named nerve growth factor that attracts the growth cones via the filopodia. Not all nerve endings are fortunate enough to find a locus for innervation and those that do not are quickly eliminated. In fact, they kill themselves. For each single nerve cell carries within it an internal “suicide program” to release a series of self-destructive enzymes dependent on conditions (intracellular or extracellular inducers). Thus, if the growth cone leading the nerve cell does not manage to hit a substantial concentration of nerve growth factor (and thus receive the suicide preempting signal), it will initiate its self-destruction program and die. The result of this amazing mechanism, called apoptosis, is that the nerves that do reach their targets for innervation will survive, whereas the others will disappear.

The brain, and the entire nervous system, is therefore to a large extent shaped via an interactive, online process — a process governed by use and disuse, reflecting the local contextual situation of the embryo (and in human beings, the first few years of life). The strong overproduction of nerve cells that takes place in the embryonic

[page 165]

brain also results in a corresponding overproduction of possible synaptic connections. And again the principle at work that will trim this chaos into order is neuronal selection — where nerve cells will only avoid programmed suicide (apoptosis) if synaptic connections are feeding them a sufficient amount of sign activity.

This was confirmed by experiments where kittens’ right eyes were covered so as to admit no light during a critical period immediately after birth. Although the shades were later removed and the kittens again received reflected light through their right eyes, they would never become able to see with this eye— and, in fact, had become functionally blind in the right eye. What explains this result is the phenomenon of synaptic competition. Since the visual cortex only received impulses from the left eye, all the synapses that connected to the optical nerve from the right eye died away and were eliminated. And although the right eye later actually began to send signals again, those signals could not get through to the visual cortex because all the previously vacant cortical synapses were now occupied by nerve threads emerging from the left eye (Gilbert 1991a, 64.4).

And, of course, it turns out that the genetic indeterminacy of the vertebrate brain is actually its greatest strength. This is especially obvious in human beings, where the brain continues to grow and actually adds 250,000 new nerve cells per minute in the initial period after birth. The American neurobiologist Terrence Deacon writes,

Cells in different areas of the brain are not their own masters, and have not been given

their connection orders beforehand. They have some crude directional information

about the general class of structures that make appropriate targets, but apparently little information about exactly where they should end up in a target structure or group of target structures. In a very literal sense, then, each developing brain region adapts

to the body it finds itself in.... There need be no “preestablished harmony” of brain

mutations to match body mutations, because the developing brain can develop a corre-

sponding organization “on line,” during development (Deacon 1997, 205).

In short, the developing human nervous system has the ability to take stock of the situation — i.e., to let its maturation process depend on the presence (and absence) of distinctive marks in the growing embryo. The biological logic behind the formation of nervous systems in nature is to delegate increasing amounts of power away from the level of the species and to the level of the individual. Genetic adaptations take generations to construct, whereas the brain can effectively wire itself up in the lifetime of the single individual. In the large scheme of things, the appearance of species with brains corresponds to a concretization or individualizing of the semiotic subjecthood that in more primitive species unconditionally resides at the level of the species. With the creation of more and more sophisticated brains, the individual increasingly takes power over its own actions and becomes an autonomous semiotic agent in its own right.

[page 166]

The Semiotics of Heredity

I began this chapter with a discussion of mortality as the logical precondition for heredity. But we have seen that mortality is perhaps a property unique to multicellularity, whereas unicellular life forms — lacking individuality in the sense that I have been discussing above — can only properly “die” by being exterminated at the species level.

In the same way, heredity is too, after all, mostly an invention that only multicellular organisms can really make use of. In unicellular organisms, the role of the genome as an efficient inventory-control system is quite obvious — but in multicellular organisms, these digitally coded specifications have the additional task of mediating an ontogenetic process, and this endows the organism with a real heritability in the sense of a temporal reconstruction of a complex spatial structure by the help of a linear set of digitally coded instructions.

We have seen that the fusion of the spermatozoon with the egg is followed by a wave of released calcium ions departing from the point of penetration, whereby the egg becomes activated to initiate this lengthy, complex process of genetically informed reconstruction. We have also seen in detail how the intracellular structures and membranes that the egg inherits from its mother organism — the endoplasmatic reticulum, the mitochondria, the Golgi system, and, not the least, the plasma membrane — are responsible for the long series of cytosemiotic processes that alone make this reconstruction possible.

The fact that the species-specific origin of the genome that we know is decisive for which organism the ontogenetic reconstruction will produce (e.g., that a snail genome will lead to the appearance of a snail-type living system and a wolf genome will lead to the appearance of a wolf-type living system) has implanted the conception in the minds of biologists that the genome controls the ontogenetic process, rather than filling the more modest role of being one tool among others for this process.

I find this former conception unfortunate, because it blinds us to the semiotic competences of the cellular system. And in my work in biosemiotics, I am trying to advance an understanding according to which the genome (both in unicellular and multicellular species) is, in effect, an inventory-control system, with the distinction that in multicellulars, access to the inventory-control system goes through a user interface — and that this interface is the product of hundreds of millions of years of evolutionary history in a narrow interplay between user (organism) and system (genome). New routines have incessantly been built upon older routines in such a way that the menu items that each cell can access is finely adjusted to the menu choices that this particular cell made in an earlier stage of its ontogeny.

[page 167]

In sum, I do not claim any Lamarckian interaction in the sense that the user organism can occasion the introduction of purposive improvements directly into the inventory-control system. But I am not afraid to adopt a modified version of the far more interactive Baldwinian scheme — as I will in the next chapter.
