[page 213]

7 Endosemiotics

Innenwelt

Endosemiotics is a term for “sign processes within the body” that Thomas A. Sebeok introduced in about 1976 (Sebeok 1985 (1976), 3). Its use has become customary, although in denoting this within, the term could be said to be somewhat paradoxical. For the processes of life are, as we saw in Chapter 2, played out across multiple surfaces, one enveloping another — and therefore no single surface or location can reasonably be appointed the essential one. In Chapter 2, the example of the Norwegian physician who suffered an attack of Guillain-Barré syndrome showed that although the skin is indeed a borderline serving to keep the world away from us in a rough physical sense, at the same time it opens us up to the world in a psychological sense, allowing us to belong to it and vice versa.

The skin, then, mediates contact with the surrounding world via its manifold of surfaces, on the physical, biological, psychological, and social levels. Among these, let us just mention the invisible surface that Sebeok (1979, 45) referred to as the Hediger bubble: “a variably shaped zone of personal space that admits no trespass by strangers and is defended when penetrated without permission.” By this very definition alone, we can draw the more general conclusion that the prefix endo in endosemiotics has no obvious or clearly-demarcated physical referent. Moreover, a sign process is itself necessarily always a border-crossing process in which an interpretant is called forth by something else.

In habitual usage, however, it is the body individuating an organism that most conveniently defines an endo-exo asymmetry of causal relations — and consequently, endosemiotics has become the pragmatic designation for sign processes taking place in the interior of an organism. Yet since the concept of the individual organism is not always as clear and unambiguous as it appears in the order of vertebrates (see Chapter 4), endosemiotics sometimes also deals with

1 Sebeok, himself, writes that he used the expression “cavalierly” (Sebeok 1979, 22).

2 The designation is in reference to the Swiss animal psychologist Heini Hediger, whose lifelong interest in the training of animals in the context of circus performances made clear to him that the animal trainer must always attempt to determine, and to respect, such invisible physical “borderlines” around the animal.

[page 214]

semiotic relations across the limits of the individual — as in cases of mutualistic symbiosis such as between squid and light emitting spirochetes. Such endosemiotic processes in damaged corn seedlings, for example, cause the excretion of a terpenoid that eventually becomes integrated into the semiotic activity of parasitic wasps (as mentioned in Chapter 6) illustrating that the endo versus exo distinction is primarily an analytical tool. At the same time, such examples point to the impossibility of upholding any sharp dividing line between biochemical and semiotic activity, however reasonable such a borderline may once have appeared.

For example, even we rational humans emit pheromones that unconsciously influence our emotional responses towards one another — and in so doing, become indelibly embedded in the complicated web of human sign use, or anthroposemiotics (see e.g., Russell 1971; Schleidt, Hold, and Attili 1981). Nowhere in this web of semiotic processes is there any sharp border to be found that might justify the distinction between an area of Peircean Secondness and an area of Thirdness (i.e., an ontological distinction between the body — as traditionally conceived as distinct from the mind — and the mind). And while it could be reasonably argued that endosemiotic sign systems are much more tightly anchored in the determinism of natural lawfulness (i.e., they have less semiotic freedom) than the kind of human mental sign systems traditionally studied in anthroposemiotics, still no absolute distinction between a semiotic, nonbiological domain and a nonsemiotic, biochemical domain can be justified.

Analyzing animal endosemiotics, Thure von Uexküll, Werner Geigges, and Jörg Hermann (1993) drew a parallel between endosemiotics and Jakob von Uexküll’s concepts of Gegenwelt and Innenwelt. These two concepts are constitutively connected with the Umwelt concept because they refer to the internal layer of processes that brings forth a common inner world in the animal. In the words of Uexküll, Geigges, and Hermann (1993, 41) — in a section that focuses primarily on the human psyche, but which may be broadened to include nonhuman semiosis simply by substituting the more general Umwelt for the species-specific human consciousness,

Paradoxically, we are “outsiders” to all “inner” (i.e., endosemiotic) sign processes, whether they occur in the nervous system or in the immune system. We can illuminate them only by complicated methods, and “understand” their messages only through biosemiotic interpretation. Whereas we are “insiders” of all sign processes by which the outside world and our body are presented to us as conscious realities. The “inner” sign processes of the brain are, like all “inner” or endosemiotic events,

3 Anthroposemiotics, as the name suggests, is the study of human uses of signs, whether verbal or nonverbal.

[page 215]

Figure 7.1 Uexküll’s functional circle (from Sebeok 1979, 10).

inaccessible to our conscious experience; but, unlike all other endosemiosis, they participate directly in its formation. That is, all consciously experienced “outside” realities are translations of “inner” sign processes which occur in our brain and are inaccessible to our experience and understanding. Here it should be recalled that originally “inside” and “outside” are semiotic concepts which take on spatial connotations only when we look at our motoricity.

These formulations may be understood as a modern interpretation of Jakob von Uexküll’s famous functional circle (Figure 7.1) where the Umwelt-Innenwelt pairing closes together, so to speak, around the animal's immediate object of attention.

Thure Uexküll and his co-authors introduce a distinction between Gegenwelt and Innenwelt in that Gegenwelt is the designation for endosemiotic systems that — like the nervous system or the immune system — each have their own internal logic (or programs) for representing states of the world. Innenwelt, on the other hand, designates a superordinate level of integration where such counter-worlds have become woven together to function as one unitary entity via circular processes: “Such an ‘inner world’ contains templates, as it were, of the sectors of the environment that are significant to the living being. These templates are recorded in signs exchanged between cells and between organs. Therefore, although they are closely related to the organism's environment, we have to call them endosemiotic” (Uexküll, Geigges, and Hermann 1993, 6).

[page 216]

The Metabolic Code

The first modern endosemiotic analysis was proposed by the biochemist and biophysician Gordon M. Tomkins, who in 1975 published a paper in Science entitled “The Metabolic Code” (Tomkins 1975). This paper focused on a group of signal compounds in bacteria that seem to function as warning signals for stress, and thus go by the name of alarmones. One of these compounds is a substance that we have already met in Chapter 5: cyclic AMP (cAMP) — a molecule that accumulates in cells lacking glucose (which for many bacterial species is the preferred nutrient sugar). A high concentration of cAMP causes the cell to start producing enzymes that are specialized for metabolizing nonglucose sugars.

Another alarmone, guanosine tetraphosphate (ppGpp), accumulates in cells lacking amino acids and will cause a radical decline in the rate that the cell makes mRNA. This is biologically appropriate, since amino acids are substrates for the synthesis of proteins. A lack of amino acids means that proteins cannot be made anymore, and that therefore further transcription of genes to mRNA

would be useless — or worse, a waste of metabolic energy. The interesting thing about these regulatory mechanisms is that there is no necessary physical molecular relationship between the signal (alarmone) and the process that the signal controls — which is why Tomkins called the alarmones symbols, defining a symbol as “a specific intracellular effector molecule which accumulates when a cell is exposed to a particular environment” (Tomkins 1975, 761).

Tomkins emphasized that alarmones are metabolically unstable, meaning that they will quickly disappear if or when prevailing conditions become better, and he also defined a domain of action as comprising all the metabolic processes that

are controlled by a given alarmone (or symbol).

As such, alarmones probably constitute the most primitive example of a digitization of analog coded processes (e.g., cAMP concentration as an indexical code for glucose starvation), as discussed in Chapter 4 in the section on the use and nature of analog codes. Tomkins even suggested a possible scenario for the evolutionary digitizing of the alarmone concentration, starting with the enzyme glucokinase that catalyzes the first reaction in a chain of processes whereby glucose is normally metabolized in cells. This first reaction consists in the attachment of a phosphate group to the glucose molecule, rendering the molecule prone for further degradative processes. This phosphate group is furnished by the compound that cells normally use for carrying around energy in the cell. This compound is called adenosine triphosphate (ATP), so named because it consists of adenosine plus three phosphate groups. In the process of glucose phosphorylation, one of these phosphate groups is transferred from the ATP to the sugar, leaving behind a partly dephosphorylated ATP molecule called ADP (adenosine with two phosphate groups attached).

[page 217]

Tomkins now suggests that glucose starvation originally may have led to the accumulation of cAMP, due to a chance side reaction that would not under normal conditions play a significant role. For example, a primitive version of the enzyme glucokinase might have catalyzed a minor side reaction consisting in the conversion of ATP to cAMP (by splitting off two phosphate molecules, as pyrophosphate, from the ATP). If the cell was starved for glucose, the main reaction of the glucokinase would then lack its substrate (glucose), and catalysis would quickly be brought to a stop. Conversely, the side reaction would make available a lot more of its substrate, ATP. Glucose starvation would thus lead to an accumulation of the product of the side reaction, cAMP.

But since the shape of the cAMP molecule has many traits in common with the shape of the ATP molecule (after all, each consists mainly of adenosine), cAMP might easily bind to a range of enzymes at the exact same positions where ATP would normally bind. A high concentration of cAMP would therefore cause a displacement of ATP from those enzymes (ATPases) that normally degrade it. In this way, cAMP serves to block the cell’s energy consumption (i.e., the degradation of phosphate bonds in ATP) whenever the supply of energy is diminished, as for example, by glucose starvation.

Seen from above, what has happened is that the cAMP-concentration has become a “switch” locating the cell in one of two possible situations: either energy metabolism goes on at full speed (low cAMP), or it is blocked (high cAMP). In the course of evolution, bacteria have developed means to utilize cAMP in a way that is even more different from the original biochemical function of this molecule — i.e., as a release mechanism for specific transcription processes whereby mRNA is formed from the genes of precisely those enzymes that are necessary for the cell to switch to other energy sources (for example, to switch on the synthesis of enzymes that specialize in the burning of lactose).

Corresponding scenarios may be suggested for the other alarmones (Kilstrup 1998). This case shows that cAMP in bacteria at one and the same time may function as an icon for ATP (i.e., as a specific conformation that enzymes may take to be ATP), as an index for increased ATP concentrations, and as a symbol for glucose starvation: Danish molecular biologist Mogens Kilstrup (2000) writes that, in post-genomic science,

the quantity of information about regulatory pathways will be both enormous

and unstructured, and new ways of extracting information will become necessary. “Regulation” is information transmission per se and a [purely] biochemical description of regulatory networks is both too complex and too unfocused. By focusing on the representation of information rather than on biochemical reactions, interesting questions will appear, such as (1) How is the particular stress factor represented? (2) How can the system be fooled (e.g., cross-talk, alternative pathways)?

[page 218]

and (3) Are there alternative representations of the same stress factor? And if so, are the signs synonymous, or do they convey different information?

Attempting to work out a sign-model that might fit the needs of a formalization of the semiotic character of intracellular biochemical networks better than the traditional two-dimensional Peircean graphic of a tripod, Kilstrup developed a new form of notation for sign relations. An important concern behind the development of this new notation system was that it should be applicable to a chain of representations: A is represented by B, which is represented by C,

and so on, where Kilstrup uses the symbol :-- to represent the relation “is represented by” and notes that “the sign chain must be a one-dimensional path through a multidimensional network in such a way that all sign elements may be allowed to represent, and be represented by, many different sign elements,” writes Kilstrup (1998, 107). In its basic form, this notation has the following structure:

Object :-- Representamen :-- Interpretant R:O

Here the Object is represented by a Representamen that again is represented by the Interpretant, but in such a way that the Interpretant refers to both the Representamen and the Object and also to the relation between them (ibid.). With a deep-drawn sigh, Kilstrup notes that this one-dimensional notation, of course, does not immediately convey the true triadic nature of the relations. But this loss of direct appeal is, in the eyes of Kilstrup, the necessary payment for a notation that is capable of specifying all the elements of the sign. For comparison, he says, the equation of H2O as equivalent to water does not bring forth

“the same associations, to a beautiful lake in a forest or a cool glass of water that we might get by hearing the word water. But few are those that would doubt water to be water, just because its formula consists of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. One should not, therefore, by the mere change of notational technique, think that the linear atomized account of the sign would indicate that the sign consists of only two dyadic representations in a row” (ibid.). Kilstrup offers an immunological example of how the new notation may be applied in the case of a physician examining the blood sample containing HIV antibodies:

[HIV virus] :-- [HIV antibodies] :-- Mental representation^[HIV antibodies]:[HIV virus]

This should be read to indicate that an antibody towards HIV is a sign (most properly, a sign vehicle) for the presence of the HIV virus. The functional sign, the representamen, is not the antibody as such. Rather, it is the concentration of that antibody that in chemical notation is indicated by placing the chemical compound in angular parentheses, so that the concentration of a compound,

[page 219]

X, is written [X]. The (immediate) object of the sign, as given in the notation above, is one or several distinctive traits pertaining to the real object of the sign (the dynamic object, in Peircean terms), which in this case would be a distinctive trait of the HIV virus itself, namely its concentration — or, more accurately, the concentration of an epitope on the surface of the virus (see below). The interpretant consists of “an induced change of the interpreting system, that thus appears as a new distinctive trait and therefore a new potential sign; in this case, the neurophysiological change that a physician experiences by learning that a patient has HIV virus in his blood” (ibid., 108). The two links (:-/-:) are icons for the relationships that taken together are responsible for the establishment of the representation. The reference link, or the interlink ([HIV antibodies]:[HIV virus]) refers to the knowledge that the physician has of the relationship between antibody concentration and virus concentration. The reference function thus always presupposes learning and memory, either as mental learning in the traditional sense or in the form of evolutionary (or gene-based) adaptations. An important point in Kilstrup’s notation is that it makes it possible to distinguish between the Peircean sign-categories simply by assigning to each of them a distinct notation: (:-/-:) for recognition links, (:-:) for causal links, and (:->) for law-based or habitual links, respectively. Kilstrup’s notational system is

a promising point of departure for explorative endosemiotic analysis, but unfortunately we are still awaiting his publication of a fully worked-through version of the system.

Dictyostelium discoideum

The problem of multicellularity — i.e., the difficulty of establishing a stable reproductive coexistence between, on the one hand, mobile cell lines lacking reproductive potential and, on the other hand, cell lines with reproductive potential — has, as already mentioned, been solved only a few times in evolution. However, there are a number of intermediate forms between unicellular and multicellular organisms, and examining these may help us get a better grasp of the role that semiosis plays in organizing unicellular life into multicellular life. The best studied among such intermediate forms is the slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum. D. discoideum alternates between a phase of free unicellular life and a phase wherein hundreds or thousands of single cells crowd together and come to work in concert as one, as they form a superorganism called a plasmodium — a slug-like structure that is capable of moving around and searching out the suitable conditions whereby the plasmodium may form a stalk with fruiting bodies from which spores bearing the next generations of unicellulars eventually burst forth.

[page 220]

Here once again, cAMP is at center stage for semiotic control — and whether we choose to call it endosemiotic or exosemiotic becomes a matter of concern only to the analyst — the life cycle of Dictyostelium discoideum itself, as we shall see, makes no such distinctions. There, just as in the bacterial system, cAMP functions as a stress code. So long as there is plenty of food and moisture, the amoeboid cells move freely around eating bacteria, living independent of one another and largely indifferent to each other's presence. But as soon as a few cells start experiencing a deficit in one or both of these two life essentials, they start producing cAMP and excreting it into the shared medium. The presence of this cAMP then attracts neighboring amoeboid cells and induces them to excrete cAMP, too.

At the same time, however, the cells also excrete an enzyme, a phosphodiesterase, that degrades cAMP — and in doing so, creates a pulse of cAMP/non-cAMP waves spreading through the population. Experiments have shown that it is this pulse that attracts cells, whereas a fixed concentration of cAMP has no effect. Yet in order for this wave to work, an additional refinement is needed to stop the wave from running backwards (Goodwin 1995, 48). For when cAMP is excreted from a cell, it will normally diffuse away equally well in all directions — but this would spoil the wave structure. This does not happen in the case of D. discoideum because the amoeba can produce cAMP only in short bursts, each of which is followed by a refractional period, where it is insensitive to the signal while it reconstitutes itself. In this way, the possibility of the wave traveling backwards is avoided.

As the cAMP pulse moves forward, cells increasingly begin to stream up against the biochemical tide. A differentiation and asymmetric distribution of the formerly homogeneous cell population now sets in, leading to the formation of a series of definite architectures, where the destiny of cells depends on their position relative to the pattern of the gradient — some cells ending up as the stalk, others as the fruiting bodies (see Figure 7.2). Yates (1992, 478) has described it in the following way: “The same signal molecule, cAMP, according to the ambient context, can be interpreted as a command to aggregate, to differentiate, or to disaggregate. ... This single signal molecule can induce different sets of genes (informational structures) at different times through different receptors. Here is chemistry in a very functional guise, giving commands: ‘Aggregate’; ‘Migrate’; ‘Differentiate.’”

All in all, this chemical exchange of commands between cells entails a collaborative effort aimed at the plasmodium’s reaching up just a few centimeters

4 As we saw in Chapter 5, in eukaryotic organisms, cAMP has been accorded far more complex and inarguably biosemiotic tasks, including that of “second messenger” in intracellular signal-transduction processes.

[page 221]

Figure 7.2 The life cycle of the slime mold, Dictyostelium discoideum (Goodwin 1995, 46).

above the ground to a position where the wind may get hold of its spores and spread them to more favorable locations, where unicellular life can begin again.

The Multicellular Self

As mentioned in Chapter 5, evolution has succeeded only three times in crossing the threshold from unicellular to multicellular life with any real success (if by this commonly misused expression, we refer to the capacity of a species to leave offspring in the sense of a large quantity of taxonomic groups that include many species). In these three cases — of fungi, plants, and animals, respectively — the problem of multicellularity was solved by the use of three very different principles. Most fundamentally, the differences turn upon how to establish a multicellular self. The unicellular self was said to be due to the establishment of a stable integration of a system for other-reference into a system of self-reference in the earliest prokaryotes (see Chapter 2). But how, the Darwinian must ask, could

[page 222]

clones of cells descending from one and the same zygote find ways to collaborate on the task of creating a communal self, where single cells work for the common good, rather than for their own best interests?

The difficulty of maintaining slime mold cultures in the laboratory offers an interesting illustration of just this very problem. Routinely, such cultures are maintained by the collecting of spores (for example, by flooding the petri dish). But cultures that are propagated in this way have a tendency to grow shorter and shorter stalks, says Buss (1987, 127). This is presumably because the washing technique does not select against eventual mutations that increase the probability of cells to end up as spores, rather than carrying out help functions such as the forming of the stalk. Over the course of successive generations, one will therefore witness a falling ability of the progeny to form high stalks, for there will remain fewer cells available to carry out such necessary supportive functions. In the wild, this condition is prevented by sexual reproduction, whereby a recombination of the genetic material will take place so that individuals without the degenerated mutations will appear among the recombinants. These genetically healthy individuals may then found new cultures where a sort of multicellular self can be maintained — at least long enough for the relevant purposes.

The task of protecting such a multicellular self against mutational deterioration has manifested in widely different strategies in animals, plants, and fungi, respectively — and these differences apparently go all the way back to the three very different types of protists from which these three kingdoms were originally derived. Two essential traits are of special importance here: (1) possession of rigid cell walls and (2) possession of a cell-based structure. Plants have both, whereas animals and fungi must do with only one of them. Fungi have rigid cell walls but no unambiguous separation of cells; animals consist of cells lacking rigid cell walls. As we shall see, these fundamental differences each pose a very different set of challenges.

The most vulnerable point of departure seems to have been that of the animals — because the free mobility of animal cells (due to their lack of rigid cell walls) means that the animal multicellular self is in imminent danger of becoming deranged by anarchistic mutant cells. These are cells that are supposed to give rise to important somatic functions but instead — due to mutation — migrate to positions in the embryo reserved for the sex cell lines. Our remote Metazoan ancestors solved this problem hundreds of millions of years ago by instituting very early differentiation of the embryonic cells. This implies a loss of totipotentiality

5 The reader should not misunderstand the apparent anthropocentric way of thinking here.

Through the spans of millions of years, all kinds of chance mutations are statistically bound to appear — among them, some that threaten the multicellular self through inappropriate migratory propensities,

[page 223]

(the ability to become any cell in the body) for all cells except those few cell lines destined to become sex cells. This does not prevent the possibility that variant cells might appear and migrate to more favorable positions in the embryo, but it does prevent any asexual reproduction of such an odd individual — and therefore it protects the multicellular self against mutational degeneration.

And here we find the root of Weismann’s cut, i.e., the strict separation of the germ cell lines from the somatic tissues. The result is that an animal’s development is differentiated at the cellular level long before the differentiation is unfolded spatially as the adult form becomes established through a complex pattern of relative growth rates in different tissue areas combined with cellular migrations. One may say that an animal’s self is bound to have a high degree of predictability as far as its basic form (bauplan) is concerned — but that this rigidity is richly compensated for by a very low degree of predictability as to the actual location of the animal, since animals are mobile creatures.

In plants, there is no corresponding separation of the temporal and the spatial aspects of differentiation, simply because plant cells cannot move. The plant cannot start differentiating its cells at an early time in anticipation of events to occur in later stages, for it is bound to leave the cells behind at the exact location where they were first formed. Plants therefore do not have the kind of preformationistic (using this word in its modern, non-naive sense) scheme of development that is characteristic of animals, but are free to develop as the wind and the weather invites them to. For contrary to the animal cell method of development, plants maintain throughout life a mitotically totipotent cell line that takes care of somatic functions (as stem cell lines) as well as the formation of gametes. If regressive cell lines should appear, they will not normally pose a serious threat to the multicellular self of the plant, due to the lack of motility in the regressive cells. This difference between plants and animals is the reason why tumors in plants are relatively benign and clearly localized, whereas in animals they are often malignant and metastatic. Considered as a disease, cancer is precisely an attack on the coherent biological self by a subset of its constituents — one might even call it a cellular insurrection of sorts.

The vegetative, multicellular self of a plant is thus well protected against dissolving mutations solely through the rigidity of its cells. The load of endosemiotic controls in the plant kingdom is therefore considerably smaller than in the animal kingdom, where the more rigidly determined developmental scheme requires accuracy in terms of temporal and spatial coordination through semiotic exchanges between cells, tissues, and organs. Conversely, plants — unable to move away from their place of origin — have had to rely on flexibility in growth and structure and the development of a whole battery of exosemiotic tools for influencing surrounding life forms and patterns of interaction in order to survive in the living world.

[page 224]

In the kingdom of fungi, the problem of rigid cell walls, consisting here of chitin rather than cellulose — chitin exhibits far more resistance to attacks by microorganisms — was solved by compensating for the lack of external mobility through increased internal mobility. The fungi have achieved this by dismantling the automatic coupling of cellular division and division of the nucleus. Instead, most fungi consist of long branching threads called hyphae that form a tangled mass called the mycelium. The weblike structure that one may occasionally find on the surface of old bread may be the outer part of such a mycelium (though most of it grows invisibly inside the bread). In many cases, these fungal hyphae are coenocytic — meaning that they form lengthy, gigantic cells with multiple nuclei that are formed by division of the nuclei unaccompanied by any division of the cell. This method prevents nuclei from being locked up within the prison of the rigid cell walls.

Morphologically, fungi are considerably more underdetermined than even plants. Hyphae spread away from each other when there is plenty of food, and then re-assemble to form fruiting bodies (e.g., mushrooms) when such stores of nutrients are exhausted. Because of their “open contextual borders” (as the British fungal expert Alan Rayner has called it), fungi are involved in numerous symbiotic interactions. In many natural environments, fungi provide the hidden energy-distributing infrastructure — like the communication pipelines and cables beneath a city — that connects the lives of plants and animals in countless and often surprising ways (Rayner 1997). And because of these flexible borders, fungi may continue to live for a very long time. Thus, in a Canadian forest an individual rhizomorphic fungus has been observed to have a mycelium that extends through an area of fifteen hectare and has an estimated weight of one hundred tons. This individual is supposed to be fifteen hundred years old (ibid.).

In a dynamical biological system of such age, many somatic mutations are bound to have accumulated — and if we consider it to be one individual (as

indeed, there is no biological reason why we shouldn’t) we must accept that individuals may possess significant suborganismic variation, even at the genetic level. Adding to the suborganismic variation in fungi, mycelia often fuse with other mycelia, and often even with mycelia that exhibit difference markers. Such chimeric mycelias may sometimes prosper under conditions where none of the two components from which the chimera was derived would have been able to survive on their own. This is because different nuclei move to different localities inside the mycelium, depending on where their particular synthetic competences (as concerns enzymatic resources) could be of use.

This surprising openness, however, is also a major risk factor. Variant cell nuclei that might further their own rate of division at the expense of their contribution to the somatic tasks of the fungus will threaten to spoil the fungal self. That this is indeed a threat, writes Buss (1987, 134), is illustrated by the

[page 225]

observation that “naturally occurring mycelia of the devastating rice pathogen, Fusarium fujikuroi, harbor a substantial proportion of nuclei which lack the capacity to invade rice.” In order to defend themselves against this threat, these fungi have developed a host of endosemiotic control mechanisms, such as distinct markers, that must be accepted before mycelia can fuse with each other, and have established synchronization controls for the division of nuclei. Certain fungi have developed septa — partial partition walls that subdivide the hyphae into semi-cells — and these septa can be capable of distinguishing normal nuclei from parasitic nuclei, allowing only the former nuclei to pass.

We can conclude, then, that in all three taxonomic kingdoms where multicellularity has been established, the emergence of a coherent multicellular individual (or self) has required the development of numerous endosemiotic control mechanisms to safeguard the multicellular (or holistic) self against the ever-present risk of mutant anarchistic cell lines that would catastrophically multiply themselves at the expense of the multicellular individual's life. But only in the animal kingdom do we find that peculiar individualization of the self as a preformationistically designed entity, the animal, with well-defined borderlines in the physical, ecological, and social space.

Compared to animals, plants and fungi have much more freedom to profit from the vicissitudes of life — either through their own growth processes or through asexual forms of reproduction. But because the early segregation of the sex cell lines makes such possibilities virtually unavailable as a life-resource for animals, the animal kingdom has had to invent compensating mechanisms. The solution was the construction of sophisticated senso-motoric systems coupled to a corresponding finely tuned regulation of a milieu intérieur that could safeguard the stability necessary for reliable performance. The task of integration that this has required is truly impressive, and I will spend the rest of this chapter in illuminating the most biosemiotically relevant aspects of it.

Cognition and Semiotic Emergence

That life and cognition may be seen as related phenomena has been observed by several thinkers (Bateson 1979; Maturana and Varela 1980; Uexküll 1986), and this conception gains in credibility with the decreasing confidence in the idea of thought as a purely logical-rational activity and the understanding of its irreducible bodily embeddedness (see Sheets-Johnstone 1990; Damasio 1994; Kelso 1995; Port and van Gelder 1999; van Gelder and Port 1995; Deacon 1997; Lakoff and Johnson 1999, just to name a few). Thought seems to swarm out of the body: “The brain is, as we have seen, immersed in the immune system's floating

6 The term was coined by nineteenth-century physiologist Claude Bernard.

[page 226]

morass of physicality, and the cognitive scientists’ search for the brain’s supreme center — or ‘central processor’ — has proved futile. There do not appear to be any such centers or processors. Rather than the brain being pre-programmed to produce intelligence, intelligence seems to swarm out of it” (Hoffmeyer 1996b, 114).

The idea that thoughts swarm out of the body implies their entanglement in human life processes. Although children are often thought to be able to spontaneously think both rationally and logically, such claims often underplay the rich world of rationalistic social interaction into which most such children have been plunged since birth, and as any parent can attest, the development of truly rational thinking in children requires much practice and incitement to develop. Conversely, narrative thinking, it has been claimed, comes to us for free and usually feels much more natural to us. The psychologist Jerome Bruner (1990, 43) has characterized such narrative thinking as fundamentally temporally organized: “Perhaps its principal property is its inherent sequentiality: A narrative is composed of a unique sequence of events, mental states, and happenings involving human beings as characters or actors. These are its constituents. But these constituents do not, as it were, have a life or meaning of their own. Their meaning is given by their place in the overall configuration of the sequence as a whole — its plot or fabula.”

The predilection of the human brain for narrative thinking agrees well with the discussion we have had in the preceding chapter that argued that mental life is organized around a central series of “I can”s (Merleau-Ponty 2002 (1945); Sheets-Johnstone 1998). Bruner refers to the French philosopher Paul Ricoeur’s demonstration of a reciprocal interdependence between “being in history” and “telling about history” (Bruner 1990, 45) — and in this connection, one might also recall Merlin Donald’s elegant theory of the origin of language in the mimetic culture of our quite smart but clearly nonlinguistic Homo erectus ancestors (Donald 1991). If human speech was indeed a further development of mimed communication, it would be understandable that our linguistic thinking from the very beginning has been inscribed in the senso-motoric field.

And yet when one comes to think about it, it is nearly unbelievable that for so long we have been able to maintain this basic confidence in the ability of thought to put itself beyond time and place — in spite of the fact that it all occurs in just a few cubic centimeters of nerve tissue at the inner side of the skull. Anyone having witnessed the effect of a cerebral hemorrhage at close range will recognize that this bit of brain tissue is all we have to connect us with the world.

And yet, we automatically project our thoughts upon the outside world. Or, as Carol Feldman has suggested, we tend to endow the conclusions of our cognitive reckonings with a special external ontological status. Our thoughts are in here, but the conclusions are out there — ontic dumping, as Feldman called

[page 227]

this human naiveté (cited in Bruner 1990, 24). However, it only deserves to be called naive if one also believes that our conclusions are themselves beyond time and place.

For in reality, the brain is there to give us a track to act upon, it is not there to give us the truth (as this concept has traditionally been understood). In Peircean pragmatism, truth is precisely seen as a track we may follow in our efforts — and not as a position or locale to be reached in a lifetime.

The inextricable relationship between mental recognition and bodily senso-motoric activity is evident most obviously at the level of our senses, as for instance, in the case of vision. For contrary to the way that we finally experience it, the human eye does not see a full picture of the visible field in the sense that all parts of the field are represented at the retina. The full picture is, rather, the work of the brain alone. The eye focuses at each one-third of a second on less than 0.01 percent of the total visual field — but this small fragment, in turn, is perceived in very high resolution. Unconsciously, the muscles connected to our eyeballs make small movements, micronystagmus or saccades, whereby the focus is shifted some three times per second. As far back as in 1967, cognitive scientist Alfred Yarbus showed that these saccades are intelligent in the sense that they reflect the context of the visual field as it relates to the immediate goals of the perceiver — as opposed to how the field is in itself (Yarbus 1967).

In one of Yarbus’s experiments, subjects were shown a picture of a room with some people in it and were asked to guess either the age of the persons, or the kind of activity they were engaged in. The experiments showed that eye movements exhibited different patterns depending on which of the two tasks that the subjects were asked to do. People use saccades to attend to the positions in space that are of interest to them, and it is a big question if they have any picture of the rest, whatsoever. And indeed, of what use would it be to have such a picture? In doubtful situations, one might just take another look — and as far as memory is concerned, we likewise tend to record exactly those things most relevant to our goals in any given situation, and there is no use for the rest to be encoded into memory. Most likely, claim many cognitive scientists, our brains fill in the gaps according to prior experience and expectations — an everyday phenomenon called visual closure (see Ramachandran and Blakeslee 1998).

7 Our desire for knowing the truth is, of course, both useful and commendable. But it risks

becoming exaggerated beyond our natural limits — as one may sometimes see in those philosophers of the analytical school who maintain a confidence in the scope of reason that may itself be somewhat unreasonable,

8 Recent studies in the widespread phenomena of change blindness — the inability to perceive

otherwise obvious changes in a visual field if such changes are not being actively looked for — also lends support to this hypothesis (Grimes 1996).

[page 228]

The philosopher Andy Clark, working in the field of robotics that is devoted to the creation of intelligent autonomous agents, has suggested that a general principle for cognition in humans — as well as in modern mobile robots (called mobots) — is one that he calls the 007-principle, wherein the mobots (or the human mind), like the famous British movie hero, use whatever resource they might first come upon to advance their performance. According to this principle, an evolving system always proceeds by using the world as its own best model: “In general, evolved creatures will neither store nor process information in costly ways when they can use the structure of the environment and their operations upon it as a convenient stand-in for the information-processing operations concerned. [The operative principle seems to be this:] Know only as much as you need to know to get the job done” (ibid., 46; italics added).

The 007-principle is derived from work in new robotics or situated robotics — the attempt to construct robots that can cope with the messy and unpredictable environments of the real world. One of the main lessons from this work is the dethronement of the central planner model:

The New Robotics revolution rejects a fundamental part of the classical image of mind. It rejects the image of a central planner that is privy to all the information available anywhere in the system and dedicated to the discovery of possible behavioral sequences that will satisfy particular goals. The trouble with the central planner is that it is profoundly impractical. It introduces what Rodney Brooks aptly termed a “representational bottleneck” blocking fast real-time response [in (Brooks 1991)]. The reason is that the incoming sensory information must be converted into a single symbolic code so that such a planner can deal with it. And the planners’ output will itself have to be converted from its proprietary code into the various formats needed to control various types of motor response. These steps of translation are time-consuming and expensive (Clark 2002, 21).

Instead of being based on the central planner model, mobots are built according to a principle that robot researcher Horst Hendriks-Jansen has called interactive emergence — but which might as well, or better, be termed semiotic emergence (Hoffmeyer 1997b). By semiotic emergence, I mean the establishment of higher-level patterns scaffolded by a situated exchange of signs between components.

For illustration, let me borrow an example from computer scientist Martin Resnick (1994). Resnick tells us, with barely concealed delight, how his computer simulations of traffic jams evoked head-shaking distrust in some of his colleagues because the simulation showed that a traffic jam moved backwards relative to the driving direction of the cars. This result was easily confirmed from the air, and the reason is simple: the traffic jam does not consist of cars, which of course move forward; it consists of a relation between cars. The traffic jam is a pattern that appears because of the semiotic interactions between the drivers

[page 229]

of the individual cars who, moment for moment, must observe (interpret) the movements of other cars — as well as such constraints on driving that might stem from other factors, e.g., the borders of the lanes, roadwork, a nearby accident, or harsh weather conditions. We have here a kind of self-organization that cannot be explained through any generative causal law but instead demands a historical explanation of the phenomenon as an effect of the conjunction of circumstances that produced it. This is the kind of interactive pattern that I call semiotically situated interaction.

The theoretical necessity for respecting the reality of historical idiosyncrasies forms a central theme in situated robotics, for such occurrences cannot be escaped during the learning processes of animals (or of intelligent robots). A key concept in this connection is what Clark calls soft assembly. Soft assembly must be understood as opposite to hard assembly, as we know this latter, for example, from a traditional robot arm with a preprogrammed repertoire of movements, whose functionality requires accurate pre-design, manufacture, and installation. As an example of soft assembly, Clark mentions, by contrast, the phenomenon of human walking — a recursively adaptive feedback process that gracefully compensates for nearly all kinds of irregularities. Slippery sidewalks, high heels, blisters, or any of a number of various and unpredictable factors may well influence the gait, as well as the pattern of muscle contractions, during human walking — but the overall movement toward the goal usually continues unaffected.

Clark illustrates these ideas with reference to studies of how small children concretely learn simple “reaching-out towards” movements (Thelen and Smith 1994). Although the end result of the efforts of the children to master such movements is quite universal, children exhibit very different styles in how they arrive at the desired result. It behooves us to follow Clark’s (1997, 45) description of this process carefully, because the key to the phenomenon in question resides in the details:

One infant, Gabriel, was very active by nature, generating fast flapping motions with his arms. For him the task was to convert the flapping motions into directed reaching. To do so, he needed to learn to contract muscles once the arm was in the vicinity of a target so as to dampen the flapping and allow proper contact. Hannah, in contrast, was motorically quiescent. Such movements as she did produce

9 Alternatively, one might enumerate a set of conditions whereby potential traffic jams are most

statistically likely to occur. But every single case of an actual traffic jam will exhibit its own unique pattern and demand its own separate explanation to be genuinely informative.

10 As Clark (1997, 45) notes, this conception fits into a long tradition in developmental psychology: “Theorists such as Jean Piaget, James Gibson, Lev Vygotsky, and Jerome Bruner, although differing widely in their approaches, actively anticipated many of the more radical-sounding ideas now being pursued in situated robotics (Piaget 1952; 1976; Bruner 1968; Gibson 1979; Vygotsky 1986).”

[page 230]

exhibited low hand speeds and low torque. Her problem was not to control flapping, but to generate enough lift to overcome gravity.

Other infants present other mixtures of intrinsic dynamics, but in all cases, the basic problem is one of learning to control some intrinsic dynamics (whose nature, as we have seen, can vary quite considerably) so as to achieve a goal. To do so, the central nervous system must assemble a solution that takes into account a wide variety of factors, including energy, temperament, and muscle tone. One promising proposal is that in doing so the CNS is treating the overall system as something like a set of springs and masses." It is thus concerned, not with generating inner models of reaching trajectories and the like, but with learning how to modulate such factors as limb stiffness so that imparted energy will combine with intrinsic spring-like dynamics to yield an oscillation whose resting point is some desired target. That is, the CNS

is treated as a control system for a body whose intrinsic dynamics plays a crucial role in determining behavior (italics added).

Here, I want to suggest, is where we find the sources for psychosomatic integration. The central nervous system is not engaged in producing solutions to abstract problems but is, on the contrary, from the earliest moments of childhood incessantly occupied with the modulation of bodily parameters that show up for us in our attempts to overcome the obstacles posed by the body and the environment. By the expression show up for us I am referring not only to the external registration of success or failure in solving concrete tasks, but also to the internal feeling of the movements (e.g., the mechanical resistance that we experience as exertion as well as the muscle fatigue that we likewise label stiffness). Proprioceptive sense receptors are distributed over the muscles, sinews, and joints throughout the body. Through proprioception, it becomes clear that cognition (knowing something to be the case) is as much connected to the registration of movements and to the play of muscles, as it is to the brain and to symbolic reflection — in fact, these two aspects of cognition cannot exist apart.

As observed by Uexküll, Geigges, and Hermann, this is dramatically illustrated by the symmetrical set of illnesses called phantom pains and scotoma limbs. In phantom pains, the brain is stimulated by proprioceptive signals from nerves once connected to a limb that is no longer there, while the proprioceptive signals emerging from a present but undetected scotoma limb are

11 Clark (1997, 45) refers to Polit and Bizzi (1978), Hogan et al. (1987), Jordan (1994), and Thelen and Smith (1994).

12. Scotoma is the medical designation for the visual blind spot that each of us has at the point where the optic nerve occupies the region where photoreceptors would otherwise be on the optic disc. Like the scotoma-limb patients, what is most curious is not that there is an ever-present hole in our perceptual field, but that we do not detect it! This is another example of the kind of sensory closure discussed above.

[page 231]

never perceived as such, since they do not reach the brain. In the first case, one experiences the presence of a limb one doesn’t have, while in the second case one is convinced of missing a limb that one actually does have (see overview in Ramachandran and Blakeslee 1998).

The neurologist Oliver Sacks experienced this phenomenon first-hand, after having suffered a grave accident and a subsequent operation, and has described the disconcerting experience of utter confusion that seized him after the bandages were removed and he could once again see — but not feel — his own leg:

Yes, it was there, Indisputably there! ... A leg — and yet, not a leg: there was something all wrong. . . . It was indeed “there” in a sort of formal, factual sense: visually there, but not livingly, substantially, or “really” there. It wasn’t a real leg, not a real thing at all, but a mere semblance which lay there before me. ... It was clear that I had a leg which looked anatomically perfect, and which had been expertly repaired, and healed without complications, but it looked and felt uncannily alien — a lifeless replica attached to my body (Sacks 1986, 91).

Uexküll, Geigges, and Hermann (1993, 43-44) have these comments:

This impressively illustrates that our living body, which we experience as the center of our reality, is the product of a “neural counterbody” (Gegenwelt) which is continually shaped and reshaped by the ceaseless flow of proprioceptive signs from the muscles, joints, and tendons of our limbs to the brain, This “neural counterbody” is the center of a “neural counterworld” which our brain constructs and reconstructs from the likewise permanent flow of signs from the sense organs. Counterbody and counterworld are amalgamated to form an indissoluble unity because all the events we perceive in the environment are counteraffordances — that is, they are related to actual or potential affordances of our motor system and combine with these to form the spatial grid by which we orient ourselves.

As we have seen, active movement has been the key to animal life from the very beginning, and senso-motoric integration has subsequently been a major theme in the evolution of the animal kingdom. Step by step, animal species have managed to optimize internal and external coordination tasks, as such coordination was called forth by the imperative to move. And, given the way that evolution works, the achievement of such coordination (and the development of coordinative controls) must have been reminiscent of problem-solving strategies proposed by the research coming out of the work on autonomous agents.

In short, the semiotic interaction between embryonic cells, tissues, and organs must have, at various intervals in evolution, given rise to the unforeseen appearance of organized high-level patterns that could stabilize (or canalize) the evolution of suitable new developmental strategies or serve as stepping stones to reach yet more overarching organizational structures. Such patterns might consist of morphological elements (as, for example, changes in the relative distribution of

[page 232]

embryonic tissues that would open the door for new functionalities) or dynamic elements (e.g., the establishment of new semiotic control loops), but in either case the principle would be the same.

And by terming this phenomenon semiotic emergence, I wish to bring out as forcefully as possible the common underlying principle exhibited in these cases, i.e., the principle that the emergence of higher-level patterns is the result of semiotic — and not just physical — interactions between entities at the lower level. Semiotic emergence will, of course, build on patterns of semiotic interactions and it is perhaps a question of terminology when — or from which level of the process — one should talk about real emergence.

The appearance of a uniquely flexible kind of consciousness in big-brained animals is perhaps the most obvious case of semiotic emergence. Integrating the ideas put forward by Sheets-Johnstone with those of the robot scientists may give us a hint as to how the emergence of such consciousness might have taken place. Neurobiologists have proved experimentally that proprioceptive information is more important than vision when the task is to direct a correct movement such as reaching out for something: “The remarkable trajectory errors by patients with large-fiber sensory neuropathy indicate that proprioceptive information is critical if accuracy is to be achieved,” writes Ghez et al. (1995, 561).

More remarkable, perhaps, is that the task of proprioceptive information

does not consist in any simple or direct correction of errors. Rather, sense inputs from proprioceptive sense receptors supply data that the brain must use to calibrate the organism’s ongoing action in the environment. As Ghez et al. (ibid.) explain, proprioceptive information “operates by generating and recalibrating internal models of the mechanical properties of the limbs. . . . It appears that the motor systems predict interaction torques and control their effects so as to achieve the kinematic results required by the behavioral task. In such a system, internal models would provide the means for predicting the unfolding scenario

of goal-directed movements.” It is fascinating to speculate (as we have noted earlier — Hoffmeyer 2002a) that these internal-model schemas, which are generated and calibrated by proprioceptive information, might perform the same trick in the moving body as do the motor emulators in industrial robot systems. An emulator is a piece of onboard circuitry that replicates certain aspects of the temporal dynamics of the larger system, and its role is to predict — i.e., determine probabilistically — what the feedback from the sensory periphery is likely to be. If the device is reliable — i.e., if it is properly calibrated — these predictions can be used in lieu of actual sensory signals, so as to generate faster error-correcting activity. According to Andy Clark (1997, 22), the human body is in need of such a mechanism: “Proprioceptive signals must travel back from bodily peripheries to the brain, and this takes time — too much time, in fact, for the signal to be

[page 233]

used to generate very smooth reaching movements.” The purpose of the motor emulator is to overcome this problem. A motor emulator “facilitates real-time success by providing a kind of ‘virtual feedback’ that outruns the feedback from the real sensory peripheries. . . . It models salient aspects of the agents’ bodily dynamics, and it can even be deployed in the absence of the usual sensory inputs” (ibid.; italics added), The evolutionary advantage of such an emulation device would apply not only to human bodies, but to all animal bodies above a certain size. And brains capable of developing such virtual action-coordination controls must have been created by evolution long before the arrival of humans. The point is that this substitute-interpreter, as we might call it, would seem to be a perfect early precursor for human consciousness.

Its primary (survival) function is to facilitate smoothly coordinated goal-directed movement, but it does so by making a construct which is not as such a direct reflection of the regularities of sensory input in the naive inner-model sense (for this would require an infinite regress of homunculi to view the models). Rather this construct is based upon a particular set of sensori-motor schema that are “selected” from the organism's entire behavioral repertoire, so that it orients the organism for the immediate next action. While still probabilistic, this selection of which schema to activate is both evolutionarily and ontogenetically informed. It thus functions as a qualified guess that will be continually re-calibrated by the actual incoming inputs from the proprioceptive senses for fine-tuned appropriateness and accuracy. In other words, and most essentially, this systemic substitute or virtual interpreter has already attained a degree of autonomy relative to the real world. In the natural history of human consciousness, these properties are exactly what should be expected from an eventual early precursor for what much later would become the virtual world of human consciousness, as we know it from our own lives. And this corroborates Sheets-Johnstone’s conclusion (1998, 290) that the internalization of sensing surfaces to produce proprioceptive organs is an “epistemological gateway, one that, by descent with modification, may clearly be elaborated both affectively and cognitively.”

We may conclude, that the deepest sources for the cognizing self lay inscribed in the very basic senso-motoric unity of animal multicellular life. And in the next chapter, I will discuss in detail the appearance of the peculiar abstractive talents that came to characterize the uniquely human form of such cognition. It is important at the outset, however, that one understands the basic phenomenon of cognition as a quite general product of semiotic emergence in multicellular organisms. Nothing could be more backwards, in other words, than to understand human cognition as the primary or most definitional form of cognition. Human cognition should be understood more modestly as an extraordinarily interesting — but obviously species-specific — development of the cognitive capacity that quite generally characterizes all moving, living, adaptive semiotic systems.

[page 234]

The Internal Surroundings

The realization that organisms do not have just an external environment, but also an internal environment — a milieu intérieur — was the seminal idea of the French physiologist Claude Bernard (1813-78). Bernard saw that a constant internal milieu was a prerequisite for the efficiency of complex organisms, and he expressed this in saying, “The fixity of the internal environment is the condition for free life” (Olmstead 1938, 254). Inspired by Bernard's ideas, the American physiologist Walther Cannon published a famous book entitled The Wisdom of the Body in 1932. It is in this book that Cannon first introduces the term homeostasis (from the Greek roots for “the same” (homo) and “state” (stasis)) as a designation for the surprising ability of all animal bodies to maintain a stable internal state concerning parameters such as temperature and salt balance, even under conditions of severe stress. Science has learned since then that the phenomenon of homeostasis depends on the coupling between the saturation degree of specific receptors and a range of response mechanisms in certain cells. If the concentration of an important component falls outside of the usual range, compensating reactions or feedback reactions will occur. For example, the blood sugar levels in a normal person having awakened after a good night’s sleep will lie at approximately 90 milligrams per 100 milliliters. If the person then has a breakfast containing a good deal of sugar or carbohydrates, these compounds will successively become degraded into glucose and enter into the circulatory system — accordingly, blood sugar levels will go up. The increase will be registered by specialized cells in the pancreas, and these will command the pancreas to excrete insulin to the blood. Insulin stimulates body cells to absorb glucose from the blood. It especially stimulates liver cells and muscle cells to store glucose as polysaccharide (glycogen) — and through this process, blood sugar levels are brought back down to normal.

When, a couple of hours later, this same person’s blood sugar level is again approaching a low (due to metabolic consumption of the available glucose) the pancreas is once again in charge of rectifying the condition — this time by excreting the hormone glucagon that induces muscle and liver cells to degrade glycogen back to free glucose. The constancy of blood sugar concentrations is thus at all times in a situation of touch and go, with insulin and glucagon as the enforcement officers and pancreas as the executive officer. And, of course, these hormonal mechanisms do not operate in a vacuum, but are tightly interconnected with brain processes. Neurons in the area of the brain called the hypothalamus are continuously monitoring blood sugar concentrations and when the level is too low, the hypothalamus induces a feeling of hunger — whereas, when the level is too high, a feeling of satiety will ensue.

[page 235]

In general, a subtle and highly complicated interplay goes on between the nervous system (and in particular, the hypothalamus, acting in concert with the rest of the limbic system) and the endocrine system (i.e., the hormone-producing glands that physically maintain the homeostasis). Homeostasis, however, is far from a static set point as one might find programmed into a thermostat. Rather, some parameters run through well-controlled cyclic oscillations (e.g., those coupled to the menstrual cycle), while others change in ways correspondent with the ongoing phases of life, or in connection to abrupt changes in the conditions of life. In addition, a range of more or less programmed changes of the homeostasis can be initiated by the manifestation of recurrent emotional patterns.

A hormone can be taken as the prototype molecule used to function as a messenger between different locations in the system of the body. Originally, hormone was the term used to describe those substances excreted into the blood by a diversity of glands and carried away with the blood to exert their effects in such tissues as were ready to interpret them (i.e., to recognize these substances and to respond accordingly). But the definition has had to be expanded in recent years to include a variety of signal molecules that are emitted not from glands, but from specialized cells in other tissues and organs. Well-known is for example histamine, a substance many readers may be familiar with from its role in allergic reactions, but which may also be formed in the event of tissue damage or infection.

Another important group of signal molecules are called prostaglandins. These I have discussed previously, in Chapter 2, with regard to their role in the lowering of the threshold for the feeling of pain in the skin. Yet prostaglandins are also involved in enabling many other internal control mechanisms in the body: they dilate passages in the bronchia, they inhibit the secretions of the intestinal tract, they stimulate the uterus, they influence nerve function, they cause fever, and they facilitate coagulation of the blood.

A related group of signal molecules that should be mentioned here are the growth factors that stimulate cell divisions and normal development. All these latter signal molecules operate by paracrine regulation — i.e., they are excreted to the interstitial fluids (the liquid that fills empty space between cells); they are generally short-lived; and their effects, therefore, are mostly local — which are exactly the qualities one wants in a control mechanism that is required to play its role at a specific moment in the trajectory of development, and then be gone. Yet another particularly interesting group of hormones are the neurohormones or neuropeptides, peptides that are transported along nerve threads (axons) and released into the interstitial fluids. Neuropeptides play a central role in the communication between the nervous system and the immune system — I will be having much more to say about this critically important communication shortly.

[page 236]

Finally, in Chapter 5, we saw how some hormones (those called steroid hormones) may act directly upon the transcription of specific genes, as these hormones are targeted by the relevant cells and become attached to specific proteins. Most hormones, however, operate more indirectly (and more obviously biosemiotically) through the processes of signal transduction. We also saw in Chapter 5 that the same hormone may have quite different effects upon different cells, since the effect depends upon the protein profile of the cell — i.e., on how the actual proteins present in a given cell will interact with the secondary signal evoked at the membrane’s inner side by the binding of hormone

molecules to surface receptors. Here, as everywhere in living systems, we see

the essential principle at work that shows us that signals do not contain their

own message, Rather, when the concentration of a hormone surpasses a certain

threshold value (i.e., when the degree of saturation of specific receptors at the receiving system attains its critical value), the hormone acts as a sign that induces the formation by the system of an interpretant. And the nature of this interpretant depends exclusively on the contextual situation of the receiving cell.

The Self as Iconic Absence

An important aspect of endosemiotic control is the systemic property of the body that Leo Buss aptly called its somatic ecology. This is the incessant corrective effort exerted by white blood corpuscles (lymphocytes, macrophages, etc.) all over the body, settling potential conflicts between cellular and bodily interests.

Traditionally, the immune system has been conceived of as a “defense department” against infections — a defense that was based on the dynamic cooperation between a multiplicity of white corpuscles that continually patrol the tissues and body fluids of an animal. Immunological identity, however, does not consist simply in a demarcation of the biochemical self as a stable, unambiguous entity to be protected from the (equally unambiguous) invasions from the outside. Rather, the term refers to a far more complex and ongoing series of events — what Francisco Varela (1991, 88-89) has characterized as “a self-referential, positive assertion of coherent unity — a ‘somatic ecology’ mediated through free immunoglobulins and cellular markers in a dynamic exchange.” For to act upon some currently residing element within the body as alien to the multicellular system of the self and to act upon some other currently residing element within the body as constituent of the multicellular system of the self are, logically, two sides of the same behavioral coin. Expressed differently, other-

13 In the human body the number of white blood corpuscles has been estimated as 10^12 (one

trillion).

[page 237]

reference and self-reference are inseparable aspects of the dynamics of the living (see Chapter 2).

The immune system identifies potentially foreign molecules that might have penetrated the body through the processes of exposing their iconic interaction with the body's own lymphocytes. Such indexicality — the clue pointing out the identity of the perpetrator, in this case — paradoxically appears as a breach of an expected iconic absence. In other words, the foreign molecules are disclosed because they engage in a kind of iconic semiosis that should have been out of reach to them — as, indeed, it is to all authentic molecular members of the bodily self. Uexküll, Geigges, and Hermann (1993, 38-39) express it this way: “To identify the unknown means to recognize something familiar: nonself is a potential variant of self”

I shall not attempt to present a complete semiotic analysis of the numerous refined mechanisms of the immune system here, for such an analysis would easily take several volumes the length of the present one. Here, I shall focus on just one such mechanism, which I believe will give the reader insight into the general principle under discussion — for this mechanism concerns a sophisticated cellular plot whereby foreign antigens are lured into an iconic trap that then serves as an index to the body.

Few things bear clearer witness to the communicative nature of the body’s inner cellular life than does the fact that each cell, at its surface, carries a “tag” — a “Hello, my name is ” — that identifies its origin. The mechanism seems eerily identical to the one used by travel agencies when they equip tourists at foreign destinations with characteristic hats or scarfs, or other easily recognizable markers for identifying one another. The character of these cellular tags is infinitely more complex and interesting, however, in that they consist of degradation products from the cell’s own proteins. These are peptide fragments with a length of ten to twenty amino acids, that — borrowing Kilstrup’s expression — “are stretched out and laid like a sausage in a hot dog bun, between the protein flaps of the MHC molecule” (MHC = Major Histocompatibility Complex) (Kilstrup 1998, 110). The “whole hot dog” (amino acids plus MHC molecule) is then transported out of the cell and presented to the surroundings by being placed at the surface of the cell. (And the term presented to is actually a quite precise technical designation in this context, as we shall see below.)

14 Interesting contributions to such an analysis can be found in Sercarz et al. (1988).

Unfortunately, none of these contributions seems aware of the possibilities opened by the Peircean tradition in semiotics. A fine discussion of this latter issue may be found in Neuman (2005) and in Kilstrup (1998, in Danish). By the time this book went to press, a biosemiotically informed analysis of the relationship between hosts and parasites was published by Elling Ulvestad (2007). See also Kawade (1992).

[page 238]

MHC is a class of protein molecules that exhibits extraordinary variation from individual to individual. This variation is based, however, on one common molecular theme in the form of a cleft (or hollow) in the three-dimensional structure “intended” for the binding of cellular peptide fragments. Such wide variation is enabled by the fact that every individual organism has its own absolutely specific MHC molecules — and this is why, for example, transplantations of organismic tissue from one individual to another is likely to provoke the formation of defensive antibodies in the new host. Conversely, this individual molecular signature means that the body’s own cells may be assured that if the MHC molecules at the surface of a cell are correct — i.e., match their own — this cell will indeed be “one of us.” Another characteristic trait of the “MHC hot dog” worth emphasizing is that the peptide fragments confined inside are positioned in a stretched (linear) form, rather than in its original three-dimensional structure, indicating that the amino acid sequence of the relevant peptide fragment is displayed. The significance of such display will become clear presently.

For it is not an overstatement to say that the key to the immune system's ability to distinguish between self and nonself resides in the action of the T cells — lymphocytes thus named because, after having been formed in the bone marrow, they get their definitive “tag” through a maturation process in the thymus.

T-lymphocytes carry special receptors on their surfaces (T-cell receptors, abbreviated TCR) that specifically recognize and bind to the stretched-out peptide fragments (as presented via “MHC hot dogs”) bearing the signature mark of the individual. Each TCR specifically binds to one, and only one, MHC-presented peptide fragment, iconically corresponding to the empty place on that particular receptor. As long as the immature lymphocyte stays in the thymus, it will only encounter peptide fragments degraded from the body’s own repertoire of proteins — and in the rare case that it attempts to bind to one of these, it is immediately eliminated. This ensures that the surviving mature lymphocytes (the ones that leave the thymus in order to take part in the immune defense) will never possess T-cell receptors shaped for the iconic recognition of peptide fragments from their own body. The immunological self thus is based on an iconic absence — the absence, under normal conditions, of iconic representations of the “empty place” on T-cell receptors.

Moreover, when an organism is infected by a virus or a bacterium, the infected cells will degrade parts of the attacker's proteins to small peptide fragments to

15 Properly speaking, it takes an interpretant to establish the iconicity of a given relation. What

I mean by calling this correspondence iconic is that the body, thanks to its evolutionary ancestry, has constructed this system of TCR + MHC-peptide binding relations in the expectation (in the sense of genetically fixed past experiences extrapolated to the future through inheritance) that it will serve to (mis)direct foreign pathogens into a binding trap based on likeness of shape between the TCR-receptor and the degraded fragment of a foreign protein.

[page 239]

be presented by the “MHC hot dogs” on the cell surface as warning signals. This partial degradation does not prevent the cell from being destroyed by the attack, nor does it prevent a new generation of virus particles from being released onto the lymphatic vessels, but it does effectively summon the omnivorous white corpuscles, the macrophages, and these will swallow up the prey (viruses or bacteria) by phagocytosis — a process whereby the cell wall is turned inside out to engulf the prey and to successively digest it through a battery of enzymes released from organelles (the lysosomes) inside the macrophage.

The next link in the process is bifurcated and consists firstly in the presentation, by the macrophages, of fragments of the degraded virus proteins at their surfaces. Parallel to this, a very specific reaction takes place whereby the B lymphocytes recognize and bind to certain domains of protein molecules (called antigens) that belong either to the surface of as yet unphagocytized viruses or bacteria, or to free proteins in the blood or lymph. This binding is made possible by the presence on the surfaces of the B lymphocytes of a kind of receptor that also functions as an antibody against the antigen in question. The binding causes an activation of the B lymphocyte that now starts breaking down the infectant and presenting the antigens at its own surface, in the same way the macrophage did.

To really appreciate the subtlety of this arrangement, it is necessary to consider the numeric relations involved. There are an estimated 10^8 to 10^9 different receptor types (each of them corresponding to one specific antigen) on the surfaces of the population of lymphocytes in the human body. Each single lymphocyte has one, and only one, of these receptor types, and the enormous diversity depends — as in the case of T lymphocytes — on a chance-generating principle. In practice, this means that there will always be present in circulation just one B lymphocyte to make the single antibody effective towards precisely one corresponding foreign protein that might have entered the body. Conversely, each receptor at the B lymphocytes is specific enough that it will only recognize one single protein among the millions of different kinds of protein molecules present in nature. The next link in the defense process is the formation (through cell division) of clones of those B lymphocytes that recognized the foreign protein molecules, and thus must have carried receptors with antibody activity against them. This is where the T lymphocytes enter the picture, and specifically, the kind of T lymphocytes called T helper cells. The receptors on T helper cells are geared to recognize (and to bind to) those exact antigens that

16 The principle is based on crossing-over events under the formation of each single clone of

lymphocytes. For example, the immunoglobulin G (IgG) consists of two light polypeptide chains, coupled to two heavy chains. Since every cell line, through such crossing-over events, will have attained just one out of three thousand possible light chains, and one out of five thousand possible heavy chains, this arrangement implies that the complete IgG molecule will represent one of 1.5 x 10^6 (one-and-a-half million) molecular possibilities.

[page 240]

are presented as “MHC hot dogs” on macrophage and B lymphocyte surfaces. Here — as in the other recognition processes we have discussed in this section — recognition is based on iconicity in the sense that significant domains on the relevant antigens have shapes and electrostatic properties that are iconic to the potential (but in the body, nonexistent) protein domain, that “fits” the specific receptor of the T helper cell.

We may now see why biochemists have chosen the (from a scientific standpoint) rather strange (and, in fact, illogical) verb, to present, for the behavior of the macrophages and the B lymphocytes. For the immunological effect of these processes is precisely to make antigens visible to the T helper cells. When T helper cells successively register and recognize the presented antigens (which are being presented to it via a correct MHC complex and at the same time as being nonself), they respond by releasing the production of yet another class of signal molecules, the cytokines (interleukins, tumor necrosis factor, lymphokines, interferons) that cause the cells to engage in a process of reciprocal activation under the formation of clones containing large amounts of those exact B and T lymphocytes that are involved in the inactivation of the infection.

Many of the B lymphocytes in the clone successively develop further into plasma cells that release large amounts of specific antibody. Such antibodies will bind to antigens at the surface of intact bacteria (or viruses), thereby forming complex aggregates that will further attract bacteria-eating macrophages and also induce an aftercare (via the help of the complement system) that assures that the antigen-antibody complexes remain dissolved until the lymph or blood has carried them to locations of intensified phagocytosis (lymph nodes, spleen, or liver). There they will be taken up and degraded. Some of the activated B and T lymphocytes will survive in the organism for years and function effectively as memory cells that will ensure a quick mobilization of the immune defense system should that same kind of infection appear again in the future.

The interplay between the astronomical number of cells involved in the immunological reaction is, of course, far more complex than this brief description has been able to even hint at. But my only aim here was to show how the immune system discloses foreignness as an iconic presence only because of the equally constructed background of a presumed absence. The whole system contains the further finesse that while B lymphocytes exclusively form antibodies against antigens (i.e., against certain domains at the surface of proteins called epitopes), T lymphocytes will only initiate cytochemical activation when the sequence of amino acids in the epitope — as stretched out in one dimension — is recognized as nonself. The safety system thus is double-stringed and requires B lymphocytes

17 Iconic recognition as described here exemplifies the phenomenon Stjernfelt (1992) has called

categorial perception.

[page 241]

to recognize the three-dimensional surface structure as foreign at the same time that the T lymphocytes recognize the one-dimensional sequence of the epitope to be foreign.

Seen in a larger view, the immune reaction is based on a special selection process called clonal selection. As in so many other cases in the world of the living, the effectual principle here consists in the gross overproduction of entities — followed by the selection for survival of exactly those entities (here, clones of lymphocytes) that have shown themselves most useful. In the nervous system, as we saw, all superfluous or inactive neurons soon become eliminated, but in the immune system the mechanism is slightly different in that an incredibly rich Lymphocyte diversity is maintained throughout life. Selection here is thus rather concerned with the allowance of certain lymphocytes to form clones containing numerous identical cells. The mechanism, in fact, resembles that of gene regulation where, similarly, genes passively await the time that cellular machinery eventually recognizes the need to activate the protein resource specified by the gene in question.

In sum, we may say that the recognition of molecular foreignness is obtained through the development of a maximal iconic openness, followed by the elimination of those openings that allow the self to be recognized. This causes a digitization — i.e., a discontinuous distribution — of protein domains into two classes, self and nonself, where nonself is distinguished through the occurrence of iconic recognition processes available exclusively for nonself molecules.

The biosemiotic problem that the immune system has solved in this intricate but elegant way consists in the fact that foreignness is a negative property, a property that cannot be understood in any other way than as nonself. But non is a phenomenon meaning “x plus its denial,” and as such it is not accessible for immediate iconic representation. By making self negative (in the form of an absence) however, it became possible to make nonself positive in the form of a multitude of potential icons for nonself — i.e., a multitude of T lymphocytes capable of recognizing all conceivable peptide fragments other than those that form parts of the body’s own proteins. The negative property nonself was converted to a positive property, an index for foreignness.

Complex as it seems here, this very same principle is familiar to us from our experience in the anthroposemiotic area, where numerous cases of the detection of nonself (or the other, as the term is used in the social sciences) is based upon the absence of a presumed, constructed, and otherwise invisible uniformity. Examples might include the tattoos and insignias on the backs of “outlaw bikers,” the veils of Muslim women in the West, the Bibles of Christians leaving a church on Sunday morning, all sorts of sports team attire, and — not the least — the various uniforms of soldiers. Employing this strategy also runs the inherent risk that the system can be fooled by the adoption of a false uniform

[page 242]

as in “The Captain from Köpenick.” Conversely, the police may perhaps just as easily place an informer in a group that they might want to infiltrate, simply by having that person satisfy the said group’s criteria for uniformity — be it physical or psychological.

This strategy of faking, based on the strong organizing power of iconic relations, runs all through the biosemiotic repertoire of living systems. For example, HIV viruses have become specialized for infecting T helper lymphocytes and these viruses are surprisingly skilled in avoiding detection. Here the hiding strategy is made possible by an extraordinarily high error frequency in the translation of virus RNA to virus DNA that precedes integration of the virus into the host chromosome. Thus, the virus simply mutates into any conformation other than its present one as soon as it has become recognized. It changes its uniform, one might say — and as it is always the uniform and not the wearer per se that is present to inspection — the virus thus avoids the full effect of the immunological response. In this respect, the HIV virus resembles the influenza virus — and in both cases (and for the same reason), it has proved very difficult to produce vaccines that are not outdated before they reach the marketplace. (In this respect, the HIV virus is approximately sixty times more iconically deceitful than the influenza virus.)

The Bodily Psyche

In discussing the internal milieu, I noted how the hormones insulin and glucagon cooperate to keep our blood sugar level inside an optimal range. But we also saw that mere chemical brute force was not in itself sufficient for true homeostatic regulation since it had to be augmented with brain-based supervision — executed by neurons from the hypothalamus that signal hunger when the sugar level goes too low and a feeling of satiety when the sugar level goes too high. It is no longer a secret, then, that our psychological life is influenced by our internal chemistry — and vice versa. We tacitly understand that people get irritable when hungry, or accept, as a matter of course, that unexpected behavior may be caused by PMS (premenstrual syndrome). This is also why we fear for the possible side effects of hormonal treatments and antidepressant drugs, and why a controlled and balanced mental life is important in the world of sports and entertainment — even professional chess players, it has been shown, do better if they undertake decent body training.

In other words, not many people will nowadays seriously deny that body and mind are two deeply integrated aspects of human life. And since one can hardly quarrel with one’s wife or play chess while unconscious, it is difficult also to deny that this whole business of what we call human consciousness is effectively part

[page 243]

and parcel of the slimy dynamics of the body’s incessant corporeal functioning. The question remains, though: How can this possibly be?

The Australian-American philosopher David Chalmers has introduced a distinction between the soft problems and the hard problem that need to be explained in accounting for this consciousness — and his distinction has become a standard one in the cognitive sciences and in the philosophy of mind. The soft problems concern the question of the mechanics of how the brain manages to integrate and process its electro-chemical data. Finding the answers to these problems may take decades, but will not, according to Chalmers, force us to break with any already fully accepted explanatory principles. However, solving the hard problem will, for the hard problem consists in explaining why brain processes are so often accompanied by an experienced inner life. Here we are confronted with a problem that, as Chalmers (1996, xiv) carefully reasons, cannot be attacked by the usual scientific methods: “I argue that reductive explanations of consciousness are impossible.”

Other philosophers have argued, persuasively I think, that science cannot possibly describe conscious experiences in a language that in principle operates exclusively inside the limits of grammatical third-person descriptions. An “I” cannot, John Searle (1992) claimed, be described by an uninterrupted sequence of “it” phenomena, no matter how complicated such sequences might be. Articulating the same problem a bit more poetically, philosopher of mind Thomas Nagel (1986, 13) once famously asked, “How can it be the case that one of the people in the world is me?”

The error of confusing first-person experience and third-person experience is widespread in much “scientific” thinking, as was illustrated by a newspaper story that appeared some years ago under this heading: SCIENTISTS WILL SOON BE ABLE TO SEE CONSCIOUSNESS. The impetus behind this alarming title turned out to be a quote from an expert in mathematical modeling working with brain-scanning technology. “I am pretty sure that one day we will have a picture on our scanner of the activity patterns constituting consciousness,” he told the newspaper. But will he?

Let us imagine him scanning my brain while I — living in the dark winter of Denmark — have an experience of longing for summer. Here I personally have no difficulty in believing that this experience might somehow have been evoked by a brain activity which can be visualized on the scanner. For the sake of the argument, let us now further assume (though I take it to be not very likely) that one day

18 Chalmers does not doubt that consciousness is a natural phenomenon or that it should be

possible to construct a scientific theory of it. But he thinks such a theory would necessarily contain kinds of lawfulness very different from the kind we are used to from physics. In this sense, at least, biosemiotics and Chalmers share the same perspective.

[page 244]

our expert would be able to tell his colleagues while scanning me, that at this time Jesper Hoffmeyer had an experience of longing for summer — and also that I did, in fact, have such an experience at exactly this time. Even then, of course the expert did not “see” my longing, for it cannot be “seen,” it can only be felt — and only by me

(Hoffmeyer 1999b).

Philosophers have used the term qualia as a designation for this aspect of our world, the inner feel of lived experience — e.g., the feel of redness when you look at a red tomato or the joy of moving in the rhythm of dance. Qualia is thus the essentially subjective dimension of consciousness (as this term is used in its everyday — not its Deelian semiotic — sense). And as such it constitutes the deepest challenge to cognitive science. For while all other aspects of our psychological life, at least in principle, might be explained within the ontology of natural physical law, doing so seems impossible as concerns the phenomenon of qualia.

And this presumably is the reason why materialistically inclined cognitive scientists go to such efforts to argue that the whole notion of a felt, lived, personal qualia is based on some kind of misguided illusion — neuronal brain states exist and are real, but beliefs, feelings, desires, and thoughts, are misdescriptions of these brain states. To believe in them as real as such is to fall prey to a widespread, but scientifically illiterate illusion (Churchland 1986, Dennett 2001). But, one may ask, can you really be mistaken about anything if you are not someone? Can pure things have illusions? The answer, it seems, has to be no — for if things were pestered by illusions, the illusion-having itself would constitute a genuine kind of subjectivity. Our feeling of being a subject can paradoxically only be illusory if it is true. To call subjectivity an illusion is simply self-contradictory.

One strategy for circumventing the qualia problem has been to reject the set of conceptions that — with a certain, and unfortunately not rare, scientific condescension — has been called folk psychology (Churchland 1984). By this term is meant the whole set of everyday conceptions about life and the world that we have all grown up with and take to be self-evident — such as the belief that other people have mental states like ourselves, or that maybe even animals have some kind of animal equivalent of such, and that neither they nor we are mere unthinking biological machines, as the detractors of this folk psychology insist that we, in reality, are.

One often discussed example of such folk psychology is the idea that the cognitive philosopher Daniel Dennett calls the Cartesian theater — i.e., the conception that in some well-hidden locality “in the obscure ‘center’ of the mind/brain, there is a Cartesian theater, a place where it all comes together and consciousness happens” (Dennett 1991, 39). It is, I suppose, true enough that we all have this immediate experience of a world presented to us by the senses — a

[page 245]

continuous and coherent world in both time and space, and a world that exists outside of us in more or less the same way it is presented to us inside our skull. It does not cost Dennett a lot of effort to show that this folk-psychological fundament about our own understanding is not reconcilable with the neurobiological facts concerning perception (nor, for that matter, with the conception of the nature of experience as arrived at by analytical philosophy!).

In this chapter, I have already discussed the “illusion” of visual perception as a spatio-temporal continuum. We saw that the fast movements of the eyeballs, the saccades, could not possibly give us information about anything but a small, if accurately selected, sector of the whole visual field — and that the experience of seeing before our eyes a “filled out space” where none, perceptually, exists, apparently must also be the construction of the brain. Nonetheless, I decline to accept without further ado Dennett's claim that we are all suffering a folk-psychological illusion concerning visual perception and that qualia belongs in this same drawer of imaginary brain constructs. For it may be objected that the illusion of the Cartesian theater is only an illusion relative to the concrete mechanics of visual perception, not relative to what is seen.

What Dennett has proven is in reality only, as the philosopher Alva Noé (2002, 3) has elegantly expressed it, that “it turns out we are mistaken in our assessment of how things seem to us to be.” Our illusion does not concern what we think we see, but only how we experience that which we think we see. Vision is experienced as discontinuous, Dennett claims, but we think it is experienced as continuous: “One of the most striking features about consciousness is its discontinuity — as revealed by the blind spot, and saccadic gaps, to take the simplest examples. The discontinuity of consciousness is striking because of the apparent continuity of consciousness” (Dennett 1991, 356). But it is far from obvious what should be understood by an “apparent continuity of consciousness.” Apparent to whom? Dennett's attempts to identify consciousness with the neural processes that are substrate for its appearance seem in this case to lead us to logical monsters that won't be conjured away simply by calling them apparent. Don Favareau (in a personal communication) has expressed it thus: “If the argument of the eliminative materialists is that consciousness is an illusion brought on by neuronal brain activity, this only begs the further question of exactly how and why this illusion appears to me in the way that it does. What explains the experience of the illusion? In other words, this idea — that what we think is our mental experience is a fallacy — is itself a self-contradicting fallacy.”

Neuropsychological research indicates that the cognitive structure that is responsible for vision in human beings may be divided into two cooperative, but partly independent, visual brain systems — one of which (the oldest in an evolutionary context) is specialized in the control of vision-based here-and-now motoric activity, whereas the other (more recent innovation) controls the

[page 246]

knowledge- and memory-based selection of well-prepared planned actions referred to as “insight, hindsight, and foresight about the visual field” (Milner and Goodale 1998). For illustration, consider a series of experiments discussed in Milner and Goodale (1998). In these experiments, subjects were given the task of following a visual track with their eyes and, at the same time, required to indicate the path of the track manually. The experiment was performed in such a way that the track at unexpected times suddenly was a little bit displaced. Under these circumstances, subjects without difficulty traced the displacements (as disclosed by measuring the saccades) without consciously recognizing that a displacement had taken place.

Successively, it was shown that if subjects that unconsciously had followed the track correctly, in spite of the displacement, were afterwards asked to indicate where the goal (now removed) was last seen, they would place it at the location at which it would have been had no displacement whatsoever taken place. The experiments suggest that memory is integrated with conscious visual experience while the (largely unconscious) motoric operation is controlled by a separate and more sensitive dynamic that is very much in the here-and-now.

On the basis of a series of experiments like the one described above, Andy Clark has suggested an experience-based selection model for visual perception that is based on the principle that “conscious visual experience presents the world to a subject in a form appropriate for the reason-and-memory-based selec-

tion of actions” (Clark 2002, 197; italics added). Clark here takes his point of departure from skill theory as developed by O’Regan and Noé (2001). Skill theory, briefly sketched, rejects Dennett’s objections regarding visual perception by claiming that visual experience is nothing other than the control by the visual brain of immediately relevant senso-motoric challenges. We see exactly what we need to see for the accomplishment of any given action — and since the world (in the sense of an object for our actions) lies open to our eyes, there is no reason to also have it represented on the inside of the skull. Should anyone be in doubt of this, the skill theorist maintains that such people simply need to take a look — and what they need to see is exactly what their unconscious saccades choose to tell them,

Skill theory, however, does not really take into account that the visual-information processing in the brain is segregated into two tracks (or pathways) — one of which draws upon available knowledge and memory resources: “ What matters, as far as conscious seeing is concerned, is that the object/event is ‘one of

19 The first of these visual “brains” is identified as “a dorsal visual-processing stream leading to

the posterior parietal lobule, and the latter with the ventral stream projecting to the inferotemporal cortex” (Clark 2002, 195).

[page 247]

those’ (i.e., falls into such-and-such a class or category) and that a certain range of actions (not movements but actions such as grasping-to-throw, grasping-to-drink, etc.) is potentially available. Both ‘visual brains’ I am suggesting, represent by activating implicit knowledge of some set of possible actions and results” (Clark 2002, 199). Clark (ibid., 201) concludes his analysis by an outright rejection of the folk-illusion kind of theorizing: “Our visual experience is not itself misleading. The scene before us is indeed rich in color, depth and detail, just as we take it to be. And we have access to this depth and detail as easily as we have access to facts stored in biological long-term memory. It is just that in the case of the visual scene, retrieval is via visual saccades and exploratory action. Our daily experience only becomes misleading in the context of a host of unwise theoretical moves and commitments.”

In other words, the brain’s two-tracked visual processing technique gives us a visual experience that both emphasizes what is relevant in the context of our immediate motivated dealings with the world, and positions this processed information in a coherent spatio-temporal visual context reflecting our general memory and knowledge.

In effect, the folk-psychological conception of vision as a Cartesian theater is only an illusion if we, for ideological reasons, identify visual consciousness with the naked sense inputs that reach retina here and now via the saccades — or, in other words, if we insist on identifying consciousness with the unprocessed neurobiological basis for sensual experience. Such an identification would, of course, free us from explaining the phenomenon of qualia, but it would also, I strongly believe, “free us” from the ambition of ever reaching an understanding of what kind of a thing mental life actually is.

What I want to suggest here, however, is that rather than disposing of the qualia problem we ought to recognize the absurdity of the concept of a psychological life without qualia, and therefore to pose ourselves the challenging question of the evolutionary origin of qualia. Seen from a biosemiotic standpoint, qualia — and thus the experiential dimension of existence — is a kind of Firstness in the Peircean sense (see Chapter 3), an aspect of semiosis as such, and therefore also of life and of cognition in general. The phenomenon of qualia in living systems cannot therefore surprise us, although the concrete manifestations it takes in human psychological life calls, like everything else in science, for an analysis of its historical origins as well as the mechanics of its enabling neurobiology. Thus, while Clark’s hypothesis of experience-based selection offers an interesting proximal explanation for how visual qualia is neurologically based in modern homo sapiens, the American philosopher Maxine Sheets-Johnstone’s seminal ideas about bodily consciousness, mentioned earlier in this chapter, provide us with a more distal (evolution-centered) understanding of the qualia phenomenon (Sheets-Johnstone 1990; 1998).

[page 248]

Sheets-Johnstone’s analysis takes its starting point in the Socratic “know your self” — which is also, and to the highest degree, a biological dictum — as I have

hoped to show in the preceding discussion regarding the immune system, as well as in Chapter 2. Remarkably, Daniel Dennett also endorses this bio-Socratic point of departure when he states that simple organisms may not have a lot of self-knowledge but must nevertheless possess some rudiments such as “when hungry, don’t eat yourself!” (Dennett 1991, 427). But, as Sheets-Johnstone (1998) observes, Dennett’s and many other cognitive scientists’ theories about the self are in a very fundamental sense unbodily — not paying attention at all to the body’s feeling of its own movement, and still very much Cartesian at heart, despite all loud protestations to the contrary. For example, Dennett appeals to the visual metaphor when he suggests rules for how the organism orients itself: “Do something, and look to see what moves” (ibid., 427). Yet Sheets-Johnstone (1998, 272) remarks that “were we to examine Dennett's theory of human agency with respect to infants, one would straightaway discover its errors,” and explains,

We humans learn “which thing we are” by moving and listening to our own movement. We sense our bodies. Indeed, we humans, along with many other primates, must learn to move ourselves. We do so not by looking or seeing what we're moving; we do so by attending to our bodily feelings of movement, which include a bodily felt sense of the direction of our movement, its speed, its range, its tension, and so on.

Our bodily feelings of movement have a certain dynamic. We feel, for example, the swiftness of our movement, its constrictedness or openness, its tensional tightness or looseness, and more. In short, we perceive the qualia of our own movement; our bodily feelings of movement have a certain qualitative character.

Sheets-Johnstone’s own theory of consciousness and qualia, as fundamentally rooted in the needs of animals to know themselves as moving creatures, may appear provocative to many cognition researchers due to its underlying assumption that our mental dynamics are spun out of the body’s biological swarm of processes. The reductive conception of the body as ruled by processes that may, in principle, be explained from the bottom-up by sheer biochemistry (or in algorithmic terms) does not, in the nature of the case, offer any help in explaining how such knowledge could appear in a moving animal. The biosemiotic model, on the contrary, has no difficulties with this connection, since semiotic emergence inherently implies the potential for the creation of systems with increasingly high degrees of semiotic freedom.

Biosemiotician Claus Emmeche has stressed that there is always a phenomenal

aspect to semiosis — an aspect that in the Peircean sign conception is contained in the concept of the qualisign. In our discussion of alarmones, for example, we saw how the symbolic function of cAMP was dependent on — though not fully reducible to — its lower-level indexical and iconic aspects. And, in fact, traces

[page 249]

of such Secondness and Firstness can always be unveiled even in complex signs, such as in symbols or in human propositional arguments. Emmeche (2001, 679-80) points out that

A single sign may be a token of some general type (e.g., a perceived pattern may be recognized by the organism as being of a certain dangerous kind, say, a predator), but it has always also an aspect of being a tone — i.e., being qualitatively felt in some way. The type/token/tone is a genuine triad, where the Firstness property of the tone is always hidden, so to speak, within the “objective” or more external property of that sign’s belonging to a type. This corresponds to the first trichotomy of signs in Peirce (that according to the character of the representamen itself), where every legisign is always realized by a particular sinsign, and every concrete sinsign includes a qualisign. What is the qualisign? Only phenomenologically can we approach a clear idea of the qualisign; it is of an experiential character, it is, as Peirce says, “any quality insofar as it is a sign,” “e.g., a feeling of red.” Thus, the umwelt, as a semiotic phenomenon, includes qualisigns with very sensuous “tonal” qualities.

The Psychological Body

Although most of us spend our lives as if our body was a tool for the satisfaction of our psychological needs, it takes only a moment’s reflection to see that the body is the precondition for the evolutionarily much later psyche, rather than vice versa. The body was there first, and only in the course of evolutionary time did bodies develop brains sophisticated enough to support what we would today recognize as psychological life. It follows that bodies must somehow have benefited by the possession of a psychological tool. In its most primitive versions, psychological life probably served to assure a coupling between, on the one hand, negative and positive emotions and, on the other hand, relevant patterns of action. The function of the development of felt emotional reactions must have been to establish an effective set of semiotic controls upon the operation of the senso-motoric functions. Over the course of many millennia, these couplings have become more and more sophisticated — and gradually they were integrated into the anticipatory and memory-based steering function of embodied brains.

In his important 1994 book, Descartes’ Error, the American neurobiologist Antonio Damasio (1994, 230), suggests that the cognitive and the emotional aspect of our lives have grown through a kind of co-evolution:

If ensuring survival of the body proper is what the brain first evolved for, then, when minded brains appeared, they began by minding the body. And to ensure body survival as effectively as possible, nature, I suggest, stumbled on a highly effective solution: representing the outside world in terms of the modifications it causes

[page 250]

in the body proper, that is, representing the environment by modifying the primordial representations of the body proper whenever an interaction between organism and environment takes place.

This reinterpretation of the standard neurobiological account was largely based on Damasio’s observations on a range of brain-damaged patients that simultaneously suffered reduced reasoning/decision-making and reduced emotion/feeling. To his surprise, Damasio found that many of these patients were unable to make rational choices for the one and only reason that their brain damage had interfered with their ability to generate appropriate emotional responses. Damasio (1994, 128) concluded from these and similar studies that “the apparatus of rationality, traditionally presumed to be neocortical, does not

seem to work without that of biological regulation, traditionally thought to be subcortical. Nature appears to have built the apparatus of rationality not just on top of the apparatus of biological regulation, but also from it and with it.”

Thus, feelings are as fully cognitive as any other perceptual image, claims Damasio (1994, 128), “But because of their inextricable ties to the body, they came first in development and retain a primacy that subtly pervades our mental life. Because the brain is the body’s captive audience, feelings are winners among equals. And since what comes first constitutes a frame of reference for what comes after, feelings have a say on how the rest of the brain and cognition go about their business. Their influence is immense.”

The distinction between emotions and feelings is central here. The emotional reactions are spontaneous, in the sense that they occur without any interference from consciousness and are released by the limbic system in the subcortical region of the brain, primarily via the structure called the amygdala (LeDoux 1996). Through these emotions are established characteristic functional states of the body, or rather, kinds of readiness that are connected to basic survival functions such as defense against dangers, reproduction, foraging, or aggression. Emotions are manifested either endogenously, or as the result of inputs from the surroundings. The emotions may therefore be seen as bodily interpretants that immediately release subsequent interpretants in the form of characteristic kinds of behavior.

Too, the neural organization responsible for the primary emotional types of behavior is rather uniform for all vertebrates (fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals, including humans). This does not, as underlined by LeDoux, imply that the brains of all these animals are identical. But it does imply that our understanding of what a human person is in the biological constitution as an emotional being must take into account this fact that we are so like other animals with whom we ultimately share a common ancestry (LeDoux 1996, 17). Nor did Charles Darwin himself ever doubt this: “The fact that the lower

[page 251]

animals are excited by the same emotions as ourselves is so well established that it will not be necessary to weary the reader by many details. Terror acts in the same manner on them as on us, causing the muscles to tremble, the heart to palpitate, the sphincters to be relaxed, and the hair to stand on end. Suspicion, the offspring of fear, is eminently characteristic of most wild animals” (Darwin 1981 (1871, chapter 3).

But while the emotional response, to a high degree, works much the same in all vertebrate animals, feelings, in Damasio’s terms, are far more specific for humans — for feelings consist in the experience of emotions. The experience of fear, for instance, appears as “the conscious recognition of the emotional response to a dangerous situation.” As such, feelings are much more varied and subtle than emotions, since they integrate the emotions into the rich repertoire of nuances available for conscious awareness — the danger may be imminent or more distant, it may be life-threatening or just inconvenient.

In human beings, claims Damasio, this leads to the formation of secondary emotions, which arise “once we begin experiencing feelings and forming systematic connections between categories of objects and situations, on the one hand, and primary emotions, on the other” (Damasio 1994, 134). The formation of these secondary emotions is no longer dependent only on the limbic system, but now also involves the pre-frontal and somato-sensoric brain cortexes.

The separation of the emotional response from the experienced feeling opens up towards a decisive insight in that it frees the understanding of the emotional response from its mysterious (and quite incorrect) anchoring in a conscious brain. It thus becomes possible to understand the emotional response without any need to necessarily solve the intractable mind/body problem that immediately presents itself when we talk about conscious emotional experiences. In fact, claims LeDoux, emotions as such are as absent from our awareness as is most of what else goes on in our brain. Biologically understood, the reason for this is simple. When an organism encounters a threat, the first command is for the body to discover the source and to react to the danger — and this, precisely, is what the emotional response makes happen. Only at the next higher level do we need the fear, the strongly inconvenient feeling that can only be extinguished by confronting the threat through appropriate action.

Consciousness about bodily states and feelings may therefore be conceived as a fundamental carrier wave running through our entire psychological life, always ready to absorb and to carry forward the stream of interpretations and

20 In this way, William James's famous claim that “we do not start running because we are

afraid of the bear, but, on the contrary, we are afraid of the bear because we start running” is confirmed to the extent that one is talking about feelings and not — as James did — about primary emotions.

[page 252]

re-interpretations that occur incessantly in both body and brain. Almost implicit in this understanding is the acknowledgement that these emotional body states are themselves subjected to intervention by feelings — and thus, to cortical modification, giving rise to what Damasio called secondary emotions. The amygdala and the rest of the limbic system (and in particular, the hippocampus, hypothalamus, and nucleus accumbens) not only feed nerve impulses to the cortex but are themselves fed by impulses from the brain cortex (some even consider the orbitofrontal cortex as part of the limbic system now, largely as the result of Damasio’s work). The secondary emotions are bodily interpretants that are continually re-patterned, reflecting the psychological reality that the person finds himself in, and these emotional interpretants then themselves enter into further semiotic loops of feeling-based experiences in an uninterrupted chain (or network of chains) constituting the psychosomatic reality of a human being. By far — and like almost all other biological functioning — the major part of this swarming semiotic control activity remains unconscious to the person within whom it is incessantly taking place. Yet it tacitly takes care of the necessary survival-orientated integration by which body and mind are (or the body/mind is) established, moment by moment.

Another important tool for the accomplishment of these operations is the autonomous nervous system that governs the central components of the body’s internal life (e.g., breathing, blood flow, heart beat, and digestion). But it has become increasingly clear that both the endocrine and the immunological system are involved in the semiotic activity by which the psychological situation of the organism feeds back into its somatic readiness potential. These connections are the theme for a new field of research in medical science that has developed strongly through the last few decades under the name of psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) — which, in spite of the name, also includes the endocrine system as part of its subject matter.

In a pioneering work, Robert Ader and Nicholas Cohen (1975) showed that changes in the immune defense in mice might be conditioned in much the same way that dogs, in Pavlov’s famous experiments from the beginning of the twentieth century, had been conditioned to salivate when hearing the sound of a certain bell that had previously repeatedly been rung at the time of feeding. In Ader’s and Cohen's experiments, the compound cyclophosphamide (a compound that has frequently been used in chemotherapy) was injected into mice at the same time as they were fed a solution of the sweetener saccharin. Cyclophosphamide induces nausea, and it was thus not unexpected that the mice responded by developing an aversion to the taste of the saccharin solution. In earlier experiments, Ader and Cohen had noticed that some of the experimental animals who were conditioned this way quite unexpectedly died upon drinking the saccharin solution, even in the absence of cyclophosphamide. And

[page 253]

since cyclophosphamide is also a strong immunodepressant — i.e., a substance that weakens the immunological response potential — Robert Ader suggested that the mice were in reality dying because the saccharin solution had worked as a conditioned reflex (like the bell in Pavlov’s experiments) and had thus elicited reduced immunological readiness in the mice. This would have weakened the mice’s general resistance towards infections and some of the animals might then have succumbed to fatal infections.

In Ader’s and Cohen's experiments from 1975, this hypothesis was essentially confirmed. The intake of saccharin in the absence of any injection of cyclophosphamide by the conditioned mice evoked a significant inhibition of the immune system, as measured by reduced antibody reaction in the mice toward the injection of red blood cells from sheep. The intake of the quite innocent compound saccharin was thus — in the conditioned animals — capable of influencing the immune system of the animals. This and many of the subsequent studies are discussed in further detail in Ader and Cohen (1993).

A recurrent objection to the psycho-immunological interpretation of these and other experiments of the kind has been that it may not necessarily have been the taste aversion per se that conditioned a reduced immune response. Instead, the reduction might have been caused by the general situation of stress inflicted upon the mice by the cyclophosphamide-saccharin regimen. It is well-known that stress causes immunodepression, and due to the conditioning process itself the mice may have experienced the saccharin solution as a stress factor. The effect of saccharin intake on the immune system need not have been caused by cortical impulses (e.g., taste recognition) — rather, stress signals from the subcortical regions may have sufficed.

It has proven extremely difficult to fully rule out this possibility, so long as animal experiments are our only source of information and the corresponding experiments on human persons are, for good reasons, excluded. In the wake of the original experiments by Ader and Cohen, however, an almost exponential growth in PNI research has taken place, and retrograde attempts to explain away the persistent indications for psychological constituents in the endocrinological and immunological systems appear increasingly forced.

The advertising industry, for one, is in no doubt of the efficiency of conditioned reflexes in influencing our choices of consumption. The stream of delicacies presented in commercials are certainly not intended for the appeal to reason — in fact, reason would be much too risky to depend on. If, however, our endocrine response is successfully stimulated, we become unconscious victims of the suggestive ads.

An important channel for delivering messages from the cerebral cortex to the immuno-endocrine control systems follows the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA axis) where, depending on conditions, the hypothalamus

[page 254]

secretes neuro-hormones that significantly influence the activity of the neighboring pituitary gland, and thus the release of pituitary hormones to the blood. Via the blood, pituitary hormones reach the adrenal glands, where they control the production of adreno-cortical hormones such as cortisol. The following, from an online resource (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal_axis), sums up the relationship nicely: “The fine, homeostatic interactions between these three organs constitute the HPA axis, a major part of the neuroendocrine system that controls reactions to stress and regulates various body processes including digestion, the immune system, mood and sexuality, and energy usage. Species from humans to the most ancient organisms share components of the HPA axis. It is the mechanism for a set of interactions among glands, hormones and parts of the mid-brain that mediate a general adaptation syndrome.”

Let us now have a more detailed look at just one small part of this homeostatic interaction system, and this will concern the role played by opioids, so named because of their molecular similarity to opium. Many different substances, and among them opioids, are produced by cells from the immune system and subsequently recognized by specific receptors at the surface of nerve cells. Endogenous opioids are formed naturally in the body and contribute to the pleasant — sometimes nearly euphoric — feeling experienced upon successfully executed physical or mental work. And this experience is most likely the reason for the strong attraction that many people feel towards artificial opium derivates such as morphine or heroin. Even animals have been shown to greedily pursue these substances and to become addicted to them. This implies that the direct effect of the opioids is subcortical or, in other words, that they exert their influence on one’s mood through brain processes that do not depend on prefrontal involvement (Panksepp 2001). On the other hand, we know that the experience of positive feelings can also lead to the release of opioids, suggesting that relations between mood and opioids work both ways. And with this acknowledgement, a broad gate is opened for the intrusion of psychological forces into the regulatory machinery of the body. Or, as Damasio reminds us in the quoted passage above, the operation of the cerebral cortex “does not seem to work without that of biological regulation, traditionally thought to be subcortical. Nature appears to have built the apparatus of rationality not just on top of the apparatus of biological regulation, but also from it and with it” (Damasio 1994, 128).

One animal experiment that most persuasively suggests the existence of a two-way interconnection between the brain and the immune system was based on measurements of the activity of a class of immune cells called natural killer cells (NK cells) in mice. The experiment showed that stress-provoked reduction

21 Wikipedia November 1, 2006.

[page 255]

in NK-cell activity may be counteracted if, simultaneously with the stress factor, animals are fed specific substances that bind chemically to the brain's normal binding sites for endogenous opioids. If, on the other hand, animals are fed an opium derivative that is unable to penetrate into and influence the brain, no effect on NK-cell activity was observed (Shavit et al. 1986). Shavit’s and coworkers’ experiment thus unambiguously showed that the stress-provoked effect upon NK-cell activity is mediated through opioid receptors in the brain, and is thus broadly open to psychological influence.

All this said, it should be noted that, as of the time of this writing, PNI research still finds itself in an explorative and somewhat immature phase. Numerous binding relations between a diversity of body/brain parameters are now being scrutinized, yet it is still too early to claim the emergence of any clear-cut pattern. Seen from a semiotic point of view, one may worry that the narrow biochemical approach that still counts as the prevailing paradigm for PNI research may disallow the introduction of theoretical tools that might help PNI to transcend the tyranny of trifles.

The vast quantity of potentially relevant substances, the multiplicity of cell types, and the incalculable number of combinatorial possibilities that must be considered if the contextual outcomes of antecedent events are included in the analysis — as of course they should be — quickly leads the researcher into an overwhelming jungle of possible parameters to keep track of. As an alternative, I would suggest that PNI researchers consider whether insights into the semiotic logic of the communicative dynamics of the system might make it possible to select and focus the analysis upon a relatively minor fraction of nodal points. At the present time this, of course, is pure speculation, but it might turn out to be just the theoretical tool that PNI research needs in order to be able to approach the data of simultaneously cascading cellular interaction with anything resembling the efficient logic of the cell itself.

Beyond doubt, PNI research is a much needed attempt to establish a scientific understanding of the deeper nature of the psychosomatic interplay — an interplay whose significance for human health and disease is unmistakable, but whose precise choreography so far remains dimly lighted.

The Global Organism — Ecological Endosemiotics

Our discussion on the phenomena of endosemiotics would not be complete without mention of that world of prokaryotic communication that led the microbiologist Sorin Sonea (1991; 1992) to talk about a global organism. Compared to the early prokaryotes (essentially the bacteria), the development of eukaryotic organisms may be seen as a privatization of the hereditary material. Bacteria

[page 256]

easily engage in widespread reciprocal exchange of DNA fragments across species barriers, and they thereby effectuate the rapid spread, around the globe, of any DNA-written “talent” that can potentially be interpreted by prokaryotic machinery. Since bacteria are surrounded by cell walls, uptake of DNA fragments from the surrounding milieu is not normally a passive process, but must be actively facilitated by the bacterium’s own activity. In the process of conjugation, bacteria take up linear DNA fragments transmitted from other bacteria, and in the process of transduction, bacteria take up a plasmid (or phage), which is a little bit of self-replicating DNA that is successively integrated into the chromosome of the host cell — becoming a prophage.

This transduction process has interesting semiotic consequences, for prophages often contain genes that are useful for the bacterium. Pathogenic bacteria are notorious for developing resistance toward antibiotics — and this resistance, more often than not, is caused by prophages hiding in the bacterial chromosome and possessing genetic instructions that furnish the means for the bacteria to resist the fatal effects of the antibiotics. Normally, prophages will remain stably integrated into the chromosome, but if growth is inhibited (for instance, because nutrients are missing), prophages are released into the cytoplasm and immediately start using the bacterial machinery to multiply themselves at the expense of the bacteria. The multiplication of the plasmids will, like any other normal biological process, proceed with a certain margin of error, so that occasionally a bacterial gene will become incorporated into plasmid DNA.

Now, considering the astronomical numbers of bacteria in the world (latest count, 5 x 10^30 — five nonillion — a magnitude that we have encountered nowhere else in our discussions so far!), even a low frequency of chance errors will imply that, in the long run, not a single bacterial gene will escape ending up as part of plasmid DNA. And upon release from their dead host cells, these plasmids will spread via wind and water, and through infections. When this process is seen from a global perspective (for bacteria are practically everywhere on Earth) it becomes clear that virtually all bacterial genes ever constructed will be present in plasmid-form somewhere on Earth — and probably in many locations.

Seen from the point of view of a starving or otherwise stressed population of bacteria, this state of affairs represents a “hope” for being rescued. For eventually the stressed bacterial population might be fortunate enough to become infected by a phage that possesses a gene for an enzyme that can be used to overcome the stress condition. And while, for any single population, the probability of such a “lucky” outcome is, of course, infinitesimal — considering the astronomical numbers of bacteria present everywhere, a successful result is virtually guaranteed to occur somewhere. Thus the global existence of the bacterial species is rarely, or never, threatened. “Whenever a new type of bacteria

[page 257]

successfully joins a mixed bacterial community,” writes Sonea (1992, 380), “it also brings its own genes, including the plasmid and/or prophages it carries. These newly arrived small replicons will, in time, be freely offered to any other member of the community.”

In sum, we may say that prokaryotic life on our planet has managed to make use of the law of great numbers to establish a kind of global prokaryote semiosphere — a semiotically based coordination of prokaryotic life into one big worldwide swarm. And as Sonea suggests, because of this holistic integration, we should not look upon bacteria as individual organisms but rather as short-lived units in a huge global organism, consisting of the worldwide network of prokaryotes. The exchange of DNA-coded messages between all these entities may then be seen as a kind of global endosemiotics.

Compared to the extreme openness toward foreign DNA messages exhibited all over the prokaryote world, eukaryotic organisms appear to be very isolated beings. Too, it should be noted that in spite of the statistical character of the semiotic interactions in bacteria, these interactions are nevertheless highly controlled and rely upon the well-regulated occurrence of specific receptors at the surfaces of cells, as well as the induction in the cells of specific enzymes suitable to support this kind of communication. With the appearance of eukaryotic life forms, these horizontal mechanisms for DNA communication disappeared, and DNA communication became exclusive to the “family” line. Thus, in eukaryotic cells, DNA-transmission is strictly vertical or temporal, limited to the events of cell divisions. The one major exception to this, of course, is the fusion of genomes that takes place during the course of sexual reproduction.

A deep difference in semiotic logic between prokaryotic and eukaryotic life is buried here. According to current theory, eukaryotic cells arose through endosymbiosis from prokaryotic life forms (see Chapter 5). As we saw, present-day mitochondria, chloroplasts, and microtubules (the intracellular organelles concerned with movements) are all, according to Margulis’ suggestion, descendants

22 The richness of the collaborative patterns and communicative mechanisms to be found in

the bacterial world is only now beginning to be realized (see Ben-Jacob et al. 2004). For in order to get reproducible results, microbiologists have almost always had to study bacteria while they are in the exponential growth phase, where they are close to optimally supplied with nutrients. Under natural conditions, however, this artificial laboratory situation is probably not typical at all — and it has now been shown that under more poor growth conditions, all kinds of interesting cooperative strategies arise between bacteria — patterns that are never observed under exponential growth conditions. This has inspired some researchers to talk about a bacterial linguistic communication and about its networked social intelligence. These metaphors are hardly satisfying because they tend, once again, to neglect the code-dual nature of bacterial semiotics, stressing the digital (linguistic) aspect unduly. But it is, of course, encouraging to see that microbiologists now are tempted to engage in clear-cut semiotic terminology in order to better grasp the nature of their subject matter.

[page 258]

from individual bacterial species that, long before their present relations of symbiotic cooperation appeared, were adapted to niche conditions that had prepared them for their later function in the eukaryotic cell (Margulis 1970; Margulis and Fester 1991).

Gradually, many of the genes that originally belonged to individual endosymbionts were transferred to the shared pool in the cellular nucleus (that in this process had its genetic material doubled many times — relative to the typical prokaryotic content of genes). Thus the eukaryotic cell engaged in a new survival strategy. Rather than depending on the reception of visiting genes through plasmid infection, eukaryotic cells relied on genetic self-sufficiency. Yet this strategy had the consequence that eukaryotic organisms became genetically segregated from one another, and increasingly more reliant upon endosemiotic resources than on exosemiotic interactions for both their survival and for the continuation of their line.

But what eukaryotic life forms lost in capacity for horizontal genetic communication, they copiously gained through the development of sophisticated kinds of communication based on a diversity of nondigital biochemical and behavioral signs. For while the evolution of eukaryotic cells implied a strong restriction in the channels suitable for digitized communication, it opened the way to the development of life forms that possessed far more architectonic multiplicity and behavioral degrees of freedom than prokaryotic organisms could ever have obtained. The transition from prokaryotic to eukaryotic life forms thus exemplifies a general principle pertaining to emergent processes — i.e., that in emergent processes, freedom of possibility will always be constrained at the simpler level in order to allow an altogether new kind of freedom to appear and unfold at a more complex level. The emergence of multicellular life and of social life are but two more examples of this fundamental dynamic principle.

The idea of the superorganism (such as the plasmodium phase of the slime mold that we discussed earlier) has a long pre-history in biology, especially as concerns social insects. Both the ant hill and the bee hive have been suggested as cases of superorganisms, with the implication that the individual insects were seen as just subunits — mobile cells in the superorganism. But as we have seen earlier, the delimitation of the individual is not always as clear-cut as it may seem in the world of vertebrate animals. Yet I have no wish to choose sides in this quarrel. From a semiotic point of view, one might perhaps suggest the criterion that, if a system's semiotic interaction with its environment presupposes a

23 In my book Signs of Meaning in the Universe (Hoffmeyer 1996b), I did suggest a swarm-semiotic model of the brain functioning involved in creating a mental life. And this proposal does in some sense accord ontological reality to swarm-dynamic systems of the kind we find in social insects.

[page 259]

finely elaborated internal semiotic activity (a proto-endosemiotics), then the system deserves to be counted as an organism.

Deborah Gordon's laborious and highly rewarding work with ants of the species Pogonomyrmex barbatus (who live in a harsh zone bordering the deserts between Arizona and New Mexico) has revealed a much more sophisticated pattern of semiotic interactions between individual ants than had been expected — and the survival of colonies of this species are so dependent on this proto-endosemiotic regulation that the nomination of ant colonies to the status of superorganisms feels reasonable in this case (Gordon 1995; 1999). Gordon does not, herself, draw this conclusion, however. For (and most remarkably, in this connection) she found that ant-colony behavior is not absolutely deterministic. Rather, a particularly important element in the colony’s growth process is what Gordon calls job allocation — and she shows that although this task does indeed rely on a quite schematic interaction pattern between different groups of ants, an element of unpredictability persists: “An ant does not respond the same way every time to the same stimulus; nor do colonies. Some events influence the probabilities that certain ants will perform certain tasks, and this regularity leads to predictable tendencies rather than perfectly deterministic outcomes” (Gordon 1999, 139).

Gordon’s experiments in this area may also be seen as a response to experiments performed by the founder of sociobiology, Edmund O. Wilson, that were claimed to show a full-blown determinism in the response pattern of ants to chemical signals (e.g., oleic acid, Wilson 1975). Gordon's experiments, on the contrary, showed that “just as the same word can have different meanings in different situations... so the same chemical cue can elicit different responses in different social situations” (Gordon 1999, 97). Physiological, social, and ecological processes are simultaneously at work, says Gordon, and none of them are more basic than the others: “Linking levels of organization are central to any study of social behavior. For humans and other social animals, an individual’s behavior is always embedded in a social world” (Gordon 1999, 96).

The semiotic competence of subunits, then — whether these subunits are human individuals in a society, plants in an ecosystem, cells in a multicellular organism, or ants in an ant colony — is the medium through which the behavior and integrity of the higher-level entity is maintained. To the extent that such a system’s endosemiotic relations perceive and utilize cues and signs that indicate (are indices for) the state of the holistic unit and its needs, it seems justified to talk about these processes as genuinely endosemiotic — consequently, the holistic system itself deserves to be ascribed a status as an autonomous unit: a superorganism. The evolutionary formation of this kind of autonomous macro-entity is

the quintessence of what is called emergence (Figure 7.3). Figure 7.3 claims a

[page 260]

Figure 7.3 The connection between semiotic emergence and downward causation.

Downward causation operates through indexical sign relations, i.e., the values of system parameters are interpreted by lower-level agents as indexical signs. But this state of affairs in itself depends on the formation of a large-scale pattern with a behavior that stabilizes the semiotic interaction between parts. Semiotic emergence and downward causation may thus be seen as two sides of the same coin.

connection between semiotic emergence (whereby macro-entities or stable large-scale patterns are established through semiotic interactions among small-scale entities) and what has been called downward causation (the influence of large-scale patterns upon small-scale interactions) (Bickhard and Campbell 1999; El-Hani and Pereira 2000; Emmeche, Koppe, and Stjernfelt 2000), and it is suggested that this connection is taken as constitutive for both phenomena. The semiotic relations between subunits that collectively account for the stability of the large-scale or holistic system (for instance, the ant hill, the multicellular organism, or perhaps the symbiotic system of bobtail squids and light-emitting vibrio bacteria) must necessarily be geared to respond to

[page 261]

changes in the environment in ways that do not threaten the integrity of the large-scale system. Subunits, for their part, must receive messages telling them how to uphold the macro-system, and probably the easiest way to do this is

to distribute the needs of the macro-system via indexical signs — as we saw in the case of N-acyl-homoserine lactone in the symbiotic squid-vibrio system. When night approaches, the squid makes sure that the bacterial density in its mantle cavity (and thus the homoserine-lactone concentration) is high enough for the bacteria to respond by allowing for the transcription of lux-operon genes — and thus for light emission — to start. The point is that the semiotic emergence whereby this system was gradually established in the course of evolution necessarily also demanded the invention of semiotic means for assuring the stability of the system, and these semiotic means are precisely what we understand by downward causation.

Downward causation and semiotic emergence are thus two interwoven, but not identical, aspects of the same process. That this mechanism, based on indexical semiosis, is indeed coupled to the circadian rhythms of the squid, was confirmed by the finding that the squid has means at its disposal to fine-tune light emission. It may, for instance, change the wavelength of the emitted light by help of a yellow filter, or it may weaken the intensity of light by opening a bag of ink (Bruni 2002). Presumably, the indexical sign process itself is too slow in its effects to compensate for momentary variations in background light (as occurs under cloudy conditions), and evolution therefore had to provide the macro-system (the squid) with a number of additional “screws” for fine-tuning.
