Preface



When a brown hare spots a fox approaching in the open landscape, the hare
stands bolt upright and signals its presence instead of fleeing. The explanation
for this behavior, according to ethologist Anthony Holley (i993), is that a hare
can easily escape a fox simply by running — a fact that the fox seems to “know”
(whether by learning or instinct). Apparently, then, what is happening in this
behavior is that the hare is telling the fox: “I have seen you” — and as a result,
they can both be spared the effort of running.
   A modern Darwinist may claim that this communicative exchange is eas-
ily explained by the increased fitness conferred upon individuals by the low-
ering of their energy expenditures. That is an important insight with which I
shall not quarrel. And yet, I cannot help feeling that something is missing in
this kind of explanation. For how can we be so sure that these animals them-
selves — as environmentally situated organisms of blood, flesh, and brain —
take no creative part in their own behavior? The Neo-Darwinist explanation
would require us to delegate to their genetic apparatus the whole burden
of anticipating the outcome of all and every future communicative situa-
tion these animals may encounter. But why would evolution equip mammals
with brains containing billions of extremely energy-costly nerve cells if such
brains were then not allowed to make any decisions not already anticipated
by the genes?
   Charles Darwin got it right in the sense that no behavior is likely to evolve
in the organic world that significantly lowers the fitness of phenotypes exhibit-
ing such behavior. This is an extremely important insight — but it should not
blind us to the deeper questions surrounding the ubiquitous intentionality of
communicative behavior. Living creatures are not just senseless units in the sur-
vival game; they also experience life (and perhaps even “enjoy” it as we say when
human animals are concerned).
   In other words, there is, as we shall see in this book, an element of natural
play and not just of zatural selection discoverable in the natural world. There,
organisms never “try to survive” — for the simple reason that they cannot know
they are going to die. Rather, they try to escape or to counteract life-threatening
events as those events present themselves; more precisely: they just instinctively
do what they must to live. In brief: Organisms strive, and this striving — a word
Darwin did not himself shy away from using — cannot be set aside in any genu-
ine attempt to understand the workings of animate natural systems.
XIV        THE BIOSEMIOTIC    APPROACH




   Making scientifically responsible sense of this “striving” is one of the chal-
lenges that the emerging scientific field called biosemiotics sets out to accept,
and it does so by presenting an understanding that biological communication
is more than just machine-like exchange of information. True communica-
tion, biosemiotics argues, is based on semiosis, or sign processes. Sign processes
are what this book is all about, and I shall be delving deeply into the question
“What is a sign?” (as well as many questions regarding how signs can be under-
stood scientifically) throughout this text.
   For the purposes of this preface, however, it will suffice for now just to say
that a sign is something that refers to something else — with the essential addi-
tion that it takes somebody (i.e., a receptive living system) to make the refer-
ence. The meaning conferred by a sign is thus acutely dependent on the nature
and the context of its receptive system, the sensing body — and that body’s
relations with externality are mediated continually by the active establishment
and disestablishment of such signs. A sign process, then, is more than just a
mechanical transfer of information packets because the sign embraces a process
of interpretation. And yet, it is precisely the biological phenomena that com-
prise this interpretative activity that is neglected — or at least not recognized
as engendering its own measure of causal efficacy in the world — in both tradi-
tionally conceived Information Theory and in most contemporary mainstream
Evolutionary Theory.
   Yet by making just this slight and empirically well-justified expansion in our
basic view of nature (i.e., to accept that semiosis and interpretative processes
are essential components in the dynamics of natural systems), biosemiotics, as
I hope to show, provides the conceptual tools necessary to explanatorily rein-
tegrate living creatures (including, of course, human beings) into the natural
world from which they came — but from which they have since been effectively
excluded by a scientific ontology that has, at least since the time of Descartes,
consistently encouraged scientists to de-semiorize all the naturally communica-
tive and fundamentally interactive processes of living systems.


                                    Caveats

When I set out to write this book in 1999, biosemiotics was still in its initial
phase en route to becoming an autonomous field of its own (I will provide some
further background on the history of the field in the Postscript to this book).
Back then, however, apart from a small group of semioticians who were follow-
ing the lead of the pioneering linguist and semiotician Thomas A. Sebeok, only
a handful of medical doctors and biologists were actively engaged in investigat-
ing the potential of this newly developing perspective for the study of life. The
                                                                 PREFACE          XV



whole field was at the time relatively open, but also largely anchored in a shared
understanding of semiotic processes that was derived from the naturalistic sign
logic of the American logician, scientist and philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce
(1839-1914).
  Today, only one decade later, the situation has radically changed and biose-
miotics has been taken up as a field of study by chemists and physicists, as well
as by philosophers and cognitive scientists, anthropologists, psychologists, and
scholars from many other disciplines in both the humanities and the natural sci-
ences. This growth spurt in the development of biosemiotics as an international
research project is welcome, since it will force every one of us who is working in
the field to become more exacting in our arguments, and because it widens the
agenda of the biosemiotic perspective to encompass the entire study oflife.
    But this recent rapid growth also means that the views that I present in this
book may not cover all the competing conceptions of biosemiotics now being
debated within the field. I have chosen, nevertheless, to keep the title Biosemiotics
from the original Danish edition of this book — for although there are cer-
tainly now other views of the field, this book surely comes close to expressing
the original understanding of biosemiotics as envisioned by Thomas A. Sebeok
and Thure von Uexkiill — as well as, I feel confident, the majority (although
certainly not all) of those scholars that are currently engaged in the still ongoing
development of biosemiotics.
    It is unavoidable too, I suppose, that this text reflects my own original back-
ground as a biochemist and scientist. Thus, many readers might have wished
for a broader treatment here of areas such as zoosemiotics or medical biosemiot-
ics, and also perhaps for a more comprehensive analysis of Peircean philosophy
as a resource base from which to explicate the biosemiotic approach. I can only
hope that such readers will show tolerance towards these perceived deficits in
the text. No single person can claim competence in all the varied scientific disci-
plines that must be brought into play in order to reveal biosemiotics in all of its
potential and, at the same time, to consistently grapple with all the philosophi-
cal implications that it holds.
   Similarly, another group of readers may argue that the investigation into sign
processes at the “micro level” — i.e., cytosemiotics and, in general, endosemiotics
— have been given undue emphasis in the book. I have done this for a reason,
however. For biosemiotics is often dismissed by scholars — not least, those from
the humanities — who fundamentally misconceive the project as an attempt to
project anthropomorphic features upon an existing world of nature that, as we
have all learned in school, can easily be explained without reference to human
mental states and constructs. Perhaps no other caricature could be further from
the true aims of principles of biosemiotics, however — and, indeed, I too dis-
cuss the fallacy of anthropomorphism in some depth later in this book.
XVI        THE BIOSEMIOTIC      APPROACH




  Rejecting anthropomorphism, but determined not to fall into the opposite
trap of eliminative reductionism, however,      one of the main points of the bio-
semiotic analysis presented here is a rejection of the idea of scientific knowl-
edge as a kind of knowledge obtained by taking the “view from nowhere” (to
use Thomas Nagel’s famous expression) — a knowledge, in other words, that
does not include ourselves as knowing creatures produced by and inside of the
very same nature that we are attempting to explain. This conception of scientific
knowledge is not only absurd, but it systematically corrupts our understand-
ing of the world because it hides from us the very tools that might help us see
how we both emerge from, and still now essentially belong in, nature — i.e., to
answer another question that Nagel puts to us: “How can it be the case that one
ofthe ‘people in the world’ is me?” (Nagel 1986, 13).
   We may not feel that we can ever answer this question adequately, but a first
premise for approaching such an answer must be that we can somehow explain
the existence of such me-ness in the world. How could evolution create such a
phenomenologically odd entity as a “me” or an “I”? An evolutionary theory
that does not give us any tools to see how such a question can be meaningfully
answered leaves us as object-ified biological robots, or zombies. I must assert
upfront that I firmly believe that neither the reader nor I are, in fact, such zom-
bies — and consequently, that a decent biology must search for the evolutionary
root forms of what it is to be an “I’, or a first-person singularis.
   A key to answering this question, I am going to argue in this work, lies in a
sufficiently rich concept of semiosis. Biosemiotic analysis takes us back to the
questions of how life and semiosis first appeared on Earth, and we shall see that
these are, in fact, not two distinct questions, but a single united one: semio-
sis is an essential aspect of life already at the primitive unicellular level. It is my
guess that readers, with no firm background in biology will be greatly surprised
to learn how nearly impossible it is to gain an understanding of the interactions
and organization constituting the world of living nature without a semiotic ter-
minology — and, perhaps even more fundamentally, a semiotic way of thinking.
I do hope, moreover, that this book will show that the attempt to cross the tra-
ditional borders between major areas in university life does bring us necessary
new insights. Transdisciplinarity will be of no help so long as everybody stays
safely inside her own disciplinary borders, politely transgressing no internal dis-
ciplinary taboos. Rather, “interdisciplinary scholarship” only becomes fruitful
when we collectively take the risk to confront problems in the ways those prob-
lems may be seen within disciplines other than our own.
   Accordingly, the major challenge in writing this book has not so much been
to assemble and to present the many and varied kinds of knowledge that must
be assimilated in order for the biosemiotic project to take on its real signifi-
cance. It does indeed appear at first glance to be a far jump from the analysis
                                                                PREFACE          XVII



of danguaging in the human animal to the analysis of courtship trembling in the
water mite, or from the logic ofself-organization and emergence to the biosemiot-
ics ofmodern petrochemical agriculture — and I have tried to make clear all the
conceptual links and unique level properties that come into play as we move
from one of these phenomena to the other.
    A harder problem by far, however, lies in the attempt to surmount the the-
oretical and philosophical difficulties of putting insights from areas that tradi-
tionally have been seen as scientific into play with insights that have traditionally
been seen as belonging to the humanities. For, on the one hand, biosemiotics is
engaged in developing conceptual tools for theoretical biology (and thereby also,
indirectly, for experimental biology) — while on the other hand, the conceptual
understandings made evident by biosemiotics contribute to the development of
a general semiotics inclusive enough to conceptualize the human being as being
not only in but also deeply ofnature. And in doing so, biosemiotics contributes
to renewed reflections in natural philosophy.
  Moreover, because of the ambitious nature of the attempt, I have no doubt
that readers coming from backgrounds on each side of the disciplinary Cartesian
divide will at times feel their scholarly sensitivities violated by this book. To
them, I may only suggest that they attempt to localize their misgivings not to
the entire project undertaken here, but only to such particular mistakes and
misstatements as they may find herein — and to share my own hope that time
will teach us all to do a better job of transdisicplinary scholarship and commu-
nication. For there is no way we can allow ourselves to remain stuck, each on our
respective sides of the Cartesian dividing line, in our attempts to understand a
reality that refuses to so divide itself.
  And in that regard, I believe that I need to add one further note of explana-
tion here at the outset of this book. This concerns my belief that if communica-
tion across large ranges of scientific disciplines shall succeed in producing new
fruitful ideas, it is absolutely necessary to transcend the narrow terminology of
each particular discipline in our speaking to one another. Terms are used in very
different senses inside different disciplines, and it has been my experience that
everyday language should be used as much as it is practically possible to do so
when undertaking transdisciplinary work in order to make one’s ideas as explicit
as possible to all participants in the conversation. Thus, for example, through-
out this book I have deliberately employed illustrative materials that may seem
like simple textbook figures to the expert eye. Such a commitment to baseline
clarity and explicitness is often misunderstood as a kind of disciplinary trivial-
ization — but I believe that one should rather see it as a necessary step in the
research process itself. We do not get anywhere if we do not understand each
other, which means that the mediating process becomes itself a vital part of all
transdisciplinary research.
XVIII        THE BIOSEMIOTIC     APPROACH




                       The Structure of This Book
This book consists of three parts and a postscript. Part One contains a gen-
eral discussion of the biosemiotic perspective as a project in the life sciences.
Chapter 1 introduces the basic idea of biosemiotics and addresses some possi-
ble initial misunderstandings and misgivings likely to be engendered by the pro-
posal that semiosis is a fundamental aspect of life in general. In Chapter 2, the
latter notion is further focused through a discussion of its relation to the basic
inside/outside asymmetry of living systems. A biosemiotic model for the origin
of life is suggested, and the concept of the generalized membrane is introduced.
Chapter 3 discusses the roots of the modern sign concept in the “logic of rela-
tions” formulated by the American philosopher Charles S. Peirce, and analyzes
the standing of Peirce’s sign logic in its relation to modern scientific ideas of cau-
sality and thermodynamic irreversibility.
   Part Two contains a detailed exposition of biosemiotics as an approach to the
understanding of life processes as they are taking place variously and on several
different levels in nature. Accordingly, Chapter 4 explores the double-coded (i.e.,
analog and digital) nature of living systems, arguing that evolution is equally reli-
ant on both kinds of coding, as well as on their interface. Chapter 5 follows the
semiotic controls involved along the developmental route from genotype to phe-
notype. In Chapter 6, the book moves on to an exploration of organismic life
as it unfolds within its ecological settings, introducing the concepts of the semi-
otic niche and the semiosphere. Chapter 7 deals with endosemiosis — the semiotic
processes inside the body that control the settings of essential physiological and
biochemical states and that assure mind/body integration, i.e. the reciprocal cre-
ation of a psychicalized body and of an embodied psyche, a bodymind.
    In Part Three, the biosemiotic perspective is used in the attempt to throw
new light upon the origins of “a speaking animal” — and on the cultural reality
shaped and reshaped by this animal through its communal use of signs under-
stood as signs (i.e., words). Chapter 8 examines the problem of human lan-
guage origins, which — following the lead of American neurobiologist Terrence
Deacon — is here seen as the development in the human species of a special-
ized ability for making symbolic reference. The chapter also briefly introduces
Maxine Sheets-Johnstone’s theory of bodily movement as the most fundamen-
tal basis for linguistic capacity. Chapter 9 addresses the radical consequences
that the biosemiotic perspective may have on our thinking in a range of other
areas: ethics, aesthetics, biomedicine, environmental understanding, health,
and cognitive science. Finally, Chapter 10 considers the prospects of biosemi-
otic technology, suggesting that such technology might be a necessary tool in
overcoming the ecological imbalance that our industrial production systems
seem inevitably bound to produce.
                                                               PREFACE         XIX



  In Part 3, too, we move farther and father away from my own primary area
of competence, and there I will inevitably enter risky discussions on matters
that others might have treated in a more satisfactory way. I can only repeat my
request for the reader to show tolerance. It is necessary to follow the biosemi-
otic perspective into these risky areas, and I see it is an inescapable part of my
task to take that risk.
   The Postscript gives a brief account of the historical development of the bio-
semiotic project, as well as a prognosis for its future growth. The late Thomas
Sebeok claimed that the idea for a rigorously empirical science of biosemiot-
ics was independently invented at least five times during the last century. The
Postscript tells the story of the most recent of these attempts, as this author has
experienced it.
                                                                Jesper Hoffmeyer
                                                                      Copenhagen
                                                                     January 2008
 ex                                    On Lt                           ov Awe (Sy ena os
                                                                                                                                          re



  ery              tei            hai ieee ee nevirw

              paar                                 cea ohh iy,                                                                                    pony!
       ths oh ae 1-4 Tigpaneop inbeabatetner
      ee ee                e      e
                   aS              an ietcna ann RES AlcsLeith
                                                          ‘
                                                         Lahey aabee
                  orp            Ss Ili ¢                              np           galt                                    et           ee                ot

          de picts                                 <apoleseita                                     NI                                       hile hat
                                                                                                                                         apse
                                                                                   Sy Mets.                                                       oe
 eng                   tore                ofl ie
* Spite dowd fie ae                                                        Mabey                        net elesrenets.i.
      oth) ee ——                                                            as Hemet) 4/4 yt Ae
        Sertheg                                                            inh atsais sDei—acigs wire nae ane
  ’                                        Sosa                                                          can                        of                                                me.                  St

 rs)                   2     et, a             s       6                                   :                           a             a                                                        ,

 he           Vian               eo”                                           vn                        '                                                           —

  ee ewe                                       Cee                                      ee                                                                                                         oa                           aneoes
                       ate       EN                                        aia                                                      wt            An                              ;                        :         re          ASD sh
                             ;                     ed                                   J.                             ie                         “A            =~                                     =; 0           lary Seti ge
          iy                       a                   i                                                               eas                                      >t                @           ee           es             Beotians DON     ,   .
                                                                   ;                    —.                                                                                                                      >.                       xe’
                                                                                        Se                                                                 =                              ‘De                   res                   Can




                            ne                 =~                  ee
                                                                                                                   2                 meter,                ars:
                                                                                                                                                                                              ena a
                                                                                                                                                                                                  We             ie             Pia? igs

          =
          a            7                           g               ; f
                                                                           See                                                            |                wes                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ee             ae       ’ wi nQug vaball     an

          1                                                        ~                               ns                  Pe            a                                    ot wy                                           Pr one               AE
      =                                    :                                                                                                  ;                  ee                           be                          alee het.
              py                               ‘                           :               yh                                   :                 nie                        (—~                                tl        2.4            1g
                                                       &                       a?                   a4                      7                      oe           fir vi                =                         isi; ibe im ara’, 7

                           ees                                                                     ;              ier                                  i             ‘@                       = | ‘salean ihNan
                                 ae                        2                                                 iesam                                                       —,
                                                                                                                                                       =         ”           os               4             eae                 ~~ ti          an
                           —                                   j                                             Ung,Oe bg                                     af                Se “* sn                                      lanai
                  i,                                                                    iS                              + 6p                  Pel                 1 (Ne                           Aen Meier                                ;
                   :                                                   .                   er                                   AL .iue ee
                                            We
                                                                                                                                                                ae           i                                  ai                        he

                                       te                                      (    PAs                      ot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ics
                                                                                                                        a           eur                     ay            emda

                                                       a                            A      me                                       7a of                            ep Vrir Pims

                                                   val                                                       bash 1s                          FM                          hee,
                                                                                                                 s                                                                                 ;              batveTY
                                                                                    rei                                 bien ad                                          J                             '                  ns
                                       ;                           ?                           :                                                                                      Weed                                  :
      :       _    s                                       ‘                       Has                       ‘e ankil ie                  ab!                                            :




                                                   a                               WY 4% 2 ‘cee
