PART   I

THE   BIOSEMIOTIC      APPROACH
                                                I
                             On Biosemiotics




                                      An Overview

Biosemiotics is the name of an interdisciplinary scientific project that is based on
the recognition that life is fundamentally grounded in semiotic processes.’ This
investigation into the semiotic nature of living systems has taken a long time to
emerge, since it poses a challenge to many of the prevailing ontological assump-
tions of both the natural and the human sciences. Yet the biosemiotic perspec-
tive that will be argued for in this book has been developed over a considerable
period of time in works that, by virtue of their quality and scope, indeed offer
path-breaking new ways of understanding both culture and nature. Regrettably,
because of their perceived radicalness at the time at which they were written,
many of these works were banished to the fringes of scientific study and accep-
tance. The time for such timidity and denial is surely over, however, and thus the
goal of this book is to resurrect these ideas and to scientifically expand on them
in light of what scientists have been learning in the last few years.
   Most noteworthy among the earlier advocates of biosemiotic investigation are
the American natural scientist and philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce (1839-
1914), the Estonian-born German biologist Jakob von Uexkiill (1864-1944),
and, to some extent, the English-American anthropologist Gregory Bateson
(1904-80). I will have much to say about each of these men later. However,
it should be noted at the outset, that none of these thinkers explicitly used the
word biosemiotics in their works. Rather, the word apparently was used for the
first time by the German medical psychologist Frederich Solomon Rothschild
(1962; Kull 1999a). And, in point of fact, the very term biosemiotics is thought
to have first emerged in Russian literature in the 1970s, where it was used to
refer to the study of natural signs — including the study of communication sys-
tems in organisms — particularly with reference to Jakob von Uexkiill’s work
(Stepanov 1971, 24-25, 27-32).



1 The expression paradigm is used by Anderson et al. (1984), Hoffmeyer and Emmeche (1991),
Eder and Rembold (1992), and Kull (1993). Here I prefer to employ the less definite term approach
in an attempt to avoid a premature hardening of the biosemiotic idea into an actual paradigm.
4         THE BIOSEMIOTIC      APPROACH




   However, it was only in the last decade of the twentieth century that the word
began to proliferate in the international literature (Sebeok and Umiker-Sebeok
1992). According to the biosemiotic perspective, living nature is understood as essen-
tially driven by, or actually consisting of, semiosis, that is to say, processes of sign
relations and their signification — or function — in the biological processes oflife.
Accordingly, biosemiotician Claus Emmeche (1992) has suggested the follow-
ing as a succinct definition of the concept of biosemiotics: “Biosemiotics proper
deals with sign processes in nature in all dimensions, including (1) the emer-
gence of semiosis in nature, which may coincide with or anticipate the emer-
gence of living cells; (2) the natural history of signs; (3) the ‘horizontal’ aspect
of semiosis in the ontogeny of organisms, in plant and animal communication,
and in inner sign functions in the immune and nervous systems; and (4) the
semiotics of cognition and language.”
   This idea, then, implies that processes of sign and meaning cannot, as is
often assumed, become criteria for distinguishing between the domains of
nature and culture. Rather, cultural sign processes must be regarded as spe-
cial instances of amore general and extensive biosemiosis that continuously
unfolds and acts in the biosphere. It is important to emphasize at the outset,
however, that the biosemiotic project in no way whatsoever contradicts the
conventional scientific understanding of living systems as originating from
molecular processes. Biosemiotics accords entirely with this viewpoint but
expands upon it by noting that molecular processes cannot be exhaustively
described in chemical terms, since such processes, by virtue of their very par-
ticipation in the constitution of the fundamental processes oflife, function-
ally become distinctive bearers oflife’s critical semiotic relationships. Thus,
rather than making the semiotic aspects of life processes a secondary part
of biochemistry, biosemiotics posits that the semiotic dynamic constitutes a
 vital key to a more complete biochemical understanding, without which the
 fundamental biochemical organization oflife processes cannot be satisfacto-
 rily explained.
    The biosemiotic understanding, furthermore, is related to process philoso-
phy, which considers substance (matter) not as life’s fundamental entity but
rather as an intermediate stage in an emergent process. While process phi-
losophy is normally linked to the work of the English philosopher Alfred
North Whitehead,” biosemiotics is principally anchored in the evolutionary
philosophy of C.S. Peirce. The biosemiotic project also has implications for
our understanding of evolution, as it is embedded in a theory about organic
evolution as the cornerstone of a cosmic semiotic process that Peirce often


2 Whitehead (1978 (1929)); see also Hartshorne (1970). A current discussion of evolutionary
theory in the light of process philosophy is found in Kampis (1998).
                                                                   ON BIOSEMIOTICS                 5



described asa tendency of nature to “take [i.e., to form] form habits”. The bio-
semiotic idea implies that
                      th life onEarth manifests itself  in a global and evolu-
tionary semiosphere, a sphere of sign processes and elements of meaning that
          aa

constitute a frame of understanding within which biology must work.* “The
semiosphere iis a spherelike the atmosphere, hydrosphere, orbiosphere.
                                                                     Itper-
meates these spheres from their iinnermost to outermost reaches and consists
of communication: sound, scent, movement, colors, forms, electrical fields,
various waves, chemical signals, touch, and so forth — in short, the signs of
life” (Hoffmeyer 1996b).*

In the chapters that follow, I will more closely consider various aspects of the
biosemiotic approach, but let me deal here with a few warning signals that
the critical reader must already have detected. Perhaps the most troublesome
alarm alerts those readers with a biological background who think that the
biosemiotic approach may be a form of vitalism. Empirical researchers may
quickly spot a warning sign that suggests metaphysics. Humanists, on the other
hand, may see a danger marker that points to reductionism. Let me confront
this last alarm signal first.



3 One could object by saying that not just living beings but also as yet lifeless nature should
be included in the semiosphere. From an evolutionary-cosmological standpoint, such an under-
standing of a continuum, a physiosemiosis, would perhaps be preferable (Deely 1990; Salthe
1999). Here we follow Sebeok (1979) in defining the emergence of life as the threshold for the
semiosphere. As we shall see in Chapter 2 (in the section “The Creation ofLife”), from a biosemi-
otic point ofview, life’s beginning is connected to the creation of encircling membranes, so that
self-organizing processes can establish a stable integration of a system of self-reference (via DNA)
and a system for other-reference (linked to receptors). The creation of such a self-sustaining feed-
back between the inner and outer sides in an inner-outer asymmetrical system makes possible, in
our opinion, the generation ofgenuinely triadic sign relationships.
4 The expression semiosphere was originally introduced by the Russian-born Estonian semi-
otician Yuri Lotman, who explicitly used it in comparison to Vernadsky’s idea ofthe biosphere.
For Lotman (1990, 125), the semiosphere remained a cultural concept: “The unit of semiosis,
the smallest functioning mechanism, is not the separate language but the whole semiotic space
in question. This is the space we term the semiosphere. The semiosphere is the result and the
condition for the development of culture; we justify our term by analogy with the biosphere,
as Vernadsky defined it, namely the totality and the organic whole of living matter and also
the condition for the continuation of life (Vernadsky 1926; 1945, 1-12).’ One could say that
Vernadsky’s idea of the biosphere in fact includes what we here would call the semiosphere.
But the idea of the biosphere has not retained the connotation that Vernadsky originally gave
to it but is used today simply to mean “the ecosystems comprising the entire earth and the liv-
ing organisms that inhabit it” (Webster's Encyclopedic Unabridged Dictionary 1996). For more
details about the origin of these terms, see Sebeok (1999). John Deely accepts my use of the
word semiosphere and suggests “signosphere as a term more appropriate for the narrower desig-
nation of semiosphere in Lotman’s sense, leaving the broader coinage and usage to Hoftmeyet’s
credit” (Deely 2001, 629).
 6        THE BIOSEMIOTIC   APPROACH




                             Not Reductionist

 Is the biosemiotic approach reductionist? The answer is of course yes — if one
 narrowly defines the words sign or meaning in terms of human phenomena such
 as linguistic symbols. In Turkey, those who contemptuously mistreat a certain
 red cloth decorated with a white half moon and a white star risk a prison sen-
 tence, and this is, of course, astonishing to those who do not understand the
 symbolism of the flag. However, if one understands the meaning of this type
 of sign, the matter quickly becomes less surprising, even if one may still believe
 that prison is a too dramatic penalty for this particular offense.
    It is unlikely that one will find examples of sign processes of this complexity
 in the animal kingdom. The biosemiotic approach does not imply that human-
 ity is nothing special but only that the obvious uniqueness of humans is not
 as users of signs but as creatures who can readily teach themselves to master a
 special form of sign usage — symbolic reference — that is the basis of linguistic
 competence. The red cloth with the white half moon and star belongs to the cat-
 egory flag, and it is because — and only because — of this that it is legitimately
 thought that those who trample on the cloth also indirectly stomp on Turkey's
 good name and reputation.
    The American anthropologist and neurobiologist Terence Deacon has
 made   a detailed case for the necessity of distinguishing        among    iconic,
 indexical, and symbolic forms of reference, if one will explain the evolu-
 tionary emergence of the human brain’s special linguistic talent (Deacon
 1997). While we share the ability for iconic and indexical reference with all
 other animals who possess a brain, the capability for symbolic reference is
 unique to humans, Deacon believes (see Chapter 8 for further discussion).
 Language’s fundamental basis in corporeality is a relatively newfound insight
 with radical consequences for linguistic and cognitive research (Lakoff 1987;
 Sheets-Johnstone 1990; Lakoff and Johnson 1999), to which I shall return in
Chapters 4 and 8. Here I shall argue, by way of introduction, that humani-
 ty’s cognitive and emotional characteristics cannot be considered so mirac-
  ulously great that we can justify setting humans “inside parentheses” in the
* study of the natural phenomena of this earth. The mental system of humans
  has grown from nature through an evolutionary process, and we must expect
  to find phenomena in nature that remind us of humanity in all its forms.
  Indeed, if this were not the case, we would have to find a theory to explain
  how we have become such extraordinarily peculiar beings. With all due
  respect for the distant myth ofthat theft of the apple from the tree of knowl-
  edge, we are still waiting for a plausible theory.
     How will arch-humanists (if, indeed, there are any still around) explain that
  humans could have ended up so totally outside of nature?
                                                        ON BIOSEMIOTICS           7



  There is a perfectly clear answer to this question — or perhaps I should call
it an avoidance maneuver     — and moreover it is a maneuver that has become
quite fashionable of late. One can choose to entirely reject evolution’s validity
beyond biology itself. According to this view, scientific results cannot be used to
critique philosophical positions, because the scientific results themselves have
philosophical baggage. Indeed, in the twentieth century, not only historians
of science but also philosophers have become acutely aware that all scientific
results rest upon tacit assumptions that very often are dependent upon unac-
knowledged philosophical presuppositions. Natural science, therefore, cannot
claim a superior place in our understanding of the world when it is essentially
nothing other than a special “story” with no claim to universal validity. This
constructivism can have much in its favor, especially as a needed corrective to
the almost terrorizing conception of just a generation ago that objective sci-
ence is the guiding rule for the development of technology and community.
However, in its radical version, as outlined here, such arch-social constructiv-
ism approaches absurdity. It is true that the fossils found underground could, in
theory, have been put there by a capricious god who is amused by teasing scien-
tific eggheads on Planet Earth. However, simply the demonstration that such a
“theory” cannot possibly be disproved cannot serve as an argument for taking it
seriously — especially in light of the overwhelming quantity of strong and inde-
pendent evidence we have to support its alternative, the theory of evolution.
   Constructivism does, however, contribute to our perceptions as we seek those
biases that inevitably conceal themselves in the inner structures of our theories.
As we shall see in this book, the neo-Darwinist version of evolutionary theory
is lacking in the way that it significantly reflects remnants of ontological ideas
that by and large are characteristic of twentieth-century natural science (further
on this in chapter 3 and 4. See also Depew and Weber (1995), Wheeler (2006).
In this context, constructivism can be seen as a useful counterbalance. But to use
constructivism as an excuse to avoid taking serious central, and profoundly well-
corroborated natural scientific understandings of this world in which we find our-
selves is not a mark of profundity but rather of intellectual complacency. Indeed,
in social constructivism’s most radical version, where only the cultural and social
domains are considered to be real, constructivism itself is reductionistic.
  The biosemiotic idea does not maintain that the social, cognitive, and emo-
tional processes of humanity can simply be understood as individual manifesta-
tions of traditional biological phenomena. Such an understanding, with varying
degrees of radicalness, has been given validity first by sociobiology and later by
evolutionary psychology. The biosemiotic idea actually consists in a diametri-
cally opposed understanding, requiring a diametrically radical approach — i.e.,
if we would build bridges between the human and the natural, let us assume
that nature already possesses semiotic competence. Biosemiotics thereby rejects
      8         THE BIOSEMIOTIC        APPROACH




      the idea of the i/usionary character of human universes of meaning, but it pays
      for this rejection with its acceptance of nature’ universe of meaning— ot, in
      other words, the reality of a causally efficacious matrix of biological interaction,
      the utterly natural product of organisms interaction that I will refer to through-
      out this text by use of the term semiosphere.
         However, this solution is just that which will set the alarm bells ringing for
      many biologists.


                                   Not Disguised Vitalism
      Is the biosemiotic approach simply vitalism in disguise? There is hardly any idea
      more despised in modern biology than vitalism — perhaps with the exception
      of Lamarckism, which we will later consider more closely. In biological connec-
      tions, the word vitalism is identified simply with the belief that life consists of
    ~ the existence of special life forces or vital forces, which are not active or known
     _ in physical nature. These are unknown and even unknowable forces that biology
      is claimed to require but which play no role in physics and chemistry. Let me
      immediately make clear that there is no undertone of this type of mystic power
      in the biosemiotic idea.
        Even so, there is in this book good reason to look more closely at the assess-
      ment of vitalism, which in its rational roots was an answer to problems that are
      still unsolved and that to a large degree nourish the search for a biosemiotic
      understanding. Thus, the relationship between vitalism and biosemiotics is not
      based upon theoretical agreement but upon some common conception of what
      are the central unsolved problems in biology.
}        Vitalism today is most closely linked to the German biologist and philos-
      opher Hans Driesch (1867-1941), who developed the Entwicklungsmechanik,
—



      a theory about embryonic development as a kind of mechanical process. The
      influential German Darwinist and mechanicist Ernst Haeckel (1834-1919) in
      1866 proposed his famous (but essentially inaccurate) biogenetic law, often sum-
      marized in the saying, “ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny” (Coleman 1977, 47).
      The idea is that every organism in its embryonic development passes through

      s Already in 1828, the embryologist Karl Ernst von Baer saw that although the embryo during
      its development passes through stages which correspond to the forms that one finds in the lower
      animals, these are the embryonic stages of the lower animals, not — as Haeckel later had it — the
      mature forms. But this correct view failed to spread outside of disciplinary circles and neither,
      apparently, was it grasped by biologists such as Haeckel (Coleman 1977, 41-56). It is ironic that
      von Baer was a type of early vitalist (epigeneticist) and in any case an ardent opponent of mech-
      anicism. Von Baer maintained that it is “the essence (the Idea, according to the new [nature-phil-
      osophical] school) of the developing animal form which controls the development of the germ
      [fertilized egg]” (ibid., 42).
                                                              ON BIOSEMIOTICS               9



stages, whose sequence follows exactly the stages that the ancestors followed in
the historical changes in the species —a         process called phylogenesis. For exam-
ple, the human embryo, early on, develops fish-like gill slits, later a three-cham-
bered heart like a reptile, and still later a mammalian tail. Haeckel believed that
with this theory he had found a key to a mechanical explanation of the mysteries
of embryonic development and the generation of form, and it was to cast light
on this question that the German biologist Wilhelm Roux (1850-1924) devel-
oped, in the last decades of the nineteenth century, the age                    ts.
which became the scholarly turning point of the vitalism debate.
    Roux believed that the aggregate of the hereditary units (noting that the the-
oretical concept of the gene was itself not yet invented until 1907 by the Danish
geneticist W. Johannsen) in the eggs became with each cell division unequally
distributed between the daughter cells, so that the potential of individual cells
became more and more differentiated and limited throughout the course of
embryonic development. Finally, the individual cells of mature organisms
formed a kind of mosaic of cells, each with its own genetic content. He there-
fore called this theory the mosaic theory. The beauty of this simple theory was
that it led to predictions that could be tested. If the hypothesis was correct, the
destruction of an embryonic cell —a blastomere, at the embryo’s two- or four-
cell stage — would lead to a deformed fetus. If the hypothesis was incorrect, the
destruction of the blastema would be expected to have little effect (Allen 1975).
    Roux experimented with frog embryos, in which he punctured a single blas-
tomere with a heated, sterile needle, thus killing it while leaving the others
(apparently) undisturbed. The experiments seemed to confirm the theory that
the embryos developed abnormally, in agreement with the assumption that half
of the genes in the blastomere were set out of play because of the intervention by
Roux. The egg seemed to contain an inner mechanical device that would ensure
that under normal circumstances each cell in a complete organism came to pos-
sess the correct characteristics.
    In 1891, however, Hans Driesch reached an altogether different conclusion.
Driesch’s work took place at the zoological station in Naples, where he exper-
imented with eggs from sea urchins. Instead of destroying individual blastom-
eres, Driesch was content to agitate two-cell embryos in sea water, whereupon
the cells separated from each other without becoming damaged. Under these
circumstances, it happened that each single embryonic cell developed into a
normal, if small, larva (a Pluteus). Every cell had, in other words, fulfilled its
complete potential, which, one should think, was a powerful argument against
the mosaic theory.° Driesch, however, was just as eager as Roux to find an expla-


6   Weknow now that the difference between Roux’s and Driesch’s results is based, among other
reasons, upon the fact that the ontogenetic process is dependent upon communication between
10         THE BIOSEMIOTIC         APPROACH



nation for the embryonic developmental process of form generation. In other
experiments, he left two-cell embryos undisturbed and sought instead to deter-
mine which daughter cells would be derived from which of the two original
blastomeres. It appeared that when the two-cell stage was allowed to develop
normally, each cell became the source of qualitatively different types of tissue in
the mature organism. Considered as a whole, Driesch interpreted this research
as a sign that blastomeres had an inherent ability to adapt themselves to vary-
ing environments, so the process of embryonic differentiation had to be seen
as a result of the capability of cells to coordinate internal and external circum-
stances. Driesch came to regard the embryo as a self-adjusting whole of many
cooperating cells that he described as a harmonic equipotential system — that is,
a system where all parts have equal potential to contribute to the development
of the whole organism (Allen 1975).
     However, Driesch had to abandon his quest to solve the puzzle that was to
give a causal mechanical explanation of the workings of these harmonic equipo-
tential systems. In the beginning of the new twentieth century, he despondently
gave up experimental biology and developed in its place (as a philosophy pro-
fessor in Strasburg and later in Leipzig) that neo-vitalist philosophy for which
he would become so notorious. Instead of being able to give a mechanical expla-
nation for the form-generation process, he had to content himself with his idea
about a special energy of vitality. Driesch went back to Aristotle’s old idea of
entelechy, the principles or conditions by which things are realized or deter-
mined. He emphasized that we must not consider this entelechy to be energy.
Entelechy should be understood as a natural effect in its own right, Driesch
believed, and he suggested that its efficacy consists in the changing of energy’s
direction. Entelechy thus — in Driesch’s conception and as expressed in modern
language — belongs to a meta-level; it is not in itself'a real force but rather, has a
controlling agency upon such forces (Driesch 1908). Even so, entelechy became
both considered as and named as a vital force, which of course caused the scien-
tific community to strongly disassociate itself from this idea.’

cells. In Roux’s experiments, this communication is disturbed, because the destroyed cells send
out false signals. In Driesch’s experiments, on the other hand, the cells lack signals from their
neighbor cells, which normally will make two-cell embryos act in a certain way, and in the absence
ofthese signals, the process begins anew (but with a reduced supply of metabolic resources).
7 Ina recent analysis of the inherent teleology in the theory of natural selection, philosopher
T.L. Short (2002) points out that in Driesch’s work, vitalism makes the mistake of explaining the
telos of the evolutionary process, its obvious tendency to favor certain types of organization rather
than others (i.e., those selected away) through an efficient causality, namely a vital force. Force is
not a common good that one strives for but rather, in the best case, an instrument for such an
endeavor. The vital force is therefore not a final cause but rather an efficient cause (a similar point
was made by Hans Jonas — see p. 321). This blending together in vitalism of efficient and final cau-
sality (in Aristotelian terms) is probably the main reason why this direction of thought cannot
                                                                  ON BIOSEMIOTICS                Il



  The understanding of entelechy as a controlling authority foreshadows a
thermodynamically inspired model for the physics of form generation (see
Chapter 3), as Driesch had already suspected. It was perhaps unfortunate that
thermodynamics in Driesch’s time was not yet ready to function as the founda-
tion for such a nonvitalistic solution. Therefore, this story illuminates an impor-
tant strand of the development of biology. The hardcore reductionism that has
characterized many of the most successful biological theories all the way back
to Descartes’ time has presumably been basically incorrect; nevertheless, it has
functioned as a remarkably good foundation for the experimental study of life
processes. In contrast, those who persistently deny the oversimplified pictures
that are characteristic of reductionist theories have perhaps been on the right,
path but have not had adequate theoretical means to create a productive alter-|
native to reductionism.  The time was not yet right for a scientific confrontation!
with mechanicism. However, that has changed in the last few decades, with
the development of nonequilibrium thermodynamics, chaos theory, nonlinear
dynamics, complexity research, and biosemiotics.
   Contemporary biology has understood it such that, in the controversy over
vitalism, both sides were wrong, but that, while Roux developed a fruitful
method, Driesch pursued an unproductive path. Vitalism and Driesch’s theory
became for many biologists the quintessential example of how badly it can go
when philosophical considerations are given credence in connection with inter-
nal controversies in the biological disciplines. This assessment, however, is based
upon a rather euphoric understanding of molecular biology’s potential to solve
the problems that Driesch abandoned. The smart idea about genes as informa-
tion has all too often paralyzed the critical nerves of biologists, who a long time
ago should have asked themselves how a substance entity, a DNA segment that
travels (as a kind of parcel post package) from generation to generation, can
at the same time be identical to a form entity that can instruct an egg to gen-
erate an organism. There is hidden here an unsolved ambiguity that Norbert
Wiener (1962, 132), the founder of cybernetics, has already warned against:
“Information is information, not matter or energy. No materialism that does
not admit this can survive at the present day.” The heart of the matter is that                       —_—



it is fairly unclear what we mean with the expression genetic information. If the
meaning is that the genes contain information that are instructions about how
the egg shall create given phenotypic traits (forms), this kind of information is

be made fruitful. From a thermodynamic standpoint, however, Driesch’s entelechy has more to
do with the relations between order and entropy than with energy (force). But Driesch was far
from unique in this confusion of the entropic and the energetic. We see this, for example, also in
Sigmund Freud's idea of psychic energy dating from nearly the same period, which in the final anal-
ysis has nothing to do with metabolism (the body’s production of energy) but instead has a great
deal to do with what brings order to the psychic house.
12         THE BIOSEMIOTIC         APPROACH




of a fairly different mold than the type of information (Shannon information)
that is operative in computer science or physics. So it is namely a question of
information, which in one or another sense has a meaning, or is meaningful (for
the egg?),° which again assumes a valuable or preferred direction and it is just
the kind of information that we associate with signs and sign processes or semio-
sis (Hoffmeyer and Emmeche 1991; Santaella-Braga 1999). And thereby we have
in a radical sense transcended that molecular genetics, whose results are used
to refute the ideas of Driesch. It thus appears that the key to the problem ofform
generation will be found neither through the approaches ofmechanicist biology nor
through the invocation ofspecial lifeforces, but rather through the elaboration ofa
            ontogenesis.
semiotics of|


                               Specious Metaphysics?
While biosemiotics must reject its connection to vitalism, as narrowly defined
by Driesch, it must acknowledge its relationship to the broader strand of nine-
teenth-century natural science that — outside of biology—is often called
vitalism. However, biosemioticians in this instance join company with such
renowned scientists— Claude Bernard, Louis Pasteur, and Niels Bohr, among
others — that the alarm bells have scant reason to ring. In this more modest
understanding of the concept of vitalism, the word refers to the idea that com-
plex phenomena are controlled partially by mechanistic forces and to a certain
extent by self-determination. In biology, this conception is regarded not as vital-
ism but rather as organicism, and this is probably the principal direction among
more philosophically inclined biologists of recent times, such as Ernst Mayr and
Stephen Jay Gould (El-Hani, Queiroz and Emmeche 2006). An earlier repre-
sentative of vitalism, as defined in this sense, was the Swedish chemist
                                                                       Jons Jacob
Berzelius (1779-1848), who clearly used the expression vital forces but expressly
emphasized that he meant to describe a regulative power that could create orga-
nization. In 1806, he wrote that the beginning point of life “should be sought


8 In sexually reproducing species, the egg is the cell that is prepared to set the ontogenetic pro-
cess in motion, which begins with the sperm cell’s penetration. That the egg cell is prepared must
be understood here in its phylogenetic dimension. Evolution has developed a finely articulated
semiotic interplay between the embryo cells, which already before birth lead to the production of
special egg-producing cells, oocytes, much as it has created the other numerous components in the
play of reproduction. See the section “The Semiotics of Ontogeny” in Chapter 5 for details about
the biosemiotic interactions of egg and sperm cells. That this inherited information has mean-
ing for the egg refers to the state of “readiness” of the egg for releasing that evolutionarily deter-
mined series of processes which is the embryonic development, starting with the penetration by
the sperm cell, with which the egg then joins to make a complete genome and a full set of genetic
information.
                                                         ON BIOSEMIOTICS             13



 in the basic forces of the elements and it [life] isa necessary consequence of the
 relationship whereby the fundamental materials are joined. .. . Consequently,
 there is no special force exclusively the property of living matter which may be
 called a vital force-for-life; rather, this force arises from the conflict of numer-
 ous other [forces] and organic nature possesses no laws other than those of inor-
 ganic nature” (Coleman 1977, 147).                                                   i
    That organic evolution on this planet is real and that it is an example of
 nature's ability to create complex, organized structures from less ordered com-
 ponents is broadly accepted by biologists. Therefore, it is hardly the ability to
 self-organize that is contested. Instead, at stake is the question of how such self- .
 organizing processes can be understood without seeking explanatory sources
 other than simple causality. It has become a credo, especially outside of biology’s
 own circles, that Darwinian natural selection constitutes an adequate explana-
 tion of historical developmental processes in nature. Therefore, it is most often |
 not considered necessary to introduce further principles into evolutionary the- |
 ory. The differential destruction of dysfunctional characters is seen by many as
 the key to understanding the generation of functionality in nature.
    As pointed out by the American environmental psychologist Rod Swenson
 (1999), there is, however, an underlying metaphysical anomaly hidden deep
 within this apparently so elegant theory. For the most important premise of
 natural selection is the overproduction of offspring. Only because there are too
 many mouths to feed can the least fit be eliminated. But this proliferation that
 leads to overproduction     — how can we explain it? For good reasons we can-
 not here refer to natural selection, for without proliferation, there could be no
 natural selection. Fertility lurks as some unexplained hypothesis in the heart ie
 Darwin's theory.
    Seen from the standpoint of biology, this is perhaps not a serious problem,
 for the fertility of organisms, their ability to multiply themselves, can fairly eas-
 ily be explained by our knowledge of the mechanisms of DNA replication and
 cell division, which are already well described with regard to the simplest organ-
 isms. And yet, isn’t there a bit of nontrivial ignorance here, that shouldn't be ;
 neglected? For even if we know well the mechanisms that cells or organisms
 use for reproduction, we do not fully understand how these processes are con-
 trolled. Strictly speaking, we do not understand the integrated level, which for
 lack of a better term can be called the cell’s agency, its tendency to incorporate
 interactive events into its own project o survival.
    That we can explain how living systems behave in order to become prolific
 does not explain evolution in the deeper sense. How does this fertility come into
 being? What temporal motive forceisat play here? Selection theory also needs
 a theory about what kind of thing ]life’s agency would be and how that agency SY
_comes to be. And so it appears that selection theory is only a surface structure
14          THE   BIOSEMIOTIC      APPROACH




built upon the foundations of a deeper theory of evolution that explains how
life relates to the processes that are fundamental to the physical development of
the universe.
   These are questions that I will discuss more closely in Chapters 2 and 3, but
here I will simply mention that modern physics does not leave much ground for
dependency on a metaphysics that declares all that cannot be reduced to simple
efficient causality (in an Aristotelian sense) to be unreal.
   In the book Evolving Darwinism (Depew and Weber 1995), the philosopher
David Depew and biochemist Bruce Weber point out that Darwinism long
ago moved from a Newtonian worldview to a probabilistic mindset. It is just
this shift of thinking that we usually label as neo-Darwinism. They maintain
that Darwinism is now again transforming itself in a way that adapts to the
new worldviews of the physics that have emerged in recent decades. If Depew
and Weber are correct in this analysis, the metaphysical divergence between
Darwinism and biosemiotics presumably can be transcended.
     It is understandable that experimental biologists are suspicious of ideas that
imply that nonreducible form determinations underlie life processes. That life
processes are embedded in a set of semiotic relationships implies that they
cannot be completely described at a single level of complexity, the molecular,
since these processes must also always be understood in relation to a signifi-
cative content that could only be defined when viewed from a superior level.
Biosemiotics requires an understanding of living nature that respects discrete
levels of complexity as partially autonomous and that therefore is very aware of
the hierarchical and emergent character of nature. Such an understanding may
seem restrictive in experimental biology, which perhaps not so much as before
would be considered a ticket for direct entry into insights concerning nature.”
However, it is important to understand that the experimental exploration of the
processes of life has a central place in biology also from a biosemiotic point of
view. The differences lie in the interpretation of observation and experiments,
not in the experiments and observations themselves. It may be added that a bio-
semiotically driven curiousity might be expected to influence those questions it
feels relevant to ask and, consequently, the observations and experiments that
one will feel tempted to initiate.
     To a large degree it is traditional biology’s own success which has necessitated
and inspired the biosemiotic idea. Throughout modern biology, one encounters
expressions and sayings that are in fact essentially meaningless if one attempts
to understand them without regard to their semiotic implications. Even in
authoritative biochemical texts, these expressions appear quite frequently. One


9 Ironically, the success of molecular genetics has to a large degree itself fueled a growing inter-
est in other levels of complexity. See for example Shapiro (1999)
                                                        ON BIOSEMIOTICS            15



speaks of, for example, lymphocytes that present peptide fragments on their sur-
faces. However, one cannot meaningfully present something without reference
to communication between some entities. And yet, a biochemist would firmly
deny that lymphocytes should possess communicative intentions. Or one speaks
about “high fidelity” replication, but reliability is an attribute that presupposes
some kind of meaningful content, just as replication — whether it is accurate or
loaded with errors — is in itselfasign process. How can something meaningless
possibly be reliable?                                                                3
   Let these examples suffice. Claus Emmeche (1997; 1999a) has used the
expression spontaneous semiotics to describe this well-accepted practice of mod-
ern biology. The ordinary assumption is that these are cases of the careless use of /
language, but this employment of language in each single instance might even-|
tually be transformed into statements that in the end will refer to the attribute’s
origin through natural selection. As already stated, there could be significant
skepticism concerning this explanation.
   Considering how widespread spontaneous semiotics has gradually become
even in scientific journals (Hoffmeyer 1997a; Yates 1985), a more serious consid-
eration of the scientific status of spontaneous semiotics may be needed. Perhaps
this manner of speaking is so prevalent because it reflects an important aspect of
the subject matter of biology and biochemistry, ice., life itself. Rather than get-
ting rid of the semiotic terminology while moving down to living nature’s most
basic and general level, the biochemical, it appears that precisely at this level an
extended use of semiotic terminology has become customary. It’s questionable,
in fact, if one can at all understand advanced biochemistry and molecular biol-
ogy without thinking in semiotic terms.
  It is my opinion that the answer to this question is no. The biosemiotic
approach is already tacitly permitted in the disciplines. It simply remains to
become developed as a new integrated paradigm.
  We must thus plead guilty to the charges of the experimentalists. The bio-
semiotic idea certainly implies metaphysical views that have no place in tra-
ditional biology. But rather than narrowing down the options— as Driesch’s
vitalism does — biosemiotics will have a liberating influence on a biology which
seriously needs a way to displace the big-brother role that physics has claimed
for all too long. Biosemiotics does not turn experimental biology to meta-
physics but instead replaces an outdated metaphysics
                                                  — the thought that life
is only chemistry and molecules —with a far better, more contemporary, and
more coherent philosophy. Life ratherthan |natural law — and signs rather than
atoms — must become natural science’s fundamental phenomena. Life is com-
posed ofmolecules, which manifest themselves as signs (Hoffmeyer 1993; 1996;
Kawade 1996).
    re
                                                                                 ng                                    a
    as                 ee
.


                                                                                  >
                                Feb                                         e



                                ~                                                                          dX.
                                                                                 rink                      may             r
                                                                   ;        wicyt, a                               ae niall


                                            »@                                  yicsicietey                                A   ~~                             ,
                           or

                                            ae                                                                     i               emia
                                            Serovar                                                                                  :
                                        q            De            nqalese
     me
                                                           Sen                   =_—"                  —
=              ~

    ia                                                      ato                                            =
                                    A                              °        ers
                   M

                                                                                     -             a.
                       .




                                                            sea)                              x42
                                        »                                                          P nies


                                                       :                                  3                        :
     r                     j


                                            2a €> <2 al                                            ees!
             ie

                           i.                    »                          Lewew                  d=

                                                                                  -                a:




         3                      ‘we                                                       7,
                                                                            R
     ——
         — i                        +            ceded                                             9

                                                     tend                                          Pins

                           i                                                abyss?
                                                                                               tn
                                                                       by        Ou            ~~!
                   a

                                             1                                   7                 i


                                        e              sy                   \-                as

                                                 ented espe

             si                                      ‘pbs                                                                      Y   Seaton                         ren     Sm

                           é                                           ING                                                 , “agus                  5 opehe        eee        mien



                                                                                                                                         ;          wise            iy        Viale on
                                                                                      ;
                                             ie                                      "a                        !           a                 Pre    ©              nano    ayiacare
                                                                                                                                                                   a      a




    ii




                                                                                                                                                        g'°          ?   ~e
                                                                                                                                                              Cy ei: al Outing
                                                                                                       =                             pel
                                                                                                                                                   Ya              sci           i




                                                      [                 7 py                  fi
