2
                  Surfaces within Surfaces




                           Biological Membranes
Let us in this chapter explore the biosemiotic understanding by applying it toa
more concrete topic: biological membranes. An appropriate place to begin this
exploration would be to investigate the semiotics of the skin.                        -
    From birth we humans are in fact skin more than we are anything else. The
skin of the newborn is, as Thure von Uexkiill (1999) says, a kind of pre-actual
atmosphere (vorwirkliche Atmosphare), and what enters the awareness of the
newborn infant is only qualities or differences between qualities— grades of
intensities of touch, taste, and smell. In a certain sense, then, the newborn child’s
skin is a type of brain, in the sense that it is the place where encounters with the
world first freeze into the vague structurings of knowledge. And not coinciden-
tally, the skin and the brain both originate from the same germ material, i.e., the
embryo’s ectoderm layer.
   Now traditionally, most of us are taught from childhood that appearances
are deceptive, and that we should not judge a book by its cover—which is to
say that we should not be superficial but rather go after the heart of truth that
lies concealed within the surface statement. The most important and essential
aspects cannot be seen or sensed directly, we are repeatedly advised, but must
be dug out from their hiding places deep within the depths of things. Deepest
within, goes this logic, we will find what we most profoundly feel and know.
   Undoubtedly, one could argue that there are good reasons to teach children
that things are not necessarily what they seem, and that the world is often full
of fraud and deceit (indeed, much of philosophy after Descartes is based on
this conviction). But one can also inversely argue that the belief in an inner-
most being— the idea of the “true I” —is for the most part a cultural bias. And
here it might be useful, for a change, to try seeing the world from the skin’s per-
                                                                                has a
spective (as I will, presently, in this chapter). For the idea that personality has
place, a topolo
            ologicalsite, is not especially « obvious, and by its very nature cannot
be scientifically confirmed. Rather, in principle everything that belongs to the
domain of reality that grammar calls first-person singular is thought to fall out-
side of the purview of natural science and is therefore considered as imaginary
     18          THE BIOSEMIOTIC       APPROACH



     by many philosophers (see Churchland 1986; Dennett 1987; Churchland 1991).
     Yet the simple fact that our personhood presupposes our brain does not imply
     that our personhood is im the brain —and should we feel so compelled as to
     finally place our personhood in a definite biological locus, why not place it in
     the skin? After all, this is where we encounter the world around us and, in so
>
     many very obvious ways, the skin is the place where all the fun occurs. And in
     this chapter, Iwould like to show you how and why I believe that the skin is an
    _ indispensable part of our personality.
        Firstly, the skin is the largest and most diversified organ of the human body.
     If we could stretch a grown person’s skin out on the ground, it would cover
     between one and a half and two square meters. This modest area is crossed by
     sixty kilometers of nerve fibers and fifteen kilometers of veins and contains mil-
     lions of sense receptors for pain, temperature, pressure, and touch. Incessently
     and whithout our knowing, the skin repairs itself after both physical and psy-
     chic traumas, and more than anything else it is the skin that tells us about the
     person we are, as well as about the people (and the world) that we are facing.
     Color, texture, tension, and smell provide a constant barrage of information
    _ exchange for and among humans, across the interface that is the skin.
          The following description from a Norwegian physician who was afflicted
     with the Guillan-Barrés syndrome, an illness that puts the nervous system out
     of commission for a time, can illuminate the skin’s predominant role in our self-
     understanding:
          The worst experience was the disappearance and disturbance of the sense of touch.
          In a way, the borders of my self disappeared. When the hand was placed on the
          breast, it felt as if it were floating in the air. There was no ending to my breast and
          no beginning to my hand. The quilt floated in the air above something that was not
          me. A caress couldn't be felt, it was only a fuzzy suggestion of something long gone.
          I experienced in this situation an intense feeling of being locked inside myself with-
          out possibility for physical contact with the surroundings. I saw the responses and
          heard the words of my loved ones, but Iwas cut off from being physically present.
           .. This confused bodily experience was, I believe, 1nearly psychotic in its strange-
          ness. The experience, to be without boundaries, that thoughts and feelings were as
          before, but the body was something different, blurred and long gone and that didn’t
          obey instructions, is difficult to describe. The experience of being physically cut off
          from physical touch and contact still remains for me an experience of hopeless lone-
          liness (cited in Fyrand 1997, 65; italics added).

          It is obvious that the skin protects us against external intrusions, but the
     Norwegian doctor's account reminds us how indispensable the skin is in semi-
     otic terms as well. The skin keeps the world away in a physical sense but present in
     a psychological sense. ‘Teisthe skin that gives us the experience of belonging — it
     allows us to feel the ode But the very fact thatthe world can be feltisalready
                                                  SURFACES    WITHIN    SURFACES             19



a complex phenomenon that doesn’t just presuppose that there are receptors
(sensorycells) inthe skin that register touch, pressure, pain, cold, warmth, idee
and various chemical influences, but also that biological meanings are assigned
to these sensations, It is not enough to sense; organisms must also create func-
tional interpretations of the myriad of sensory stimulations so that these do not
become isolated incoming impulses but are integrated into a form that the body
understands and can act upon appropriately.
   By way of an extremely simple example, consider a mother who sketches the
number two on her child's back, and asks the child to guess the number that
she just drew. The mothetr’s light touch causes small deformations of the child’s
receptors (the sensory cells that lie close together just under the surface of the
outer skin) and these deformations, in turn, cause a depolarization of the nerve
endings. If the depolarization exceeds a certain threshold limit, an electrical
impulse (i.e., an action potential) is transmitted through the nerve to the central
nervous system, where a longer lasting pressure causes a series of impulses whose
frequency is a function of the pressure’s intensity. And already, even at this level,
the organism’s own most current contextual situation becomes a relevant fac-
tor in the phenomenon, in that the threshold limit is defined by biochemical
parameters that reflect the general condition of the organism. Thus the sense of
pain, for example, is greatly influenced by prostaglandins that lower the thresh-
old values and thereby increase sensitivity. Prostaglandins are produced in con-
nective tissue, and their production is increased in case of inflammation.’
   Moreover, when these individual impulses reach the central nervous system,
a system-generated integration takes place, so that the impulses from a given
nerve ending are compared with impulses from nearby points in the skin (a
comparison which constitutes the discriminative sense) as well as with impulses
from muscles and joints (constituting the kinesthetic sense). The meaningful |
integration of these sense-data constitutes the stereognostic sense, and it is this
sense that the child in our “simple” example must mobilize to solve the prob-
lem — that is, to determine that the mother’s drawing is representative of the
number two.
  As most parents know, it is not easy fora child to solve this puzzle (for reasons
having almost nothing to do with numerical knowledge), and the ability to gain
skill in this game is in large part dependent on deliberate training. Furthermore,
the kinesthetic sense is one that must be developed throughout life — it is, for
example, highly developed among dancers and football players.
    Most importantly, in the job of determining the number two sketched on
the back, it is for the most part the tactile sense in the skin itself that is trained,


1 Such production can be counteracted with acetylsalicylic acid (which is the active ingredient
in ordinary pain-relief medicine).
20           THE BIOSEMIOTIC                   APPROACH




                               hair       4       nerve             nerve     sense receptor

              stratum Cone
                             HO onsatie                                                ie
                                                                                              epidermis
                                                                                       as
sebaceous gland.                                                                       7

     hair follicle                                                                       |


                                                                                              dermis
                                                                                         i         .




                                                                                         ii
     hair erector.|
          muscle                                                                         |



     sweat gland:                                                                      T
                     :                                                                     subcutaneous
        hair root        &                                                               | tissue

        hair bulb’                                                                   =
                                                                                  oi
                                                   .                             oe
                      hair papilla            fat cells   artery   vein     connective tissue
Figure 2.1 Cross-section of skin (from Den Danske Encyclopeedi).


and the task oflinking these tactile signals with signals from the other sense
organs is quite negligible. But in more ordinary situations, it is necessary to
integrate the stereognostic sense with a// the remaining senses to create an
optimal picture of what is taking place. This involves a long chain ofinterpre-
tations, or interpretants, on steadily more and more integrated levels. We can
sketch this chain as a sequential order of triadic sign processes, as depicted
in Figure 2.2.


                                      The Semiotics of a Slap
Figure 2.2, seen above (2a), isa graphic presentation of the elementary sign rela-
tions of Peircean semiotics. Here, a sign is “something which stands to somebody
for something in some respect or capacity” (CP 2:228*). We can, for example,
think about a slap, which normally is a clear sign that someone is angry. The slap
and the anger, however, do not exhaust the implied sign relation here, as the slap
itself does not know that it refers to an angry person, so we are lacking a third

2 References to the The Collected Papers ofCharles S. Peirce, Vols 1-8 (Peirce 1931-35, 1958), are
given throughout this book as CP followed by volume number and the number of the referred
paragraph.
                                                   SURFACES       WITHIN      SURFACES                             21




                                                               Brain                      ss
                                                                Processes                       :
                                                                                  woven     eter            Siaaaamema


                                               Experienced                Combined
                                                    pressure            _@xperiences                Anger


                                                                                    e |                                  /
        | Seriesof | :                   ‘Stereognossis                                Action       _
|    action potentials                                                                                  .

Figure 2.2 The semiotics of a slap. (a) The general sign triad, depicted as a tripod with
the interpretant designated as its foot. (b) A slap viewed as a triadic sign. (c)-(e) A slap
seen as a chain of sign processes whose interpretant in each articulation emerges as a
new signin amore integrated semiotic relation.


logical instance in the relationship, namely, the interpretation that takes place in
the person who is slapped, or perhaps in the mind of the friend who saw it hap-
pen. Sign relations are said to be triadic because they always involve three — and
only three — logical entities (either real or imaginary). In this case, the slap takes
the role of the primary sign (the sign vehicle), and the anger or aggression caus-
ing the slapping is the object that the sign refers to. The interpretant is now the
process, that is to say, the mental connections that take place in the brain and
body of the interpreter,’ whereby the slap and the anger are connected into a
sign relation. The interpretant will often be unconscious, as it probably is if, for -
example, the observer reacts spontaneously to the slap with a punishing attack
on the aggressor (instigating a new slap). Or perhaps the observer (mis)inter-
prets the slap as a sign of malice rather than of anger. The semiotics of the slap
can be summarized as in Figure 2.2b.
   In the next chapter we will look more deeply into the logical status of sign
relations. However, here we must at once (that is, before we turn back to our
primary theme, the semiotics of the skin) confront three potential sources of
ambiguity. First, it is important to distinguish between what has been called
the primary sign, or the sign vehicle, and the sign itself. In Figure 2.2b, the slap

3   Iam tempted to use the word body-brain. If one simply says brain, the reader may not take
into account the body in which the brain is located and which is in continuous communication
with the brain. This is more closely considered in Signs ofMeaning in the Universe (Hoftmeyer
1996b, 87-88)
22          THE BIOSEMIOTIC         APPROACH




constitutes the primary sign or sign vehicle (Peirce sometimes used the term
representamen but I will not use this term here), while the whole triad consti-
tutes the accomplished sign. The slap, then, és a sign only because it is involved
in a triadic relationship, asdescribed.*
   Secondly, it is important to clarify that the triad is an unbreakable whole
that cannot be understood as an assembly of three dyadic (two-part) relations.
When in Figure 2.2 we chose to link three logical instances in a sign relationship
depicted in a tripod rather than a triangle (which is often seen), it is precisely
to emphasize this characteristic of wholeness. Sign vehicle, object, and interpre-
tant are of different (but necessarily interdependent) logical types. This will be
clarified in the next chapter when we introduce Peirce’s categories of Firstness,
Secondness, and Thirdness.
   Thirdly, it should be noticed that when Peirce, in his designated definition
of sign, uses the expression somebody, he is not necessarily, nor exclusively, refer-
ring to a person. And likewise, the Peircean interpretant is a much more gen-
eral category that is directly linked to the triadic logic of sign relations, and
should not be confused with the very different notion of an interpreter. The
Brazilian Peirce scholar, Lucia Santaella-Braga (1999) explains, “Since the three
elements, sign, object, and interpretant, by themselves, or better, by their exis-
tential nature, may belong to various orders of reality as single objects, gen-
eral classes, fictions, mental representations, physical impulses, human actions,
organic activities, or natural laws, what constitutes the sign relation in its logical
form is the particular way in which this triad is bound together.” In fact, Peirce
explicitly referred to this point in the following passage, from a letter to Lady
Welby, written in 1908: “It is clearly indispensable to start with an accurate and
broad analysis of the nature of a Sign. I define a sign as a thing which is so deter-
mined by something else, called its object, and so determines an effect upon a
person,’ which effect I call its interpretant, that the latter is thereby mediately
determined by the former. My insertion of “upon a person” is a sop to Cerberus,

4 To avoid this potential confusion, some authors prefer not to use the term sign at all when
the meaning technically speaking is sign vehicle. I prefer to stick to normal language practice and
am content to remind the reader that a triadic relation is always knowingly or unknowingly pre-
supposed when something is called a sign — as even when in daily speech we simply call the slap a
sign, the set of sign relationships that are in play are always implicit.
s Bythe word determine in this context, Peirce does not suggest that the sign should be involved
in a deterministic causality. Peirce sees the sign as determined by its object in a way that reflects
the manner in which the interpretant (under the influence of the sign) establishes a relationship
between the sign and the object. In another place, Peirce defines the sign (here the representa-
men) in the following way: “A representamen is a subject of a triadic relation to a second, called
its object, for a third, called its interpretant, this triadic relation being such that the representamen
determines its interpretant to stand in the same triadic relation to the same object for some inter-
pretant” (CP 3:541; Peirce’s italics).
                                                   SURFACES    WITHIN     SURFACES             23



because I despair of making my own broader conception understood.”¢ (Peirce
1908 (1977), 80-81).
   At the bottom of Figure 2.2 is depicted the chain of biosemiotic processes thar, |
taken together, produce the sign relationships of Figure 2.2b. Correspondingly,
Figure 2.2c shows semiosis in one of the skin’s sensory cells, whose entire archi-
tecture and biochemistry create sensitivity to the applications of pressure (a
receptivity that, as already mentioned, is influenced by, for example, the concen-
tration of prostaglandins). Here, with the application of pressure, there emerges
an interpretant in the form of a context-dependent sequence of action poten-
tials that create a kind of cellular echo of the disturbance. This interpretant, the
echo, now becomes part ‘ofa more complex sign in Figure 2.2d. There, the pat-
tern of action potentials from many different sources, tactile as well as kines-
thetic, is processed under the formation of a stereognostic codification of the
experience of pressure. Such stereognosis constitutes the registering of the distur-
bance’s spatial-temporal characteristics and leads, on one hand, to an even more
complex sign that also encompasses other senses (sight, hearing, etc.), as well as
to the materialization of contextual memory as seen in Figure 2.2¢.’ The result-
ing interpretant is here a (conscious or unconscious) awareness of the slap — and
it is awareness not of an unintegrated meaningless physical event, but as a sign
of anger or aggression from another person. Such knowledge has the potential |
to create new interpretations in the motor apparatus so that new agent-object
interactions might be initiated (whether physical or verbal).
   Thus, beneath the conscious (mental) semiosis (here, the perception of a slap
as a sign that one has incited anger in another person), a complicated set of alto-
gether unconscious biosemiotic (bodily) processes takes place. The generation -
of“meaning starts in the skinmany milliseconds before thebi     brain brings forth                  V
a ‘conscious interpretation. Biosemiotics attempts to analyze this sequence of
events that traditionally has been considered a simple causal signalling process
in no need of interpretive modulation.
   Yet there is good reason to hesitate a moment to ponder this difference
between a solely biochemical analysis and an analysis that also seeks to.determine
what is the biosemiotic function of the chemical events s taking place — i.e., how
these events are “understood” by |the organism. In both cases the point of depar-
ture isa description of the molecular processes that enables the organism to inter-
pret signs of its surroundings. But in traditional biochemistry, the presumption is

6 Peirce had no illusions that his contemporaries would accept his own broader conception
whereby nature teemed with beings, for example, bees, that could stand in the place of persons as
sites for the establishment of interpretants.
7 The chains of sign processes in the body can perhaps be compared with tributary rivers that
flow together and integrate (with the generation of interpretants on a steadily higher level) in
greater and greater flows.
 24          THE BIOSEMIOTIC       APPROACH




 that such interpretation is either an illusion —a constrained causal process mis-
 takenly experienced as if it possessed a certain freedom — or (and perhaps even
 worse) a process that only takes place on the psychic level. This last view pre-
 sumes a dualistic understanding that, strictly speaking, implies that the biochem-
 ical machinery is no longer in control when it comes to psychological processes.
 Considering modern medicine’ arsenal of psychopharmaceuticals that can all
 but put one into whatever mood one wishes, such dualism is greatly at odds with
 our scientific knowledge. Thus, it cannot easily be denied that our interpretations
 of the situations that we find ourselves in are strongly influenced by chemical sub-
 stances (whether naturally produced endogenes such as hormones or neurotrans-
 mitters, or externally introduced exogenes such as alcohol or pills). Also, most
  people seem prepared to accept the reality of an inverse mechanism whereby our
  health is strongly influenced by our psychological well-being. If then, one (for
> example, on grounds of religious belief) still wishes to maintain a dualistic view
  of the psyche-body problem, there still remains the challenge of explaining such
 well-documented cases of psycho-chemical interaction.
    This line of argument is indeed one of the most important reasons to con-
 sider the biosemiotic understanding, where psychophysical unity more or less
 comes for free. Because biosemiotics considers human mental processes not as
 unique phenomena in the ontological sense, but rather as extremely interesting
 extensions of a much more general mode of biological organization and interac-
 tion that human beings share with all other living creatures. But of course, there
 exists also a third possible perspective, and this is perhaps the one that most the-
 oreticians would choose —i.e., that one rejects both dualism and biosemiotics
 and simply maintains that all phenomena in the end can be reduced to efficient
 causality and that our sense of personal causal freedom, or free will, is therefore
 nothing but an illusion.
    And, in fact, this third view is probably one of the most widespread and
 deeply rooted components in what one could call the ontology of modern biol-
 ogy. It has arisen from, and is rooted in, centuries of conflict between church
 and science, and it therefore carries considerable historical and emotional bag-
 gage. And let me here confess that I myself began my studies — and later my
 professional work — with this exact view as a strong driving force. In the end,
 however, it proved too simplistic a view to survive my continued investigations
 into the philosophical problems posed by this approach to natural science.*®
  However, even if one denies the concept of a biology-based semiotic freedom
  a place in the ontology of the natural world, it should still be noted that the


 8 An account of my own history, of course, this is not an argument with which Iexpect to con-
 vince others. Therefore, we shall return to the problem of biological reductionism (eliminativism)
 in connection with the discussions of sign and causation in the next chapter.
                                                    SURFACES    WITHIN     SURFACES             25



triadic description of a cellular process (such as the sensory cell’s production of
an impulse that then serves a semiotic function), does offer science a pragmatic
advantage because it organizes our knowledge about biochemical processes in
a way that reflects their functions in a larger context. Take an analogous exam=-_}
ple: No urban planner commissioned to analyze subway traffic in Copenhagen
would think that such an analysis could be put forth without considering such
factors as rush hours, ferry schedules, economic limitations, etc. In the same
way, our description of a sensory cell’s complete physical activity remains crit-
ically impoverished without an accompanying understanding of the exact role
that such activity plays in creating the overall function of sensation. Accordingly,
that a slap is perceived as a slap requires that millions of different sensory cells, |
each in their own specific area of functionality, reacts appropriately regarding
the giving and taking of biochemical signs. For even if one believes that the
activity of each of these cells obeys the coersive power of natural law down to |
the most miniscule electronic quiverings
                                      — in other words, believes that the
cells have absolutely no freedom to interpret and therefore to misinterpret such |
signs — it could still be useful to describe such activities in the light of their
organismic “purposes” — however much we may feel the need to bracket the
term purposes at this point.8


                                          The Self
The semiotics of the skin encompasses numerous other elements beyond those
associated with the senses of pressure and pain. Generally, the skin might be
considered a user interface that couples us to the outer world. Onone hand,
the skin thus serves us as a kind of topological boundary; while, on the other
hand, its semioticiccapacity opens up the world to us —so that the question of
where our selfbegins
                b. and ends is not at all an easy question to answer scientifi-
cally. Are not the impulses generated by the blind man’s stick really a part of his
self ? Similarly, as I can just now see houses more than four kilometers away on
the other side of the ford, it seems as if a part of my self reaches out over such a
large area. And if, for example, a lightning bolt strikes on the other side, “I” will
see it in an instant, even before “I” hear the thunderclap. “I” exists, so to speak,
in places over there.” The problem here, of course, is that we lack a clear under-
standing of what our self really is. Does the self have a mass or dimension, or is \
it a purely mental entity? And do purely mental entities exist? In the biosemi- |
      analysis, the problem of the self is closely associated with the problem «of
otic anal
biological reference. The skin has both an inner side and an outer side and an |

9   Henri Bergson even said, “My self reaches all the way up to the stars” (cited in Kemp, Lebech,
and Rendtorff 1997, 64).
  26          THE BIOSEMIOTIC          APPROACH



~ asymmetry is therefore established by the skin between that which is inside and
that which is outside. The self exists only insofar as that which is inside con-
tains an intentionality toward or reference to that which is outside — an about-
 ness, as it is often called. But this outward reference rests upon a corresponding
 inward reference, such that one could say that other-reference presupposes self-
 reference. The French philosopher Maurice Merleau-Ponty (2002 (1945)) has
 expressed it this way: “L’évidence d’autrui est possible parce que je ne suis pas
  transparent pour moi-méme et que ma subjectivité traine apres elle son corps.”
  (The evidence of the other is possible because I am not transparent to myself
  and because my subjectivity pulls ics body behind it’, cited in Zahavi 1999.°°
  The key point here is precisely corporeality. For Merleau-Ponty, subjectivity is
  bodily, and to exist as a body is to exist neither as a pure subject nor as a pure
  object but rather to exist in a manner that overcomes this opposition. When I
  experience my self, and when I experience an other, corporeality is the common
  denominator; we are similar because my experience of both my self and of an
  other is incarnated. And because my experience of the self is necessarily an expe-
  rience of a kind of corporeality, it can not be separated from an experience of
————


  the other— “I am always a stranger to myself, and therefore open to others,’ as
  the Danish phenomenologist Dan Zahavi (1999) has subtlly expressed it.
       Yet even if we let ourselves be inspired by the insights of phenomenology,
  we cannot let our curiosity be paralyzed by the conception of phenomenology
  as transcendental and as in any way eliminative of scientific knowledge. Thus,
  while bearing in mind Merleau Ponty’s understanding of the self, we shall there-
  fore now pursue the semiotics of the skin that will show us this self in its evo-
  lutionary ancestry —i.e., by generalizing it from the particular human self we
_ think we know so well to the self as it occurs in other living organisms. -
       Under the skin, we come upon even more cellular layers, layers that envelop
  tissues or organs — or, in other words, beneath the surface we encounter even
  more surfaces. And if we go further below these surfaces, we again find more
  surfaces, i.e., the membranes that surround single cells. Now, the number of cells
  in a mature human's body may be estimated as fifty trillion; and if all of these
  cells are thought of as being spheres with an average radius of 2.3 x 107 cen-
  timeters, then the combined area of the cell membranes can be calculated as
  some 300,000 square meters, or almost a third of one square kilometer. Yet even
  this figure is probably set too low— for the assumption that all the cells must
  be spherical is a gross idealization: The vast majority of the cells are, in fact,
                                             7%


  10 In Soren Kierkegaard’s religious philosophy (as expressed in The Sickness unto Death) there is
  the following view of the self: “The human is spirit. But what is spirit? Spirit is the Self, But what
  is the Self? The Self isa relationship that acts upon its self, or it is in the relationship by which the
  relationship relates itself to its self; the Self is not the relationship but the relationship that relates
  itselfto its self” (Kierkegaard 1944 (1849)).
                                             SURFACES   WITHIN    SURFACES         aT,



oblong, and thus their surface area is somewhat greater than if they were spher-
ical in form.
   Moreover, this is not yet the end of the “surfaces inside of surfaces” princi-
ple in biological organization. For when we next move inzo the cell, we again
encounter a plethora of biologically important surfaces. The cell’s interior is
packed with bodies inside bodies, e.g., the organelles with names such as mito-
chondria, lysosomes, Golgi apparati, cell nuclei, and the endoplasmic reticulum
(see Figure 2.3). It is difficult to estimate the cumulative area of these additional
surfaces, but we would hardly exaggerate if we would say that it is tens and per-
haps hundreds of times larger than the total area of the cell membranes alone.
A human body, then, consists of perhaps as much as thirty square kilometers
of membrane structure. And across all of these membranes there occurs con-
stant biosemiotic activity whereby molecular messages are exchanged in order
to bring the biochemical functions on the inside and the outside of these inte-
rior membranes into concordance. Thus, the meta-membrane that is the human
skin is indeed a highly specialized manifestation of the very same interior inter-
face principle whereby life processes are most generally built up.
   But here we must immediately address an essential reservation about this
abstract generalization. For an organism’s outermost layer (whether consisting
of skin, fur, plumage, chitin layer, or something else) is indeed special, in spite of
everything, in that it encloses a system whose uniqueness as a particular kind of
interface cannot or should not be overlooked. And in this regard, we would like
to point out a general difficulty that newcomers to the biosemiotic perspective
sometimes find themselves struggling with —i.e, the nature of the interpreter’s
role. For semiotics is too often presumed to be a science that attempts to explain




Figure 2.3 Schematic cross-section through eukaryotic ceils with organelles.
28        THE BIOSEMIOTIC     APPROACH



away the person or organism, whose accustomed principal role is displaced by
semiotic processes that go on behind his, her, or its back. Indeed, from Adam
Smith’s invisible hand and Karl Marx’s capital, through Sigmund Freud’s vedipal
repression and the behaviorists’ conditioning, to the sociobiologists’ selfish genes,
Western science has been beset with attempts to postulate virtual agents whose
forces are efficiently causal and yet unseen (in the same way as that highly val-
ued ideal, gravity?), and are considered to be the essential dynamic behind the
surface functioning of things.
   Biosemiotics, however, is capable of transcending this tradition of disregard
for the autonomy of individuals through a theory of semiotic emergence that I
will attempt to unfold in the course of this book (Chapter 7). In the Peircean
schema of sign relationships sketched above, there are interpretants but not
interpreters — but this does not mean that the category of interpreter is an empty
one. For as we shall see, the idea of semiotic emergence implies that while there is
no centralized director “behind” the person or organism, the organism or per-
son as an entity is continuously regenerated as an active, creative authority. The
person is thus not a stable being but rather a constant becoming. The critical point
is to recognize the emergent autonomy of various levels of organization.
   A single example must suffice here: Some billions of years ago it happened
that a number of daughter cells from a single monocellular organism developed
a series of symbiotic relationships with one another and, in time, even entered
into a process of shared ontogenetic differentiation — so that there emerged a
small multicellular organism, consisting of cells with connected life histories
but with differentiated roles in their newly collaborative mode of being. These
cells having reached this state, it would no longer be sufficient for us as scientists
to describe the activity of each single constituent cell in isolation. Rather, one
would hereafter have to consider the presence of a new holisticly autonomous
actor, an interpreter— or a system of interpretants as Stanley Salthe (1993) has
formulated it — that is able to organize the semiotic life processes of negotiat-
ing an external environment for the benefit of the collective, and at the expense
of the interests of single cells.
   Thus, in a certain sense, the appearance of a multicellular organism might be
seen as the appearance of a new kind of causality in the natural world, ice., a for-
mal causality, as suggested in the Aristotelian scheme. In the next chapter, we
shall consider this type of formal causality in more detail.


                              The Lipid Bilayer
The human skin is indeed something special; it serves as the outermost semi-
otic interface for an organic community of some fifty trillion individual living
cells. And the human skin is of course perfectly suited to this role as it is itself
                                               SURFACES    WITHIN   SURFACES            29




Figure 2.4 The lipid bilayer is the most prominent feature in this depiction of a seg-
ment of a cell membrane. The single lipid entity (a phospholipid) is pictured as a cir-
cle with two ends, where the circle represents the hydrophilic end and the tails depict
the hydrophobic ends. When such bipolar lipid units are placed in an aqueous solu-
tion, they spontaneously assemble themselves, as shown here, into a bilayer in which
the water-repellent lipid ends turn against each other. This creates a barrier that water
or water-soluble compounds cannot pass through without help from proteins, which
are also seen in the figure and which play a variety of roles in the semiotic functions of
biomembranes.


an evolutionarily advanced example of a fundamental principle of life — ice., the
organizing principle of the membrane or interface, the semiotic bridge driven by
the persistent asymmetry $e             CETEL CESEREARS ERE of bio-
logical organization and interaction. The operation of this semiotic bridge, and
the inside-outside asymmetry that drives it, is the theme I shall develop in the
following pages.
   In its most basic manifestation, a biological membrane is composed of a
simple lipid bilayer mixed with numerous protein molecules, and such mem-
branes encapsulate each and every cell on Earth. (Hoffmeyer 1998b; Hoffmeyer
19998).                                                                                  )
   (A schematic presentation of the lipid bilayer is given in Figure 2.4). In this sys-
tem, the protein molecules are responsible for a large range of membrane func-
tions that the lipid layer alone cannot support — first and foremost, the ability to
transport material through the membrane and to translate the molecular signals
that hit the outside of the membrane into meaningful signals for the inner side of
the membrane. When a protein receptor molecule detects such a signal (such as a
hormone molecule or a message substance given off by a neighboring cell), what
happens is a binding of the signal molecule to the receptor. This then gives rise to
a steric change of the receptor molecule that extends across the membrane. On
the inside of the membrane, the sterically changed receptor molecule may now,
depending on the contextual situation in which the cell finds itself, initiate a vari-
ety of specific cascades of biochemical activities that can influence the processes
that control the reading of the cell’s genetic material.
 30         THE BIOSEMIOTIC   APPROACH




      One should take care not to underestimate the complexity that these cell
 membranes exhibit. Thus, for instance, the number of surface receptors, ice.,
 the protein molecules that specialize in translating specific molecular signals
 in the cell’s surroundings, has to be counted in the millions. Accordingly, more
 than a third of the human organism’s total basal metabolic energy production
 is consumed just to maintain the intense activities taking place across the body’s
 widely distributed membrane interfaces.
    And this is because membranes, or proteins topologically linked to mem-
 branes’ interior and exterior surfaces, control by far most of what goes on in
 a cell. In the prokaryote (primitive single-cell organisms without cell nuclei,
 such as bacteria), the plasma membrane attends to the transport of molecules
 and ions, the biosynthetic translocation of proteins and glycosides; the build-
 ing up of fat material; communication via receptors; electron transport and the
 related phosphorylation processes; photo-reducing phosphorylation; and the
 anchoring of the chromosome, and thereby to cell continuity and replication.
 In the larger and more advanced eukaryotic cells (cells with nuclei, such as those
 found in plants, fungi, and animals, as well as in many single-celled organisms
 such as yeast and amoeba), these same functions are taken over by subcellular
 organelles  — the individually membraned mitochondria, chloroplasts, Golgi
 apparati, ribosomes, lysosomes, etc. Some of these membranes (perhaps, even
 all of them) are almost certainly descendants from once free-living prokaryotic
 organisms, which at one time in the remote past probably were engulfed by
 some other kind of prokaryotes and which by luck managed to survive, repro-
 duce, and after some time enter into a symbiotic relation with the host organ-
 ism — what Margulis (1970) called the process of endosymbiosis.
    Membranes also play a leading role in the functioning and survival of mul-
 ticellular organisms; the coordination of growth and development in multicel-
 lular organisms requires the constituent cells to engage in activities that reflect
. their exact spatial position in body and tissue. These specifications cannot be
  obtained from the DNA or gene because the DNA cannot “know” where in
  the organism any given constituent cell is located. Such knowledge must be
, obtained solely through the cells’ communicative surfaces. The form genera-
 tion process is mainly the result of local cell-to-cell interactions in which signal
 molecules from a cell act upon the neighboring cells’ receptors. For example,
 animal cells constantly search out their surroundings with the help of small feel-
 ers called filopodia that stretch out from the cell. “These cytoplasmic extensions
 that drive cell movement and exploration are expressions of the dynamic activ-
 ity of the cytoskeleton with its microfilaments and microtubules that are con-
 stantly forming and collapsing (polymerizing and depolymerizing), contracting
 and expanding under the action of calcium and stress,’ writes Brian Goodwin
 (1995, 36).
                                                   SURFACES    WITHIN    SURFACES             31



   Membrane structure thus exists relatively independently of the DNA. For
while it is true that all membranes are dependent on the availability of enzymes
that catalyze the synthesis of new lipid units — and that the proteins necessary
for the function of the membrane structures must of course also be present — it
                                                                    the inser-
iscritical tonote thatthe growth ofthemembrane itselftakes place by the

ing of this process alone thereby increases its area, while ne itselfasa re
In other words, membranes can only be created using themselves as the proto-
type, and each cell must therefore inherit fragments of the cell-specific types of
membranes that will be involved in the cell’s future life. In particular, the egg
cell must always emerge with a complete layer of pre-existing cellular membrane
types. And this, in turn, should alert us to the fact that the common myth that is
broadcast on a nearly daily basis in newspapers and textbooks (and even in some
scientific articles), telling us that DNA is the crucial controlling element in the
cell’s life — and even in the organism's life — is fairly misleading.
    For as we shall see in Chapter 5,  DNA is a hermetically closed and, for the
most patt, completely passive tmolecule, which, as Richard Lewontin
                                                                I        (1992) has
put it, makes nothing: “First, DNA is not self- reproducing, second, it makes
nothing, and third, organisms
                            ns are not
                                    determined by it.”Rather, The DNA|
molecules contain in their nucleotide-based code an array of vital instructions
mainly aimed at the growing embryo, enabling tissues and cells to produce what-
ever protein resources that may be needed in different contextual situations as
advertised by the reception of molecular signs at the cell surface. Therefore, If
——ee——
any agency in the body deserves to be called directive or controlling, it would |
not be DNA ‘but instead the membranes that permeate the body. Yet itwould —
be more accurate to say that the biological orchestration |of an
 Caine
                                                              an organism is cre-sees   Se




ated by a well-tuned symphony of biosemiotic relationships across the mem-
branes, which in each instant
                            of an organism’s life controls and coordinates the
biochemical, physiological, and even cognitive processes that together consti-
tute
 utelife
     life (Chapter ii a


                               The Creation of Life
The shift of emphasis from DNA to the membrane interface solves a problem
that has long been a mystery to biology — i.e., that of how a one-dimensional and
fairly static molecule such as DNA could be able to specify the generation of a
three-dimensional embryo in time and space. There is, in fact, no reason to expect


u Onastill higher level, we can also talk about an ecosemiotic regulatory operationality that
is crucial for the ecological and even for the evolutionary dynamic (Hoffmeyer 1996b; Kull 1998;
Hoffmeyer and Kull 2003).
         32          THE BIOSEMIOTIC         APPROACH




         that the lifeless DNA molecule would be capable of such a counterintuitive feat.
         Yet where there is DNA, there is always also the cell with its membranes,” whose
         patterned «organization is  is autonomously determined by the continuity of cellu-
                                                   ells, through their membranes, use DNA
         lar life through ccell division."* Livin cells
                                           versa.” It is the active functioning of these
        to construct the organism, not vice>
     SS)saan         he          ee connected proteins that direct life’s activ-
         ity, not the passive and inanimate DNA. cis, iin other words, in the semiotic
                     Sr the cellular membranes that we
         punctioning of                             weshall seek what can be called life’S
AK
t        agency, i    erent future- directedness, its survival project.””
             t
            ——
               “lows from t these considerations that the generation of membranes has
         been a principal milestone along the path that led to the emergence of life on
         our planet some four billion years ago. How exactly the first living event hap-
         pened we can, of course, never know, but it helps that modern nonequilibrium
         thermodynamics and complexity research support the viewpoint that orga-
         nized structures can arise from less ordered structures under the conditions that
         prevailed on our planet at the time of life’s beginning (Prigogine and Stengers


         12 This applies also to the virus, which is certainly a kind of membraneless DNA, but which
         cannot reproduce itself without the participation of the host cell’s mass of membranes.
         13. Because of the strong contemporary focus upon the genes, one can easily forget that (with
         the exception of the chromosomes that suddenly double in number right before the division, after
         which they are scrupulously partitioned into two of each type to each daughter cell), the cell’s
         remaining parts grow in a smooth and continuous way. The cell itself does not die during cell divi-
         sion — it just continues its life under “two different flags.”
         14   Kenneth Schaffner (1998) has used the expression causal parity to describe such processes. In
         this case, however, the problem rather is one of incommensurable kinds of causality. The causality
         of membranes would be an efficient causality in the classic Aristotelian schema, while the causal-
         ity of the genome is instead a formal causality (see Chapter 3).
         15 The astute reader may at this point ask the question: Why not use Jean-Baptiste Lamarck’s
         and Henri Bergson’s concept of impulse or strive here? I would reply: Because the risk of being
         misunderstood is far too great. The problem is that the term impulse can be understood as an aspi-
         ration in an unspecified sense (such as aplant’s diffuse quest for light) or as a pre-planned endina
         specified sense (such as a predator’s hunt for a given prey). In the latter case, it isa matter ofa striv-
         ing after afairly defined result (a transcendental end), whereas in the former case there is only a sit-
         uation of a preferred direction (a purely /ocal teleology). Ifone attributes an impulse to life in the
         first sense — which was actually what Lamarck and Bergson did —I do not see a great problem
         with that (see Chapter 9). But if one attributes to life in general a working, or a striving toward
         a definite aim or end, this invites the justifiable accusation of preordaining from the beginning
         a fixed purpose for life — something for which there is no scientific justification and which, fur-
         thermore, traditionally has been characteristic of ideological or religious encirclings of science.
         Lamarck’s and Bergson’s unjust destiny was to become misunderstood as spokesmen for the idea
         of anatural impulse linked to a transcendental purpose, which was in fact not their view. And it
         has been my experience that an insufficiently informed notion of what biosemiotics is and is not
         asserting is also subject to— and will have to guard itself as much as possible against — the same
         kinds of facile misunderstandings.
                                                     SURFACES     WITHIN    SURFACES              33,



1984; Kauffman 1993). “Order comes a free,’ as complexity researcher Stuart
Kauffman has succinctly expressed  it.16 And Kauffman’s theory of life’s emer-
gence almost by necessity, through a growth of complexity in autocatalyticsys-
tems, offers a good starting point for a biosemiotica                     about life’s origin.



Now, the standard understanding of life’s origin has long been that the emer-
gent chemistry of life had RNA as its central element. Stuart Kauffman (199s)
has pointed to several problems with this scenario, however. One objection is
that the belief in a “magic molecule” (be it RNA, DNA, or some as yet unspec- ,
ified protein) holding the key to the very origin of life rests on a too simplistic |
idea of what life is about in a chemical sense. For as Kauffman points out, the
simplest independently living cells that are known, the pleuromona,”’ are greatly
stripped-down examples of bacteria, yet they themselves still contain between
five hundred and one thousand genes."* “All free-living cells have at least the
minimum diversity of pleuromona” writes Kauffman (1995, 42), alerting us that
“your antenna should quiver a bit here: Why is there this minimal complexity? =—
Why can’t a system simpler than pleuromona be alive?”
   The answer that Kauffman himself offers to his rhetorical question is the
result of his work with the mathematical modeling of combinatorial chemistry.
This research has shown that when the number of individuallyrandom reactions
that are catalyzed in.a system of chemicals becomes great enough, there sud-
denly emerges an orderly and complete network of catalyzed reactions. “Such a
web, it turns out, is almost certainly autocatalytic — almost certainly self-sus-
taining, alive” (ibid., 58). Kauffman refers to this phenomenon as autocatalyticX
closure,” and his schema for the origin of life then can be summarized as fol-


16 Thermodynamically speaking, Kauffman’s aphorism is not meant to be taken Jiterally, for
to produce order, energy must necessarily flow through the system, thereby inevitably leading
to entropy. With the expression for free, Kauffman simply means that ordered structures emerge
without selective processes, and that self-organizing-structure generation in this context is the
means or condition by which selective forces can have something with which to work (rather than
structure being a result of selection). I thank Claus Emmeche for having pointed out this impor-
tant detail to me.
17 The simplest organism is now considered to be Mycoplasma genitalium, which includes over
four hundred genes.
18 The virus is, of course, much simpler, but it dos not live its own life. Vira are parasites that
invade other cells, where they overcome the metabolic workings in order to reproduce themselves.
By all accounts, the vira did not exist at the beginning of life but, on the contrary, depend upon
the existence of more advanced forms of life.
19 A logically closed system fulfills the following conditions: If one has a quantity of compo-
nents, the system will be closed in relation to operation M if it happens that when x belongs to the
quantity and x is linked with another component, y, by way of operation M, so y will also be part
           34         THE BIOSEMIOTIC        APPROACH




           lows: Complexity leads to autocatalytic closure, and autocatalytic closure leads
  x to life. “The secret of life, the wellspring of reproduction, is not to be found in
  -




    the beauty of Watson-Crick pairing [DNA nucleotide base pairing], but in the
           achievement of collective catalytic closure. The roots are deeper than the dou-
           ble helix and are based in chemistry itself. So, in another sense, life — complex,
           whole, emergent — is simple after all, a natural outgrowth of the world in which
           we live” (ibid., 48).
              While an important advance in our understanding of the natural world in its
           own right, however, relative to the discussions of this chapter, Kauffman’s sce-
           nario has a quite significant insufficiency. This is that it all but totally ignores
           the issue of organismic semiosis, which is a vital element in all processes of life.
           Thomas Sebeok (1985 (1976), 69) expressed this when he stated that “a full
           understanding of the dynamics of semiosis may in the last analysis turn out to be
      _ no less than the definition of life.’ From the biosemiotic viewpoint, Kauffman’s
      \ idea about the generation of autocatalytic self-sufficiency is only a necessary
      |first step on the way from a chemical system to a living system (see figure 2.5).”°
      | Beyond this, we must add a second step, which is the establishment of the very
        conditions that could make semiosis possible in the first place —i.e., the gen-
        eration of a closed membrane around such an autocatalytically closed system
          ,of chemical components and thereby the creation ofa basic asymmetry between
(a     an inside and an outside, making the membrane a potential interface structure
 05   | hrough wich the autocatalytic mix on the inside might learn to adjust cleverly to
          : conditions outside.
      ¢        Closed lipid bilayers are, as already mentioned, indeed spontaneously gener-
            ated when simple components (the phospholipids) are present together in an
            aqueous solution. But, as we also noticed, a simple lipid bilayer alone will not
            allow the transport of water-soluble compounds, and membranes in actual liv-
            ing systems always contain numerous specialized protein molecules that attend


           of the quantity. In logic, the components are propositions, and the operations are logical conclu-
           sions; in biochemistry, the components are the molecules in metabolism, and the operations are
           individual metabolic processes.
           20 Ina later work, Investigations, Kauftman takes a big step toward accepting semiosis as a fun-
           damental element in the creation of life (Kauffman 2000). The proliferation of organization and
           diversification that Kauffman’s later analysis here implies, is caused by the necessary creation of
           autonomous agents, that is, “autocatalytic system(s) able to reproduce and able to perform one or
           more thermodynamic work cycles.” Kauffman very explicitly emphasizes that this definition leads
           to inconvenient questions about measurement and recognition. For if work is defined as “the
           constrained release of energy,” from where do these constraints come? To this he answers, among
           other things, that “autonomous agents also do often detect and measure and record displacements
           of external systems from equilibrium that can be used to extract work, then do extract work, prop-
           agating work and constraint construction, from their environment” (ibid., 110), And since a mea-
           surement is always an interpretation, we are here in the middle of biosemiotics.
                                                        SURFACES      WITHIN     SURFACES               35



to this task. The spontaneous generation of such a more realistic proto-cell
membrane, then, is actually a fairly demanding challenge.’ Yet even if we can- }
not here point to a solution to this explanatory difficulty, we can yet maintain
that the generation of a kind of proto-cellular membrane with the ability to
canalize a selective flow of chemical reactions across itself was at some point
a critical initial step on the way towards the evolution of genuinely living sys-
tems (Hofftmeyer 1998b; 1999a), see also (Weber et al. 1989; Morowitz 1992;
Weber 1998a).
   But such a closed autocatalytic system, locked within a proto-membrane,
still exhibits no capacity
                      pacity autonomous
                              for
                              for autonom    biological agency, and thuswe hesi-
tate
  tocall ica genuinely /iving system. There is not yet inthe                    system,aswe have
described it so far, any proper mechanism for registration of the outer world.
There may occur a flow of chemical compounds across the membrane, but this
flow is not yet incorporated in the project of sustaining a self. As we reach back
to  Merleau-Ponty’s definition
                    :           of the self, we mayay now p pose a new
                                                                    new q question:
What would it take to attribute a self toaclosed membrane >  system? It seems to
me that weshouldbe content if we could point out a mechanism that supplied
                                                                                                             vA
the system with a genuine other-reference— which again, if it were a case of
genuine reference, would necessarily assume a corresponding basis in a network
of self-referential activity. The question then becomes this: How could such a
thing emerge within the membrane system?
   Figure 2.5 suggests a conceptual five step model for the origin of agency and
semiosis or, in other words, for prebiotic evolution. The figure does not pretend
to detail the kinds of chemical processes that most models of prebiotic evolu-
tion have focused on. Instead it departs from a semiotic understanding of the
internal logic of the origin process. If - as suggested above - we take Kauffman’s |
concept of the generation of autocatalytic self-sufficiency as a necessary first step
on the way from a chemical system to a living system, and the second step, also
depicted, to be the establishment of a closed membrane as a basis for creating
the asymmetry that makes life-sustaining semiosis with its environment both
possible and necessary in the first place, we then propose the following three
additional steps as necessary for satisfying our criteria fora living system, exhib-
iting true biological agency, in every instance:~
   Third step: Once the conditions for autocatalysis within a closed membrane
system are in place, there must be established not only one closed membrane

21 Although we acknowledge this difficulty, we must note thar, thus far, all alternative scenarios
oflife’s origin equally run into great chemical difficulties. This suggests that there is still (at least)
one major part ofthe puzzle we still are not yet even seeing.
22 Although we acknowledge this difficulty, we must note that, thus far, all alternative scenarios
oflife’s origin equally run into great chemical difficulties. This suggests that there is still (at least)
one major part of the puzzle we still are not yet even seeing.
    36            THE   BIOSEMIOTIC   APPROACH




         BEGINNING OF
                   C LIFE

             1. Formation ofautocatalytically closed system.
             2. _ Membrane formation: Establishment of anasymmetry between
             insides and outsides.         .
                 Emergence ofhigher orderautocatalyss|in swarmsSor
               _ membrane units.         _       ]
                : Digital redescriptio ofproteincomponent in DNA or RNA (self-
         .       reference system).      2~=—rers—eE           7

         /S._ The membrane becomes anoe                  other tefecence system).
                 Integration of.asystem forself-reference anda a system for other-
         _       reference,                 |       _

    Figure 2.5 Five-step model of pre-biotic evolution. See text for explanation.


    ‘system, but a whole swarm of closed membranes interacting chemically and
    reciprocally through the flows across their membranes. One might understand
    this as the establishment of a kind of autocatalytic closure on a higher level. By

i   virtue of this step, there would be created the capacity for a kind of proto-com-
    munication between membrane entities.
       Fourth step: Membranes and their inner autocatalytic reactive combinations
    massbedalilized through a digital redescription (such as is found today in the
    RNA or DNA molecule arrangement common to all true cells). Such repro-
    ducible molecular arrangements serve as the structural specifications, which
a
    (at least in modern cells, where a sophisticated system for protein synthesis has
    developed) can be translated into defined proteins. Thus the idea here is that
    the proteins contained in the autocatalytic soup that we believe surrounded the
    primitive structures of early life, over time became matched with a sequential
    or digital coded description (presumably first in RNA but later in DNA). In
    cells as we know them today such a matching of protein strings with nucle-
    otide strings occurs via the tRNA code (see Chapter 5), but this complicated
    machinery was probably a later invention. At first the matching mechanism
    may have been much more partial, perhaps just connecting essential domains
    of the protein surfaces to distinct nucleotide sequences. The advantage of this
    step in the beginning was to function as a buffer against disturbances of the sys-
_ tem, because the components that were lost in this process could then be recre-
  ated from the corresponding digital descriptions. Moreover, as we shall discuss
  in more detail in Chapter 4, this step would have accelerated the evolutionary
                                                     SURFACES     WITHIN     SURFACES             37



 process by the establishment of that dynamic we have referred to elsewhere as
 the principle of code-duality (Hoffmeyer and Emmeche 1991). The creation of
 information-carrying molecules’ is often seen as an absolutely central step in pre-
 biotic evolution (Dawkins 1976; 1989). In the biosemiotic scenario, outlined
 here, the matching of the proteins’ structure to a digital code is an important,
 but in the end, a secondary step.
    Fifth)step: To complete the evolution into a true living system, the autocata-
 lytic system’s | proto--membrane would need too develop iinto an actual interface.
“And to do this, the chemical conditions on the membrane’s system-external side
 must be registered on the system-internal side by a semiotic mechanism that
 can activate the synthesis of the exact protein species that are needed at any,
 given moment in order to cope with an ever changing external chemical situa,
 tion. There must, in other words, be established a feedback loop between the sys-
 tem of other-reference (themembrane system) and the system of self- fecrenee
 (RNA, DNA).
    The psychological concept of individuation is nowadays most often linked
 to the analytical psychology of C. G. Jung, where it refers to the processes
 through which a paeee comes to> understand her ownn individuality and con-

 this chapter of life’s|
                       beginnings also basically describes a process of individu-
 ation, especially if the word is understood in its broader philosophical mean-
 ing as a process through which an individual form of existence
                                                         eXISTENC develops iitself x
 from the basis of the general continuum. The emergence of   life as outlined here |
 defines an act of biological internalization, whereby a semipermeable mem-
 brane closes itself upon itself and thenceforth connects its continuing exis-
 tence to a partially trapped, autocatalytic, and agentive self-existing system |
 (Hoffmeyer 2001).
    Finally, one should not forget that life’s emergence was inseparable from that ;
 of its environment, much in the same way that the pattern in a carpet is depen- |
 dent upon the existence of the rug. Superficial understandings, which identify’
 the origin of life with the Pee          eons nome tert (some- A>,
 ti mes derisively called 7,
                          magic) molecules, far too often neglect the primacy of)
 thisdeep connection benweenOrganism andd environment. But by positing the
 SS     a   ae ee                                                                            :
miotics from the ee seeshe Grsideonride asymmetry of agents in the

 23 It is unfortunate that information, in the context of this all too common use of language,
 is identified with sequential information. The use of the word information is on the whole fairly
 unclear, a situation that we shall examine more closely in Chapter 3. In the context of biology, the
 information that is contained in the very architectonic structure of the complete and fully func-
 tioning cell is of great significance, which is easily overlooked, especially when RNA and DNA
 are designated as information-bearing molecules.
           38          THE BIOSEMIOTIC       APPROACH



           world— and the semiotic bridge that joins the two —as the turning point of
>
    y}    —

           life’s ongoing evolution.”                     7
                This is why we can speak about our skin. Some four billion years after the first
           swarming membrane vesicles discovered how to make the components of their
           inner spaces into helpmates for their own survival project, people now walk
           around thinking that the skin is there to protect them. But in a certain sense the
           inverse is true. It was the skin that gave us life.”°




            24 Augustin Berque (2004) proposes a similar view from the standpoint of philosophical
            geography.
         “25
          N
                 One can note in this connection that we know as little about what is inside as we do about
          what is outside, which of course adds an edge to the Cartesian problem,
