3
                                Sign and Cause




                                        Final Causes
In Western cultures, there is a strong streak of voluntarism, an intense belief that)
human will — good or evil — is responsible for whatever goes on in the cultural
world, Accompanying this (perhaps slightly arrogant) belief in and worship of
human freedom, however, there is also a distinct determinism with regard to
nonhuman nature. Here, the law rules to such an extent that many adhere to the
belief that the ways of the world could not have been any other than what they .
actually are. In nature, absolutely no freedom is allowed.                         me
   These two beliefs can coexist with little opposition, so long as one thinks that
Humanity and Nature are God’s separate creations, whose fundamental rela-
tionship is therefore determined by God. The moment that one accepts the the-
ory of evolution, however— and with it the view that humans are produced
from nature and are, indeed, a part of nature — then humanity’s freedom and
nature’s total unfreedom are logically set on a collision course. For how can any-t
thing that is itself unfree ever generate something free?                     {
   Such an intransigent contradiction undoubtedly accounts for the continuing
power of creationism in North American thought’ and, more generally, behind
the mistrust of natural science that has grown so marked in recent decades
across the entire Western world. For there are few who can fully accept the
opposite solution — i.e., that humans in a profound sense are as unfree as phys-
ical nature— and this presumably is the belief many natural scientists would
express, if one would closely question them.”
   In this metaphysical landscape, the philosophy of Charles S.Peirce offers
an original solution, a comprehensive and coherent cosmogonic philosophy, as
he called it, though this is a solution that few know much about, and that


1 Recently a new and refined version of natural theology has seen the light of day: the intelli-
gent design (ID) theory, whose main supporting argument is again nature's manifest quality of
design — which does not fit well with natural science’s traditional view of nature’s essential unfree-
dom (Behe 1996). And while ID theory is itself scientifically unsubstantiated, it must be admitted
that natural science’s ontological biases provide legitimate targets for such religious revisionism.
2 As I will argue later, such materialism is in reality a disguised dualism (see Searle 1992).
                 40           THE BIOSEMIOTIC   APPROACH



                 fewer still have fully understood. The essence of this solution, as we shall see,
TAVT 2
                 is that on the one hand, natural laws are not absolute, because they themselves
 x.              are products of an ongoing evolution, and on the other hand, humans’ cogni-
                 tive processes in the deepest sense are of the same kind as all other processes
                 in nature.
              The extraordinary difficulty that philosophers and natural scientists have
          had in following Peirce along this path is attributable, to a large extent, to
          the fact that the Cartesian body-mind dualism       — from which the nature-
          culture split is born — entirely lacks a concept of purpose that can free itself
          from its uniquely human connotations. For if one were to follow the under-
          lying logic of Peirce’s cosmology, one would then have to accept the existence
          in nature of so-called end causes or final causes. But among those who have
      ‘\. |not freed themselves from Cartesianism, such an idea will quickly ring alarm
          bells. Must there be a purpose in nature? Are we not thus returning to reli-
                 gion by asserting this?
             |     Now it is a fact that I, in writing these words, have a purpose in so writing.
                 And it is also as nearly a fact as anything can be — in any case for the nonre-
             ) ligious — that I as a human being am, in the end, a creation of nature. It is, in
              other words, a proven fact that there are at least some purposes manifesting
                 within nature, even if they are, as here, only connected with humanity. And
             /yet the scientifically oriented mind, especially, should feel challenged by this
                 nearly incomprehensible, and in fact unfounded, privileging of just one creation
                 among all others endowed with the talent to operate with purposes. This tal-
                 ent must come from somewhere. If it is not from God, and human beings are
                 themselves fully part of nature and nothing supernatural, then a scientific par-
                 adox obtains. And it is just here that Peirce’s solution comes into play: “It is a
                 widespread error to think that a final cause is necessarily a purpose. A purpose is
                 merely that form of final cause which is most familiar to experience” (CP 1:211;
                 italics added), or in other words, “purpose is the conscious modification of final
                 causation” (CP 7:366; italics added).
                      That which in the Cartesian tradition is integrated into one concept, the
                 concept of purposive, consciously conceived end causes (and which in a strict
                 sense has only validity in the human world) is thus in Peirce’s philosophy two
                 things — one specifically human, and the other a general principle of emergent
                 organization — that should not be confounded. Psychological end causes, such
                 as the distinct purposes I might have in writing this text, are in Peirce’s thinking
                 just a special subcategory of the much broader category of final causes — and
                 these, according to Peirce, are at play in any sort of goal-oriented activity in
                 nature, as well as in culture. For, to Peirce, a final cause is simply the general
                 form of any process that tends toward an end state (a finale). Peirce expresses it
         ’       in this way:
                                                                       SIGN AND     CAUSE             41



     [A final cause is] ... that mode of bringing facts about according to which a general
     description ofresult |read lawlike system ofregularity] is made to come about, quite
     irrespective of any compulsion for it to come about in this or that particular way;
     although the means may be adapted to the end. The general result may be brought
     about at one time in one-way, and at another time in anotiier way. Final causation
     does not determine in what particular way it is to be brought about, but only that
     the result shall have a certain general character (CP 1:121).°

     When one is socialized into the Newtonian world view — as are virtually all
 people today, whether they are conscious of it or not — then the idea of final
 causation is very difficult to accept. For the Newtonian view of causes is tempo-
 ralized in a very thin one-dimensional thread. That event A is the cause of event
 B means that first comes A and then comes B, that is to say, event A happens
 at time t; and event B at time t,, where t, > t,. Yet according to this scheme of
 thinking, final causes imply that events that happens at time t, are caused by an
 event that first takes place at time t,, which must be said to profoundly contra- :
 dict both scientific and everyday experience. -
    In order to understand the idea of final causes, one must broaden one’s con-
 ception of time so that it contains more than just one dimension. Event B is
 not just caused by the preceding event A, for the very fact that A takes place is_
 alreaidy part of a pattern of events — a pattern that also includes occurrences of;
 type B — which in the end obeys general laws of a more compelling kind. Final
 causes in this sense have the character of natural law, as pointed out by Lucia
 Santaella-Braga (1999) with the important distinction that Peirce did not think |
 that laws es : precedence over the dance of randomness, but were the prod-
  ucts ofiits
     For example, the natural law that goes under the name of the second law
  ofthermodynamics expresses an entirely universal condition pertaining to all
  known physical existence, namely that the net amount of entropy will always
  increase with each spontaneous process that takes place in this universe. What
 this law determines, as Peirce observed, is not “in what particular way a given
  end is to be brought about, but only that the result shall have a certain general
- character” (CP 1.211).° The second law of thermodynamics can be understood as


 3   Thanks to Lucia Santaella (e.g., see 1999) for pointing out this and many of the following
 points concerning final causes in Peirce’s thought.
 4 Perhaps more than anyone else, Robert Rosen has, from a mathematical foundation, seen that
 the Newtonian tradition rests upon a needlessly narrow concept of causality (Rosen 1991). Rosen
 defended a return to Aristotle’s broader understanding of causality, but suggested the term func-
 tional entailment in place of final cause, using functional in its biological sense (see below).
 5   I will discuss this in some detail below.
 6 It is worth remarking that this understanding of a final cause corresponds to the original
 Aristotelian view of telos as “that ‘for the sake of which’ something exists or occurs or is done.” T.L.
     42           THE BIOSEMIOTIC          APPROACH




     one of the final causes that must be part of any satisfactory explanation of evolu-
     tionary phenomena in general, including Darwinian selection.


             Relevance of the Second Law of Thermodynamics
                                       ata ENTOpPY Law
     The second law of thermodynamics, often called the entropy law, has a fairly
     ambiguous status in physics, perhaps precisely because it can be interpreted as
     a kind of final cause —as done here. Many physicists will probably object to
     this characterization and claim that we are led to this misinterpretation because
    | we focus on the macro level (effects) and fail to follow the law back to its roots
    lin
     }
         microdynamics (interactions). But even doing so does not solve the prob-
    lem, it turns out. For, as the Danish physicist Peder Voetmann Christiansen has
     pointed out, it is simply not possible to define an underlying microplan of any
     macroscopic system without proceeding from (and within) the preexistence of
     some boundary conditions — conditions which themselves are “given” thanks
     only to the macroplan that is the experimenter himself and, in the end, the eco-
     system in which he or she exists and whose present state must necessarily be far
     from equilibrium (Christiansen 1999).
        To get a grasp on all this, we must ask this first of all: What, in fact, should be
     understood by the phrase zhe micro level? Molecules can be divided into atoms,
     which can be divided into elementary particles. Elementary particles appear to
     consist of parts, and these parts again to consist of parts, and so forth. What is
     the bottom line in all of this? The traditional answer to this concern has been to
     say that the contribution from the submicroscopic parts is locked by virtue of
     the quantum character of energy, and that the smaller the parts are, the greater
     will be the separation between their energy levels.
        Therefore, as tradition would have it, we are fully entitled to consider a gas
     at room temperature as a classic system consisting of stiff molecular particles,
     whose dynamics we can describe. In other words, we need not (and in fact must
     not) take the elastic properties of molecules into consideration. The irreversible
“
     growth of entropy thus does not reflect a true finality in the universe, but sim-
     ply our human ignorance about the energy and movements of individual mol-
     ecules — an ignorance that by its very nature increases every time something
     happens in the system.

     Short (2002, 326) has expressed it this way: “The stock example is familiar: It is the nature of an
     acorn to grow into an oak, not into a spruce tree or a butterfly. The final cause, then, isa potentiality
     whether or not actualized.” This, however, is not the view offizality that one normally finds in the
     literature. Most often, final causes are there linked with human (or at least human-like) intentions
     or desires about the future. But for Aristotle, such causes are in fact efficient causes, that is, forces or
     energies that concretely make things happen in our familiar sense. Final causes, on the contrary, are
     general goods, desirables, that are the deeper causes of such actions of intentions (ibid., 325-26)
                                                         SIGN AND CAUSE            43


   But notice that a strange subjectivity has unwittingly entered into the argu-
ment here. For had we, as human experimenters, chosen a system at a very
high temperature instead of a system at room temperature, then we would
have had to consider the elastic qualities of the molecules     — and therefore
the quantum mechanical laws — and at that point we would have to deal with
another microdynamic. Thus, Christiansen (1999, 53) observes, “The very
notion of [what constitutes a] ‘microscopic state’ depends crucially on our
ability to heat and isolate systems, and this abilicy is not reducible to micro-
scopic laws but depends on technology and intention. The physicists do not
just isolate a natural system for closer study, but with their methods of prep-
aration create the system, including the notion of microscopic parts and the
                                                                                 ed
laws that govern them.”
  The fact that the Nobel Prize in physics in 1996 was awarded for the dis-
covery of the He’ isotope’s superfluidity corroborates this point. Superfluidity
can only exist at temperatures less than one thousandth of a degree above abso-
lute zero. The universe’s background temperature is more than a thousand times
higher than this, ie., several full degrees above absolute zero. Thus we can, in
Christiansen’s words, “be pretty sure that superfluid He’ only exists where there
are physicists to study it” (ibid., 54).
  Accordingly, then, the entropy law cannot be interpreted iin purelyepiste-
mological terms —i.e., as an expression of a fundamental ignorance on our
part
 art   — but must be interpreted ontologicallyasan expression of the universe's
intrinsic irreversibility. The entropylaw thus implies that the universe finds itself
in a state very far fromec
                        equilibrium — which iis why a flow of events continue to
happen irin it. Among other things, there is an irreversible flow of low-entropy
(that is to say, well- organized) wave energy that goes out from the sun into cold
space. The Earth receives a small fraction of this energy flow, which allows it to
warm itself and set in motion winds and ocean streams and the dynamic geo-
thermal cycle of water from ocean to ocean by way of fog, rain, snow, glaciers,
floods, and so forth.
   An even smaller part of this irreversible flow is captured by the chloroplasts
of green plants — where photosynthesis sets another cycle in play by nourishing
the cyclical web of food chains. The whole time, highly entropic energy is given
off in the form of thermal radiation that exudes off into the universe. On Earth,
the instreaming solar energy and the outstreaming thermal energy (it appears)
are more or less equally great, otherwise the Earth's temperature would be sub-
ject to radical changes, which apparently does not happen — or has not yet. But
even if all the energy leaves the Earth again, its flow through the system has
perpetually changed the microstates of the Earth system, and gradually it also
changed the Earth’s macrostates, as witnessed by organic evolution and by the
gradual emergence of a self-regulating biosphere.
         44          THE   BIOSEMIOTIC     APPROACH


-       od

              Most interesting in this connection are the insights that were first formu-
         lated by the physicist Erwin Schrodinger (1944) in his famous book, What is
         Life? Schrédinger saw that life does not so much draw upon energy for ener-
         gy’s sake — but rather that the energy flow through organisms allows organisms
         to get rid of the entropy that they themselves produce through the processes of
         life. The trick is to consume low-entropy energy and to transform it into high-
         entropy energy. In this way, life sidesteps the entropy law while it creates orga-
         nized (low-entropy) structures —living organisms — without violating the
         thermodynamic requirement that entropy must increase with each spontane-
         ous process. Entropy does increase, certainly, but all of the surplus is exported to
         the surroundings and, in the end, to outer space.’
            Christiansen’s point is that physicists are subject to these thermodynamic
         conditions since they, too, like everybody else, must live forward in time. Rather
         than a paradox, then, this shows that the entropy law is actually a tautology:
         “For the prerequisite of being able to say anything is that the entropy of the uni-
         verse is higher after the saying than it was before. The same entropic condition
         applies to any significant event, to every difference that makes a difference, i.e.,
         rises appreciably above the noise level of fluctuations” (ibid., 58).
    j         The expression downward causation is often used in this type of causal rela-
         tionship, where a macrostate acts upon the very microstates of which it con-
         sists (Campbell 1974)*. The expression is probably an attempt to say the same
         thing as is meant by the expression fimal causes without linking oneself to the
         cultural inheritance of Aristotelianism, where the term carries so much bag-
         gage. But to the Newtonian mind, the idea of downward causation isn’t espe-
         cially popular, either. Perhaps this is because many scientists are unwilling to
         let systems possess properties that do not, upon closer analysis, show them-
         selves simply to be reducible to the properties of their component parts.”
         Water can clearly be seen to be wet, which neither oxygen nor hydrogen are
         (at room temperature in any case). But those physical characteristics of the

         7 This last point was applicable, at least, until human-induced flows of energy began to create a
         significant contribution to the energy economy of Earth (Hoffmeyer 2001b). I consider this idea
         further in Chapter 9.
         8 Valentine Turchin’s work on meta-systems transition theory also examines the resulting top-
         down control of bottom-up processes, and Vefa Karatay and Yagmur Denizhan (2002) have
         shown the relevance of this work for biosemiotics.
         9 Frederik Stjernfelt has noted that a second reason for natural science’s general skepticism
         about the idea of downward causation could be that this form of causality, in contrast to effi-
         cient causality, does not function in the linear dimension of progressively sequential time. It is
         thus connected instead with formal — rather than final — causes in the Aristotelian scheme. (See
         more on this below.) And yet, to explain the kind of order we see in naturally occurring systems,
         modern-day physics has had to introduce the idea of the attractor state  — which, of course, must
         be regarded as a genuine form of downward causation, if anything is.
                                                                   SIGN AND    CAUSE             45



water molecule that makes a person who puts his finger into a glass of water
experience the sensory quality of wetness, it can be argued, could be fully
accounted for in terms of the well-known properties of hydrogen and oxy-
gen, and it is therefore not reasonable to describe water as a cause of the expe-
rience of wetness. Wetness, in this view, is not really a property at all, but an
epiphenomenon.’
   The resistance of many physicists against ideas of final or downward causa-
tion may derive from a deeply held reductionistic intuition thar phenomena
are always caused or at least explained best by the dynamics that play out on
the underlying levels (and thus, in the end, among elementary particles). But
this intuition seems more and more forced— the more it becomes clear that
there is no bottom line to such reductionism. As we have seen in the discussion
above (Christiansen 1999), an ultimately deepest level cannot be identified even |
in principle.
   What is worse, even the idea of some kind of finally elementary particles at
the bottom level, from which all causality ultimately must derive, is at odds with
other fundamental physical theories. Thus, according to quantum field theory,
reality consists exclusively of fields, and elementary particles are to be seen as
nodal points in such systems, that is to say, as purely topologic occurrences that
cannot be ascribed the property of substance (Bickhard and Campbell 1999).
That particles are topologic occurrences means that they belong to definite form
categories that cannot gradually transform themselves into each other. A surface
with a hole in it can, for example, gradually be reshaped so that it becomes a
teacup but it cannot be gradually turned into a surface with two holes in it. In
order for that to happen, the surface must be punctured, and that would create


                                                                                                      |
another topological category.
   One could perhaps now think that the reductionistic intuition can live
as easily by now simply positing quantum fields as its deepest layer as it has
attempted to do by positing elementary particles. But fields don’t have the
same independence of the patterns by which they exist as particles have. Mark
Bickhard writes,


10 Epiphenomenality is often associated with the idea of supervenience, which implies that
there cannot be changes of the higher level without there being related changes on the lower level.
That consciousness is supervening on the brain implies that changes in consciousness cannot take
place without concomitant changes in brain processes. Sometimes a distinction is made between
weak and strong supervenience (Kim 1990). We will not pursue this discussion here, as we associ-
ate ourselves with Mark Bickhard’s view that systems that find themselves in the thermodynamic
state called far-from-equilibrium (such as organisms and ecosystems) are woven into unbreakable
relationships with their surroundings, so that they cannot be characterized as merely superve-
nient. A flame, for example, is not simply dependent upon its constituents but also upon oxygen
supply, temperature, and other factors (Bickhard and Campbell 1999).
        46          THE BIOSEMIOTIC       APPROACH



             The critical point is that quantum field processes have no existence indepen-
             dent of configuration of process: quantum fields are process and can only
             exist in various patterns. Those patterns will be of many different physical
             and temporal scales, but they are all equally patterns of quantum field process.
             Therefore, there is no bottoming out level in quantum field theory— it is pat-
             terns ofprocess all the way down, and all the way up. Consequently, there is no
             rationale for delegitimating larger scale, hierarchical patterns of process — such
             as will constitute living things, minds, and so on.... The recognition that
             everything is organization of process — just at differing scales and with dif-
             fering hierarchical organizations — makes the choice to see pattern and orga-
             nization as of lower level, and thus to render properties of those patterns and
             organizations as epiphenomenal, a choice that renders everything epiphenome-
             nal because there is no level at which anything is other than an organization of
             quantum field process, including even the smallest scale quantum fluctuations
             (Bickhard and Campbell 1999, 331-32).

           But is the status of quantum field theory such that we could confidently base a
        rejection of the reductive particle ontology upon it? It is acknowledged, at least,
        that particles can both be created as well as disappear during observable physical
        processes. And this result is precisely what relativity theory brings about when
       it is used in the context of quantum mechanics. The merit of quantum field the-
       ory is that it allows us to handle these remarkable phenomena at the theoreti-
       cal level. So even if one takes the modern and pluralistic standpoint that fields
       and particles are equally fundamental, one has already thereby subscribed to the
       idea that final causes (or their explanatory equivalent) may eventually have to be
    \; considered. For the mere fact that fields are fundamental (even though for the
       moment they must share this honor with particles) will imply that one cannot
       ignore the holistic configuration of those fields in the attempt to understand
       our physical universe.”
           We thus conclude that the rejection of finalistic interpretations of the second
        law of thermodynamics is based upon (largely unexamined) ideological posi-
        tions as much as or more than it is upon compelling scientific arguments. And
        accordingly, we will not therefore let such hidebound ideology deter us from
        seeking out a broader idea of causation than has been current in natural science
        since Newton.
             For in ontological terms, reality does not consist in fundamental particles
        whose dynamic interactions cause the whole world. Instead, what I will advo-
2   |
        cate in these pages is an ontology whereby everything fundamentally consists
        of process organization, in which causality is a characteristic of such process
        organization.
    S        8



        11 The possibility of a particle interpretation of quantum field theory is dismissed by Halvorson
        and Clifton (2002).
                                                           SIGN AND   CAUSE          47




         Final Causes in Biology: Utricularia floridiana
Let us now examine the problem of causality by studying a concrete biological
example. With inspiration from the ecologist Robert Ulanowicz’s analysis in the
(1997) book Ecology: The Ascendent Perspective, | choose here to look at the sophis-
ticated feeding strategy of the water plant bladderwort, of the genus Utricularia.
   These humble plants are found in freshwater lakes over much of the world
where they feed themselves by eating small animals. The bladderwort’s leaves
(Figure 3.2) are covered with a film of bacteria, diatoms, and blue-green algae
called periphyton. Species of Utricularia in the wild are always covered with such
periphyton, and some types of bladderworts excrete complex sugar compounds
in order to bind algae to the leaf surface and to attract bacteria. Furthermore, the
growth of bladderworts support the growth of the periphyton simply by provid-
ing an area substrate — which is necessary because the types of algae making up
the periphyton are not adapted to a pelagic (free-floating) life.
   A new trophic level now comes into the picture in the form of a number
of small, nearly microscopic (about 0.1 millimeter) animals, collectively known
as zooplankton, that graze the periphyton.  The zooplankton include a range of
various species, such as Daphnia and Cyclops (both are types of water fleas),
Rotatoria (rotifers) and Ciliata (multicelled animals with hairy cilia which are
used to gather food).
   Occasionally the animals will hit a hair on the small bladders (the wzrica,
which gives the bladderwort its genus name). When this happens, an opening




                                                                The detail shows how the
Figure 3.1 Sketch of a typical “leaf” from Utricularia floridiana.
interior of the bladder contains an undigested prey (from Ulanowicz 1997).
48         THE BIOSEMIOTIC      APPROACH



will emerge at the end of the bladder— and because osmotic pressure is main-
tained inside the bladder, the small animals are then sucked up into it. The
opening quickly closes again, and a slow digestion of the animal begins, whereby
nourishment is released and taken up by the plant through the bladder’s walls
(Figure 3.2).
   This kind of interaction between different species is technically called indi-
rect mutualism, because all the involved species benefit from the arrangement.
For even if the bladderwort nourishes itself by eating the zooplankton, so do
the zooplankton, despite all, derive great benefit from the opportunity to graze
upon the phytoplankton layer — and the phytoplankton layer, for its part, gains
by broadening its /ebensraum when the bladderwort’s surface area increases.
Thus, by ensuring the bladderwort’s growth, the periphyton increases its own
biomass, even in the very process in which it is itself eaten.
  The bladderwort system isan example of a biological autocatalytic system.
Ulanowicz points out that the generation of an autocatalytic cycle at the species
level distinguishes itself from chemical autocatalysis, in that the entities that are
involved in the cycle are themselves able to adapt. The result is a self-organiz-
ing autonomy that cannot arise in the corresponding chemical system. The sys-
 ems possess a type of centripetality, says Ulanowicz: Each arbitrary change that




Figure 3.2 The Utricularia system's self-catalyzing cycle. The bladderwort plant provides
the necessary surface for the growth of phytoplankton. Zooplanktons graze on the phy-
toplanktons and become themselves caught in a bladder (from Ulanowicz 1997)
                                                        SIGN AND   CAUSE         49



\ tandomly increases the speed by which material and free energy are carried to
  a given element in the systern (for example, periphyton) will increase this ele-
  ments ability to catalyze the flow of nourishment and energy to the next ele-
  ment (for example, zooplankton), and the change will eventually be rewarded
  (by increasing the growth of the whole system).
    Thus, the self- catalyzing ensemble becomes the organizational locus of the
 growing flows ofmatter and energy,, which are drawn into the system: “Taken
 as a unit, the autocatalytic cycle is not acting simply at the behest of its envi-
 ronment: it actively creates its own domain of influence. Such creative behav-
 ior imparts aseparate identity and ontological status to the configuration,
 above and beyond the passive elements that surround it. We see in centripetal-
 ity the most primitive hint of
                             entification,
                                         of selfhood, andid’ (Ulanowicz 1997,
 47-48). Ulanowicz then goes on to cite Karl Popper, who opined, “Heraclitus
 was right: We are not things, but flames. Or a little more prosaically, we are,
 like all cells, processes of metabolism; nets of chemical pathways.” I stated this
 in another way in Signs ofMeaning in the Universe: We are “infinite swarms of
 swarming swarms” (Hoffmeyer 199 6a, 125).
    Very few people will deny that a human individual is vea/ in an ontological
 sense — and yet all of us consist of nothing but cells that, with the exception of
 our nerve cells, did not exist at all even seven years ago. As humans, we do not
 identify our self with the constituent units of matter that exactly at this moment
 make up our body. In the same way, we would ordinarily consider Beethoven's
 Grosse Fuge as an autonomously existing phenomenon of our world, even in
 those cases (should they ever happen) where this particular piece of music were
 not being played anywhere on Earth, the whole. has a genuine identity that is|
 not «exhausted by iits immediate configuration. Nor is it a mere nominalism, as’
 fgrilldliscassbelowe
    Likewise, we must attribute real ontological status to such eee
 cycles as the bladderworts. Self-catalyzing systems generally outlive their con-
 stituent elements, which most often come and go as illustrated in Figure 3.3.
 Yet by their very existence, they have genuinely causal effects, because they con-
 strain the number ofpossible sustainable adaptations and innovations available
 for the evolutionary |process. —
    If we look at Figure 3.3d and ask how it has come to be that a certain spe-
 cies — for example, species D — is located in this ecological configuration, the
 answer must necessarily reflect the self-catalyzing system as a whole, for in the
 absence of the self-catalyzing system, species D most likely would not have dis-
 placed species B. It seems difficult to avoid saying that it is the relationships
 between species that causes these replacements to occur. Or, in otherwords, rela-
 tionships andnot individual species are carriers of causality. What takes place in
 the bladderwort’s system is,of course, fully determined by the material processes
               50°      THE BIOSEMIOTIC    APPROACH




           A
            Figure 3.3 Step-by-step shifting of components ina self-catalyzing cycle. (a) The original
           |cycle. (b) Component D appears and is more effective in the feedback loop. (c) D even-
           _tually replaces B. (d) In the same way, C is replaced by E. (e) Finally A is replaced by F,
            so that none of the original components remain. The system endures; the components
           fake (from Ulanowicz 1997).


          '\ chat happen within ic — but these processes are grounded in a dynamic whose
               inner logic is dependant upon the way the system is structured, and upon the
               relationships among the populations in the ecosystem.
          1b
                  John Deely (1994, 15) calls this, interestingly enough, intersubjectivity:
               “This contrast between the intrinsic constitution of a thing and its relation
               to other things provides us with the fundamental contrast between the subjec-
               tive and the intersubjective, between what things are in themselves and what
               they are as parts of a system, that is, relative to other things.” He notes that
               in the Middle Ages (and in most of the modern age), such intersubjectivity
               has not been considered to have independent existence. And here, I suppose,
               do we find the essence of what is called nominalism. This oft-contested doc-
               trine holds that the relation between existing things is not itself part of what
wy)            exists, but should instead be regarded as a mere construction in the mind of
      |
               the observer. That a mammalian shoulder bone fits into the shoulder joint of
               the same animal is, according to this view, not part of reality, for fits into is a
      }
      |
      |
               purely relational concept, and relations are not real things in themselves, only
         things like shoulder bones and shoulder joints are. The fitting-in relation, cor-
         respondingly, does not — to a strict nominalist — refer to any independently
      existing reality.
       ; But as Deely (1994, 22) carefully explains, “What is at stake in this pecu-
          \ liarity of relation as an intersubjective mode of being is the very possibility of
                                                                 SIGN AND     CAUSE            51



semiosis — or, perhaps I should better say, the opening in nature to an action
of signs not reducible to the more typical, or at least more widespread, brute
force interactions of Secondness constitutive of [purely] subjective being and
the physical environment of material objects.”””
   The tendency of natural science to deny the ontological reality of relations|
is probably the reason that some biologists in recent years have looked back
to Aristotle’s more articulated understanding of causation (Rosen 1991; Salthe,
1993; Riedl 1997; Ulanowicz 1997; see also Juarrero 1998).'* Autocatalytic orga-
nizations such as the bladderwort can then be considered as an Aristotelian for-_
mal cause for species D’s existence in the bladderwort’s periphyton. And this.
overall cycle relates to its individual component parts in the same way that an
organism relates to its cells, namely by establishing a set of organizational and
interactional boundary conditions for the activity of its subunits — activities
that persist far beyond the lifetime of the subunits
   Indirect mutualism of the kind seen in the bladderwort demonstrates the
development of asymmetry in the ecosystem, as the flows of energy and nour-| *
ishment are displaced from what is called equiprobability — ie., the state where,
they are most equally distributed among different components and ial
Instead, the flows of matter and energy are drawn into those parts of the ecosys- |
tem where self-catalyzing cycles have established themselves. In this way, nea
structural organization emerges in the ecosystem demonstrating the self-orga-
nizing dynamics of the system. Ulanowicz (1997) shows, furthermore, that this
“propensity to move away from a state of equiprobabilility” is a characteristic
property of living systems in general. Thus behind the kind of formal causation
that we have seen exemplified here, a more general propensity is at play— one
which could be described perhaps as a general propensit                  tems to
selforganize.
   As even Kant long ago observed, the self-organizing property of living sys-
tems obviously is in opposition to the physicalist conception of nature shared
by most scientists. Kant, as a consequence, claimed that living creatures must
always be understood teleologically.'* And it was for this reason that Kant main-
tained that biology was not a natural science. But rather than accepting Kant’
radical renunciation of our possibilities for achieving a naturalistic understand-
ing of life, biosemiotics follows Peirceinseeing the principle of final causation
asnatural property oftheworld at large.
12 In using the term Secondness, Deely is referring to the Peircean categories of relation that I
shall be discussing in more detail shortly.
13 I discuss this problem more thoroughly in Hoftmeyer 2008a. See also the thorough analysis
of the ontology of relations by Paul Bains (2007).
14 This is discussed in Chapter 6 in the section, “Self-Organization, Semiosis, and
Experience.”
                   $2         THE BIOSEMIOTIC         APPROACH




              [         At this point, however, we must distinguish the semiotic conception of causa-
                   tion from the Aristotelian conception. Aristotle distinguished, as is well known,
                   four kinds of causes: the material, the efficient, the formal, and the final. To
                   illustrate this, let us again borrow an example from Ulanowicz's excellent treat-
                   ment of the subject (Ulanowicz 1997). The example is a military conflict. Here
                   the weapons constitute the material cause to the battle, the soldiers comprise the
                   efficient cause, the armies’ placement with respect to the particularities of the
                   landscape becomes the formal causeand the fimal cause will consist of the actual
                   intersection ofparticular social, political, and economic conflicts.”
                      This example at once reveals the hierarchical dimension to the Aristotelian
                   idea of causation. As Ulanowicz states, it is the officers who represent the bat-
                   tle’s most central level. Ulanowicz calls this levelthe focal level, which is pre-
                   cisely the level that isconcerned with the formal causes to the course of the
                   battle —e.g., the location of the armies in relation to the landscape. In com-
    io, A.
         LE
                   parison, the soldiers can only influence limited elements of the entire activity,
    four
     Ce
     AX
      -25,
                   whereas the heads of state for their part can mostly influence the events that
                   take place before and after the actual battle. It is precisely this inherent hierar-
                   chical dimension of the Aristotelian concept of causality that was incompatible
                   with the reductionistic and universalistic perspective that has been urged upon
              (— us by Newtonian science.
                      And ever since the Newtonian revolution, we have had to live with a natural
                   science that almost exclusively concerns itself with efficient causality. Material
                   causality, for example, is now accepted to a certain degree in biology, but most
                   often only in the somewhat pre-causal role of initial conditions. Formal causes
                   were difficult to avoid in practice since organizational structures obviously
                   always influence the particularities of natural processes, but the predominant
Ubke
 fr
 tHg
                   credo  has been that formal causes can always be reduced to efficient causes.
                   With regard to final causes, it must be said that an unquestionable taboo has
                   ruled — a taboo that has been especially troublesome for biology, where it is dif-
j
                   ficult to avoid teleologic (often called functional) explanations of the following
                   type: The heart beats im order to pump oxygen into the body. But this is an expla-
TF
 TMA
 Alay
q{
                   eee that, strictly speaking, would imply that the heart would have to possess
                   an intention of helping the body — an unacceptable thought, of course, if only
                   for the simple reason that the heart has no brain, and cannot therefore possibly
                   know that it is located in a body in need of oxygen.
               ©     As we shall see below, most biologists nevertheless consider themselves fully
                   justified in using functional explanations of this kind
                                                                        — probably not even


                   15 In adeeper sense, however, the final cause in this case is the desirability of circumstances (eg.,
                   wealth and power) that both of the involved powers cannot simultaneously realize; thus, they
                   have to fight over it (see Short 2002).
                                                               SIGN AND CAUSE              53


seeing it as contradicting the taboo against final causation. This is because it is |
assumed that such teleologic explanations could ultimately be justified reduc-
tionistically through the application of the principle of natural selection. For
this principle is quite generally supposed to be responsible for any functional
optimization of the gene pool that might arise, and for this reason, explanations
of the kind discussed above are said to be teleonomic rather than teleologic.                       y
                                                                                                        ay



   Before we look more closely at the functionalist ideas of biology, there may
be reason to warn against an uncritical adoption of the Aristotelian causal cate-
gories. For even ifwe accept the necessity to operate with formal and final causes
in biology, this does not imply that we can adopt Aristotle’s understanding of
matter as a passive victim of the form-giving principles of nature. This latent
dualism of Aristotle’s, on the other hand, was easily incorporated into the com-
promise between Aristotelian philosophy and Christianity that was worked out
by the medieval scholastics. It is perhaps not a coincidence that the alternative
to this way of thinking has perhaps never been expressed more elegantly than
by Giordano Bruno in the work Cause, Principle, and Unity, a book that more
than anything else led to his execution by burning (by papal decree) in the year
1600. Here Bruno allows his hero, Theofilus, to get into a discussion with the
orthodox Aristotelian Discono, who in dismay accuses Theofilus of implying
that “matter is propre nihil [almost nothing], pure potency, bare, without act,
without virtue and perfection.” Theofilus answers to this: “So it is. I claim that
it is deprived of forms and without them, not in the way ice lacks warmth or
the abyss is without light,”° but as a pregnant woman lacks the offspring which
she collects and expels forth from herself, and as this hemisphere of the Earth
is without light at night, which it manages to reacquire by its turning around”
(Bruno 1584 (2000)); translated by the author from the Danish version).
   The Aristotelian matter-form dualism was itself originally a way of solving a
philosophical problem that seriously occupied the minds of the philosophers
in antiquity, the question of change: How can anything change without ceas-|
ing to be the thing it was? By positing the idea of a “form-giving principle that
rules over matter,’ it became possible to think of change as change in form only,
thereby conserving the identity of matter in spite of the change. Change then,
in the Aristotelian conception, was change in form, and as such, was brought/
about by the processes of formal causation.
   But Aristotle saw formal causation itselfasguided by final causation. And at ,
work here is a somewhat questionable metaphysics in which nature’s purpose
is posited as harmony, perfection, or “the good.” In short, Aristotelian formal
and final causation depends very much on a whole set of ideas that one should
                                                                                                Y



16 See Genesis 1:2. “And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face
of the deep” (King James Version).
54         THE BIOSEMIOTIC        APPROACH




take care not to import into the contemporary scientific discussion when using
these terms. In the Peircean conception of final causes, we find none of this.
Quit            e
       to the contrary, Peirce believes on the most fundamental level that both
randomness and irreversibility characterize final causes. Peircean final causation
therefore is a very different thing from Aristotelian final causation, and the two
should notbe confused.”


                     The Functionalist Idea in Biology
The identification of final causes with purposeful causes —where purpose is
understood in the psychological sense — probably explains why the rejection
of final causes has been, and remains, all but total among biologists. In a book
entitled Narure’s Purposes, Colin Allen, Marc Bekoff, and George Lauder (1998)
collected a group of key articles from the previous thirty years’ debate about
teleology, functionality, and purpose in biology.’* Yet once one has already over-
come the fear of, and defensive taboo against, the very possibility of final causes,
 as we have here, the subtle discussions in the perceptive and well-argued arti-
 cles assembled in this volume feel a little strenuous to say the least. In fact, what
 these articles illustrate more than anything else is the absurdity of explaining
 away final causation in the workings of living systems. Like the more and more
 subtle play of epicycles invented by astronomers to uphold the geocentric uni-
 verse, thoughtful biologists have had to invent more and more subtle arguments
\in order to uphold a view of organic evolution as obeying the irreproachable
‘scheme of efficient causation as the only basic explanatory tool in the natural
‘world. Rather than dwelling upon the many subtle details of this descussion, I’ll
 limit myself here to a short presentation of the main arguments.
     Should we speak about a modern consensus among biologists concerning the
 questioin of functionality, this consensus would be best framed in the terms
 of Karen Neander’s etiological theory, where the point is that a trait or charac-
 teristic of an organism is
                          functional if it derives from parents whose offspring
 survived through natural selection by virtue of exactly the function that this
characteristic served for the parents. Or, in Neander’s (1991) own words, “It is a/
the proper function of an item (X) of an organism (O) to do that which items
of X’s type did to contribute to the inclusive fitness of O’s ancestors and which
caused the genotype, of which X is the phenotypic expression (or which may be
X itself where X is the genotype), to increase proportionally in the gene pool.”

17 This is one reason why I prefer to use the term semiotic causation for this phenomenon in my
own work. For although semiotic causation does, of course, imply some sort of final causation as an
operative principle, it does not import the whole baggage of Aristotelian metaphysics.
18 For avery different discussion of this problem, consult Havel and Markos (2002)
                                                          SIGN AND CAUSE           55


   There are divergent opinions about this, though, especially as concerns the
very selectionistic conception of evolution expressed in the etiologic theory. For
example, Ammundsen and Lauder (1994) note that the idea of homology is a
pre-Darwinian concept that originally was based upon comparative anatomy
and which therefore cannot be defined through a theory of functionality. For
example, the forelimbs of humans, dogs, moles, whales, and bats are all homol-
ogous, but their functionality is totally different.
   Against the etiological theory, they point to the wings of insects — which,
according to allaccounts, originally had no aerodynamic function, but only
served the purpose of thermoregulation (a role they still can have, for instance,
for bees). “If we identify the function of insect wings as the effect for which they
were first selected, then we would say that the function of wings is thermoregu-
lation” (Allen, Bekoff, and Lauder 1998, 357). Ammundsen and Lauder (1994) |
instead suggest that we base the definition of function upon the relevant trait’s
causal role —as originally suggested by Robert Cummins (1975). This is to say '
that functionality must always be understood in relation to a task, and the func-
tion of the trait or characteristic must thus be understood as its contribution to |
the fulfillment of this task. A dove wing's causal role is to contribute to the fly-
ing ability of the dove, which will thus be the function of the wing even in the
hypothetical case where conditions change so much that flying skill is no longer
of use to the bird in its quest for survival and reproductive success.
   Cummins’s attempt to define. biological functionalism in relation to causal |
roles was dismissed by philosopher Ruth Millikan who referred to the absurdity |
of maintaining that clouds have the causal role (i.e., function) of raining so that
streams and rivers are filled with water, which — as part of the hydrologic cycle
on earth — work to keep the soil moist so that plants can grow (Millikan 1989).
For this is obviously a different idea offunction than we are using when we say
that it is the heart’s function to pump blood throughout the body, even if its
placement in a system of interdependent causal relations looks, at a first glance,
sornewhat the same.
   Seen from the biosemiotic standpoint, Ammundsen’s and Lauder’s sugges-
tion has the advantage that functionality is ascribed to the dineage as an auton-
omous historical system. It cannot therefore be reduced to the bare rational
reflection of external selective forces, but rather, follows its own inner (semiotic,
I would say) dynamic of development. But since the authors do not explicitly
set themselves apart from the commonly accepted mechanical model of causal-
ity in biology, it is difficult to see how they can defend themselves against objec-
tions of the kind that Millikan and others have put forward (Millikan 1989;
Neander 1991; Sober 1993).
  At this point, however, the etiological theory is better only in appearance.
By linking functionality to an already selected effect, this “effect” may seem to
            56         THE BIOSEMIOTIC       APPROACH




            assume an aspect of value that in a crucial sense separates it from the raining
            that Millikan facetiously attributes as a “function” of a cloud. Insect wings with
            effective aerodynamic potential were selected (which is to say that they were in
            some sense favored) by nature, in preference to those insect wings that could
        _only be used for thermoregulation. But if one looks closer into this favoring,
            ‘called selection, then it is emphasized again and again that in the end, it too is
             all just a result of blind coincidence, and or purpose (see Andrade, 1999). Thus,
             functionality of this kind is scarcely different from the cloud’s raining; both are
            coincidental, rather than functional, in the normal sense of this word.
                In this debate, it seems that only philosopher Ruth Millikan really avoids this
            vulgarization of the idea of causality, perhaps because her source of inspiration
            is not primarily biology, but rather problems in language philosophy and cogni-
            tive research concerning the eventual possibility (or impossibility) of intention-
            ality in computers. Millikan (1998) thus has no fear in approaching the idea of
            purpose —on the contrary, she succinctly declares that “the definition of ‘proper
            function’ is intended as a theoretical definition of function or purpose.” And
        | just as function is inextricably linked to purpose, so also, in her view, is purpose
        \ unbreakably linked to historical becoming: “The mouse may have a disposition
          to take measures that will remove it from the vicinity of the cat, but not if under
            water, at 1000 [degrees] Fahrenheit, in the absence of oxygen, while being sprayed
            with mace, or just after ingesting cyanide. Indeed, there are thousands of stress-
             ful conditions under which the mouse might be placed, which would extinguish
             its escaping behavior” (Allen, Bekoff, and Lauder 1998, 308). The point is that the
             escaping behavior of mice only works under normal circumstances. Functionality
             thus presupposes an idea of normal circumstances. But where, in turn, does that
             idea come from? “At the very least, we must make a reference to something like
             the conditions in which mice have historically found themselves, or better, found
             themselves when their dispositions actually aided survival. ... Mice must be born
             of mice. Consider if a seeming mouse were born of a fish, what would set the ‘nor-
             mal conditions’ for manifestation of its relevant disposition?” (ibid., 309).
        ,        Millikan seems in no doubt that when a mouse flees, it does so with a pur-
            pose — but that this purpose is not planted in the mouse’s genes or in its brain
            in any kind of naive, simplistic sense. Rather, purpose here constitutes an aspect
            of the historic process in which the mouse is only a (short-lived) current partic-
     ipant or exemplar. And as with mice, so with humans. For us, too, our conscious
* || and intentional actions stand under the influence of the inheritance from evolu-
            tionary history. We are, so to speak, historically formed by the world — and this
   fi
            is basically why we can learn to know it.” Accordingly, our “conscious    inten-

            19 We can only learn anything about the world because our inherited talent for forming intu-
            itions (literally, from the Latin, “iz-sight”) has been evolutionarily molded by the conditions
                                                                 SIGN AND CAUSE                57


tions” are notsomething that develop de novo in an isolated brain; instead, they
alwaysemerge from historical relationships between the head and the world
(which includes, of course, the actions of other similarly situated agents).
   And although Millikan apparently is comfortable with natural selection as an
explanation for the functionality exhibited by animals, herproject nevertheless
collapses the ontological barrier between “free” humans and “unfree” animals.
In so doing, the door opens a cracktoadmit actual, nonpsychological, final cau-
sationasan operative force in nature. And, as we saw in Chapter 1, natural selec-
tion itself depends upon the existence of a deeper dynamic in the physics of the
universe that can explain the emergence of agency in life:

   That we can explain how living systems behave in order to become prolific does
   not explain evolution in the deeper sense. How does this fertility come into being?
   What temporal motive force is at play here? Selection theory also needs a theory
   about what kind of thing life’s agency would be and how that agencycomestobe.                    |
   And so it appears that selection theory is only a surface structure built upon the     j

   foundations of a deeper theory of evolution that explains how life relates to the pro- |
   cesses that are fundamental to the physical development of the universe.

Thus, biological functionality          has its roots in the universe’s fundamental                     ~*
directedness.


                                The Central Dogma
Natural selection could hardly maintain its credibility as an explanation of bio-
logical functionality if it hadn’t coincided so well with another one of biology’s
authorized stories about the innermost nature of life: the Central Dogma. It was .
Francis Crick, one of the discoverers of the double-helix structure of DNA, who
jokingly codified the dogma whereby information can only be transferred from
DNA to RNA and further to protein, but never the other way around (i.e., from
protein to DNA).”°

prevailing in our world. Peirce puts it this way: “Thus it is that, our minds having been formed
under the influence of phenomena governed by the laws of mechanics, certain conceptions enter-
ing into those laws become implanted in our minds, so that we readily guess at what the laws are.
Without such a natural prompting, having to search blindfold for a law which would suit the phe-
nomena, our chance of finding it would be as one to infinity. The further physical studies depart
from phenomena which have directly influenced the growth of the mind, the less we can expect
to find the laws which govern them ‘simple, that is, composed of a few conceptions natural to our
minds” (CP 6:10).
20 It has since been shown that there is a reverse-transcription enzyme that uses RNA as a
template for the synthesis of DNA, and therefore transmits information the “wrong” way. This,
though, still leaves intact the fundamental principle of the Central Dogma, which is that genetic
material cannot   be created from, nor altered by, proteins.
      58         THE BIOSEMIOTIC       APPROACH




      Figure 3.4 According to the Central Dogma, the information flow in a cell is one-way.
      Information is passed from DNA to RNA and further to protein, but never in the reverse
      direction.


     In Crick’s own original formulation (1988, 109), the Central Dogma was sim-
      ply this: “Once ‘information’ has passed into protein it cannot get out again.”
      But this glib formulation contains great ambiguity. First of all, of course, there
      is the question of what information actually is. Crick is himself fairly explicit
      in this regard. “Information means here the precise determination of sequence,
      either of bases in the nucleic acid or of amino acid residues in the protein”
      (ibid.). Information is to be understood, then, as a kind of specification. It is
      important to note here that this conception of information, which we may call
      the biochemical information concept, is decisively different from the concept
      of information that underlies Information Theory, or Shannon information.
      Shannon’s information concept is a purely probabilistic measure that in princi-
      ple can be objectively determined, and is deprived of any internal relationship
      to relevance or meaning.” A manuscript created by a monkey, for example, may
     | contain more Shannon information than a manuscript of the same length cre-
      ated by a normal user of language. For a language user writes according to rules,
       which make his letters more predictable than a monkey’s.
          The problem with the biochemical information concept is that a specifi-
      cation has no unequivocal or measurable reality. Even in the simplest cases,
      such as when we say that the RNA sequence AAA specifies the insertion of
      the amino acid phenylalanine into the growing protein chain, such specifica-
      tions are hugely dependent on the prevailing present circumstances. A muta-
      tion might perhaps substitute a different amino acid in place of phenylalanine
      in the same location in the protein chain, and then suddenly the same infor-
      mation (AAA) would specify something entirely different. The question of the
     _ambiguity of genetic information will be thoroughly examined in Chapter s.
      Anticipating that discussion a little bit, we can say right now that generally,
ve    the problem is that a specificational information concept is one that is necessar-
      ily context-dependent — and thus, in the end, is necessarily dependent upon


      21 One objection to this holds that the objectivistic interpretation of the information idea is
      not, as such, implicit in Shannon's original idea, but rather is a consequence of its frequent use
      within closed systems that have well-defined realms of possibility. But Shannon himself clearly
      instituted this practice, stating that the semantic aspects of communication are irrelevant to the
      engineering problem.
                                                         SIGN AND CAUSE           59


what effect (or, in Peircean terms, interpretant) the information will elicit in }
the receiving system.
  To see how this is so, we can, for example, following Sterelny and Griffiths
(1999, 102), look at a simple system for information transmission such as a
doorbell. By pressing the button, one specifies the message (out of a theoretical
infinity of possible other messages) that there is someone seeking contact. The
difference between the ringing sound and the contrastive quiet here depends
not simply upon the capability of the ears of the resident —as, for example, he
or she may be at that moment playing loud music or making some other kind
of noise such as vacuuming or cutting grass — but also depends crucially upon
such nonreceiver elements as whether or not the power is off, there is a loose
connection in the circuit, or if the bell is in order. Here we naively presume that
the source of the information is the pressure on the button, while all the other
conditions fall under the subservient classification normally called channel con-
ditions. But as Sterelny and Griffiths remind us, our thinking this so may not so
much accurately reflect a fact about the world, but reflect, rather, “a fact about
us. The sender/channel distinction is a fact about our interests, not a fact about
the physical world” (ibid.). “What is noise and what is signal depends on what
you are interested in. When you see a white dot passing across your television
screen, it may be a tennis ball (signal) or it may be atmospheric interference or
the cat sharpening its claws on the aerial (noise). But nothing in nature dictates \
that one dot is signal and the other is noise” (ibid., 103).
   In Crick’s formulation, information stands forth as an indubitable category,
                                                                                       |   }
virtually as a thing or a postal package that one can send anywhere in the world,          |
without any change in its contents. And in the aftermath of Crick, biochemists                 iS

have repeated this rather peculiar use of the word information such that it has
now become so seemingly self-evident that no further explanation is needed.
I quote as an example from a nearby biochemistry textbook on my bookshelf:
“Of course, all metabolic reactions are controlled ultimately by genetic informa-
tion, which specifies the structures and properties of enzymes” (Mathews, van
Holde, and Ahern 1999, 876; italics added).
  Typically enough, the next chapter in this textbook has the title “Information
Readout: Transcription.” And so we have become so accustomed to this type
of language use that now it barely surprises us. But, notoriously, it is somewhat
other than normal to maintain that cells can read or that information can con-
trol. Both of these worthy activities usually presume cognitive abilities that bio-
chemists will be the first to deny could occur in cells. And if we consider the
word information in its everyday meaning, then we can, for example, say that
there is some information contained on this page. But I hope that the reader
doesn’t believe that she becomes controlled by this information. I hope the situa-
tion is rather that the reader feels inspired by the act of interpreting these words
  60          THE   BIOSEMIOTIC   APPROACH




' as information and interprets them in relation to her own interests and needs.
  Exactly the same is what is happening in cells and in organisms, I will argue,
_ when they act upon their inherent genetic material as information with which
_to survive and develop.
       The idea that information can stream, flow, or let itself be transported through
  a channel derives from classical information theory as developed by Claude
  Shannon and Warren Weaver (1949), as mentioned briefly above. The starting
  point of the work of Shannon and Weaver was an engineering-related interest
  in developing telecommunications media, and consequently, in optimizing the
  ratio between signal and noise. What might be the meaning of the signals trans-
  mitted through channels was for good reason not a question that interested the
  fathers of information theory. The information that flows through channels is
  only defined in relationship to its external characteristic of non-noise.
     Information transmission, of course, always depends on material processes.
  The words on this page can be read because of the patterning of black ink on the
  white of the paper, which is reflected onto the retina of the eye, as light bounces
  off it. (In writing for the blind, this optical technique is replaced by a tactile
  approach.) But as soon as we switch from an external to an internal approach
  to information, the explanatory viability of the transport metaphor ceases to be
  obvious. Shannon information can flow, stream, or pass, but in what sense can
  a specification flow?
       The tacit transfer of the transport (or flow) metaphor of Shannon informa-
  tion to genetic information is not only meaningless (since genetic information
  cannot be understood independently of the particular context in which ict is sit-
  uated), it is also very misleading. If the expression genetic information shall be
  maintained at all, then what is at stake cannot be equated with such context-
  free (and semantics-free) information. Genetic information is deeply linked to
  the survival project of organisms and must be understood as a set of inherited
  instructions for the production and delivering of protein resources that can help
  one to function in the world.
       The transport metaphor has here the effect of objectifying genetic informa-
  tion, giving it a thingish character and a consequent autonomy that it does not
  possess. And this reification of information, for its part, opens the way to the
_ misunderstanding that natural selection can optimize genetic information bit
| by bit. For when information is understood as bound to the gene and not to the
 | context, the idea easily emerges that the population genetic combinatorics at
_ the DNA level correspond with an equally unambiguous combinatorics at the
, semiotic level. In short, by considering information as genes, one eliminates the
  idea of genes — and life — as a semiotic phenomenon.
     Such misplaced metaphor and oversimplification can hardly be expected
  to survive the ever deepening scientific developments that, more and more,
                                                        SIGN AND CAUSE           61



demand a refined understanding of the massively complex and interdependent
processes of life. A little maliciously, perhaps, one might compare the Central
Dogma with the chemical theory of phlogiston of an earlier time (Hoffmeyer
2002a). For in a somewhat similar fashion, chemists of the eighteenth century
reasoned that when substances burned, one was witnessing the liberation of a
special internal substance called phlogiston. Flammable materials such as oil or
coal, for instance, were thus considered to contain large amounts of phlogiston,
and this accounted for their propensity to readily burn.
   In 1794, however, the French chemist Antoine Lavoisier pointed out that,
what really happened when something burned, was that oxidation was taking
place — that is, burning (and rusting) material was not emitting some mystical
phlogiston, but instead consuming (binding) oxygen. And the exact same pro-
cess, he also helped to show, was soon proven to take place as well in the metab-
olism of animals. And just as the phlogiston theory, in its time, stood in the way
of the further development of chemistry — we will soon see, I believe, that the
idea of the transport of information within and between living systems today
stands in the way of the development of a biology in keeping with the progress '
of the times.
   For an up-to-date biology must acknowledge that the biochemical concept of |
information is just too impoverished to be of any explanatory use. Information
isn’t just something that is transported or that streams through a channel; infor-
mation is something that must be understood     — and which therefore can be
misunderstood. Recently, Eva Jablonka (2002, 580) has made a resolute attempt
to save the concept of information through a semantic definition, by placing
the concept in a functional evolutionary perspective where “the focus should
be neither on the evolution of the signal ‘carrying’ the information, nor on the
evolution of the final specific response. Rather it should be on the evolution
of the system mediating between the two — on the interpreting system of the
receiver.” However, even if Jablonka’s understanding of the information con-
cept comes close to the biosemiotic concept of a sign, she strangely enough still
thinks that it is important to preserve the notion of information as something
that can be moved from one place to another.
   But if information is to be understood as a relationship that involves an inter-
preting system, it is difficult to see what it could mean to say that information
is transported. It is well known that if one looks, for example, at a little white
disk on a red background, it seems to be green. Make a copy of the disk, place
it on a blue background and the disk will appear to be orange. The disk’s color
information travels as little with the disk itself, as the gene’s information tray-
els with the DNA. Information, understood as a relationship between a cue and
an interpreting system, is not itself an entity that can be transported. Still, the |
increased depth in Jablonka’s idea of information consequently parts ways with
           62          THE BIOSEMIOTIC        APPROACH




           a reductionistic approach whose ideas are still considered useable in the theoret-
           ical understanding of evolution that Jablonka is challenging.


                                 ean                      and Finality
           Biosemiosis, the never-ending stream of sign processes that regulate and coor-
          dinate the behavi              systems, depends upon the special receptivity
                               of livingor
          that evolutionary systems over time have developed towards selected features
           of their environment. Peirce considered “the tendency [of things] to take hab-
           its mere 1:409) — or, in more modern parlance, se/forganization (the tendency
    wa    ‘for ever new regularities to arise in natural systems) — as the most fundamen-
           tal characteristic of nature. And living systems are examples par excellence of the
           tendency, to take notice, that is to say, to detect regularities in their surroundings
           that, ifproperly interpreted, might guide them to perform well.
               The tendency to generate new habits is, of course, fundamental for all true
           learning, as well as for all cognitive activity. A bird must generate the habit of
           flying before it can find food, and a doctor must be in the habit of deciphering
           Xe“tay pictures before he can decide that a given shadow is a tumor. For Peirce,



           themselves the product ofthe former.” And here we have come > upon an ele-
           ment in Peircean cosmology that at first might seem somewhat counterintui-
           tive. And yet, upon a closer look, the idea is strikingly modern.
               In opposition to the natural science of his time, Peirce considered indeter-
           minacy and chance asthe primordial condition of the world. Given this start-
|    ¥f    ing point, the real “mystery to be unravelled” about our world is not so much
           that it contains an unbelievable mass of ungovernable activity, but that there is
          _any stable order in it, at all. For very good reasons, science has set itself the task
          | of explaining the events and structures we find in our world as being in all cases
            the outcome of natural lawfulness. And, although scientists are generally con-
           fident that aberations from the determinacy of natural laws will ultimately be


           22 “The law of habit exhibits a striking contrast to all physical laws in the character of its com-
           mands. A physical law is absolute. What it requires is an exact relation. Thus, a physical force
           introduces into a motion a component motion to be combined with the rest by the parallelo-
           gram of forces; but the component motion must actually take place exactly as required by the law
           of force. On the other hand, no exact conformity is required by the mental law. Nay, exact con-
           formity would be in downright conflict with the law; since it would instantly crystallize thought
           and prevent all further formation of habit. The law of mind only makes a given feeling more likely
           to arise. It thus resembles the ‘non-conservative’ forces of physics, such as viscosity and the like,
           which are due to statistical uniformities in the chance encounters of trillions of molecules” (CP
           6:23; italics added).
                                                            SIGN AND CAUSE             63



explained in good manner, itremains a striking |fact that natural systems are — as
they are actually found in nature, not as they may be reductively described in the
classroom or textbook — are “an unruly mess,’ as ecologist Peter Taylor (2005)
has succinctly put it.
   Yet if indeterminacy and chance are the basic properties of our world, rather
than determinacy and order, such, in fact, is exactly what might be predicted.
And if so, theul                     eee ne is thatint
                                                   i this swarming jum-                         K



messy ‘diversity of life into the straightjacketed uniformity of natural law. The
task is rather to explain how ordered structures emerge out ofunordered, cha-
otic diversity. Peirce (CP6:12-13) writes,

   Uniformities are precisely the kind of fact that need to be accounted for. That a
  ‘pitched coin should sometimes turn up heads and sometimes
                                                        tails calls for no par-
   ticular explanation; but if it shows heads every time, we wish to know how this
   result has been brought about. Law is par excellence the thing which wants a rea-
   son. Now the only possible way ofaccounting for the laws of nature and the unifor-
   mity in general is to suppose them results of evolution. This supposes them not to |
   be absolute, not to be obeyed precisely. It makes an element ofindeterminacy, spon-_
   taneity, or absolute chance in nature (italics added).

   The italicized sentence — Law is par excellence the thing which wants a rea-
son — is the key to Peirce’s critique of natural science. He asks us to consider
why natural science is not interested in the most central question: How is it
that there can be natural law in the world at all? It is precisely in his qu
                                                                          quest for         |
the answer to this question that Peirce comes to formulate his admittedly pro-
vocatively titled daw ofmindasthe most general (and even as the only possible)
source for the emergence of lawfulness. In his presentation of this “law” Peirce
used a1 terminology that is suitable for provoking all alarm bells to ring in the
mind of a modern scientific reader. For, read through contemporary lenses, the
implicit anthropomorphism in the Peircean ascription of feelings or habits to
‘natural systems will shock many - who are accustomed to an absolutely rigid wall
between humanity and freedom on one side, and nature and necessity on the
other side. But it is exactlythisdichotomy that Peirce would have us transcend
in his deliberately provocative use of terms. When Peirce says that nature pos-
sesses mind, it is nota cheap aanthropomorphism, for Peirce’s idea of mind is not _ al
linked to the human mind.Rather he sees the human mind asa specialinstanti-
ation ofa general principleinthe universe, the daw ofmind: “The psychologists
saythat consciousness is the essential attribute of mind; and that purpose is only
                                                                causation, of which \e
a special nmodification. I hold that purpose, or rather, final causation,
                                                            mere
purpose. isthe conscious modification, is the essential subject        oe own
                                                                payeholoeits
   64           THE BIOSEMIOTIC APPROACH



  studies; and that consciousness is a special, and not a universal, accompaniment
  of mind” (Peirce 1902; CP 7:366, italics added ).
(                 mind,hiscosmogonic philosophy, is described as follows: “In
     Peirce’s Law of
                                — there was a chaos of unpersonalized feel-
   the beginning— infinitely remote
   ing, which being without connection or regularity would properly be without
   existence. This feeling, sporting here and there in pure arbitrariness, would have
   started the germ of a generalizing tendency. Its other sportings would be evanes-
   cent, but this would have a growing virtue. Thus, the tendency
                                                              to habit would
   be started; and from this, with the other principles of evolution, all the regular-
\_ itiesoftheuniverse would be evolved” (CP 6:33).
\} Thus, Peirce sees natural laws as habits that emerge from prior — and then serve
|, to structure subsequent — interactions in nature. These habits then self-reinforce
 "and can ultimately freeze into more or less fixed patterns, a process that will grad-
 |ually broaden the domain of necessity and natural law. And Peirce notes that,

   f.
    seen from the standpoint of semiotics, such habits can be considered to be izterpre-
    tants, and here we see how the determination of final causation lies at the root of
        Peircean philosophy:

        By thus admitting pure spontaneity of life as a character of the universe, acting
        always and everywhere, though restrained within narrow bounds by law, produc-
        ing infinitesimal departures from law continually, and great ones with infinite infre-
        quency, I account for all the variety and diversity of the universe, in the only sense
        in which the really sui generis and new can be said to be accounted for. ... At the
        same time, by thus loosening the bond of necessity, it gives room for the influence
        of another kind of causation, such as seems to be [also] operative in the mind, in
        the formation of associations,-and enables us to understand how the uniformity of
        nature could have been brought about (CP 6:59-Go).

     This other kind of causality alluded to by Peirce is exactly what I have sug-
  gested we call semiotic causality, i.c., bringing about things under guidance of
  interpretation iinaa lo
                        local context (Hoffmeyer 2007. Semiotic causality cannot
  be reduced to efficient causality but, on the contrary, is dependent upon the
  workings of efficient causality, since interpretation, even in its most primitive
  modes, is of no need if not followed by habit formation, or, in other words, by
  anticipatory action — and action unquestionably depends on efficient causality.
  Semiotic causality thus gives direction to efficient causality, while efficient cau-
  sality gives power to semiotic causality. Their reciprocal relation is one of inter-
  dependence, not one of exclusion.
     But the exclusion of semiotic causality as an explanatory tool is exactly what
  the traditional scientific ontology induces in the scientist. The discussion in
  this chapter has served to clear the passage for the workings of this other kind
  of causality to be explored. By undermining the belief in natural selection as a
                                                         SIGN AND CAUSE           65



sufficient explanation for the existence of agency and functionality in the world,
we have observed the necessity to consider the more deeply buried directedness
of our universe as stated by an ontological reading of the second law of thermo- .
dynamics. We have shown then, that the banishment of final causation from the
accepted ontology of science is not a necessary consequence of physical knowl-
edge such as we have it, but is derived rather from old ideological bindings of
science such as the past wars between science and church.
   Peirce’ss definition of sign, writes the German semiotician Helmuth Pape,
actually constitutes a general description of the inner structure of final causal-
ity. Pape
        e (1
          (1993) elucidates, “There cannot be asign process without there being
a final cause involved in it” (cited in Santaella-Braga, 1999). In the biologi-|
cal world,« certainly, signs incite the generation of interpretants in the form of
actions which are future-oriented, inasmuch as living beings always seek signs
for survival and for reproduction. That organisms react to signs necessarily           ~~
implies that these signs are meaningful, and that they are directed toward latent
activities, whether now or later. Even a historian doesn’t study his history for
history's sake, but because he hopes that it can help him to earn money, to build |
a career, or perhaps even to become wiser about the world.


                Firstness, Secondness, and Thirdness

At the same time that semiotics always involves finality, it necessarily also makes
use of ordinary efficient causality. To more precisely define this relationship,
we must look more closely at Peirce’s idea that the world contains three and
only three fundamental categories of phenomena, which he laconically called
Firstness, Secondness, and Thirdness. This categorical system is deeply original
and can be seen as a realistic turning rightside up of the human-centric Kantian
categorical system. For while Kant’s classification is based upon the formal char-
acteristics of human thought, Peirce’s classifications analogically rediscover nat-
ural categories and their cognizable patterns.
   Most profoundly, Peirce’s realism is thus based on an evolutionary intuition:
“Thus it is that, our minds having been formed under the influence of        phenom-
ena governed by the laws of mechanics, certain conceptions entering into those
laws become implanted in our minds, so that we can readily guess what the laws
are. Without such a natural prompting, having to search blindfold for a law
which would suit the phenomena, our chance of finding it would be as one to
infinity” (Peirce 1955, 317).
  This, of course, does not mean that there is any simple isomorphism between
our scientific theories and that part of reality that they seek to describe. Rather,
Peirce was a conceptual realist — but not in the kind of naive way that is so often
     66           THE BIOSEMIOTIC APPROACH



     seen in natural science circles in the form of an unlettered arrogance about phil-
     osophical “speculation.” About sruth, Peirce (CP 5:565) writes this: “Truth is
    that concordance of an abstract statement with the ideal limit towards which
   |endless investigation would tend to bring scientific belief, which concordance
    the abstract statement may possess by virtue of the confession of its inaccuracy
   |and one-sidedness, and this confession is an essential ingredient of truth.” In
     keeping with this pragmatic criterion of truth, Peirce’s idea of realism consists in
     the claim that ideas shall be known by their consequences (but not just conse-
     quences as they are judged here and now, but such as the common efforts of the
     scientific community will, with time, come to approach closer and closer).”* In
     this way, neither individuals nor scientist should attempt to substantiate ideas
     in any other way than by an evaluation of their effects: “In order to ascertain the
     meaning of an intellectual conception one should consider what practical con-
     sequences might conceivably result by necessity from the truth of that concep-
fe | tion; and the sum of these consequences will constitute the entire meaning of
     the conception” (Peirce 1905; CP 5:9)
   (a Accordingly, Peirce (1955, 322-23) describes the three fundamental categories
     in his system in the following way:
         _First is the conception of being or existing independent of anything else. Second
           is the conception of being relative to, the conception of reaction with, something
           else. Third isthe conception of mediation whereby a first andasecond are brought
           into relation. To illustrate these ideas, I will show how they enter into those we
          have been considering. The origin of things, considered not as leading to anything,
          but in itself, contains the idea of First, the end of things that of second, the pro-
          cess mediating between them that of Third. ... In psychology feeling is First, sense
          of reaction is Second, general conception Third, or mediation. In biology, the idea
          of arbitrary sporting is First, heredity is Second, the process whereby the acciden-
     tal characters become fixed is Third. Chance is First, law is Second, the tendency to
p- ) form habits is Third. Mind is First, matteris Second, evolution is Third.

        Relations belonging to the category of Firstness are generally characterized as
     including potentialities — possibilities, simple and uncompounded (for could
     they be broken into components, they would already be relations of Secondness)
     (Dinesen and Stjernfelt 1994, 14). In perception, for example, Firstness thus also
     denotes pure quality, such as redness or the stench of rotten cabbage— pro-
     vided that these expressions are not understood as being also attached to a con-
     crete existence.


     23 The “deplorable degeneration” of the pragmatist’s truth criterion to a sort of “practical
     validity criterion as judged in the here and now” caused Peirce to later insist upon distinguish-
     ing his own ideas from James's and Dewey's pragmatism by re-christening his own conception
     .      .        .   (          >                      .             .    .    .



     pragmaticism.
                                                              SIGN AND CAUSE                67


  Relations of Secondness manifest as separateness, rupture, Opposition, man-
ifestation, existence, and quantity, and appear as soon as quality is imposed
upon, or adheres to, something else. “Secondness encompasses Firstness and can
be said to be its realization, which is a ‘brute fact? and where the First is only the
possible, the Second is the necessary,’ write Dinesen and Stjernfelt (1994, 15).
   Relations of Thirdness occur in and with the establishment of a connection
between the universe of possibilities that is Firstness and the plethora of events
that is Secondness. Thus, relationships of Thirdness emerge as habits, whereby
quality and quantity are themselves put together iin a relationship. Cultural, lin-
guistic, and biological habits are all thus relationships of Thirdness.
  The significance of these reflections for our discussion of causality fol-
lows from the recognition that actions or processes can either play out within
relations
 $y) eeksdelsof  Secondness
             Soleosetia
                  as          or 2within relations of Thirdness (but not, however,
within relations of Firstness, which are as yet potentialities). The processes
that
 ———
      take place  nn
                     at the leveleae
                                   of Secondness are dyadic and constrained, and \
these are the types of processes tthat are controlled by efficient causality. Peirce
characterized such actions as “brute, unintelligent, and unconcerned with
the result” (CP 6.332). As an instance of mere Secondness, a dyad is a dis-
continuous fact occurring “here and now,” writes Santaella-Braga: “there is
nothing general about it. As an efficient causation, it is brute force or com-
pulsion, an effective action, blind, nonrational, singular in occasion, just a
factual compulsion and the hic.et nunc of an event” (Santaella-Braga 1999,
501). Consequently, one should not confuse efficient causality with determin-
istic causality, which presupposes a lawfulness that is not yet present on the
level of brute Secondness.
    When we speak about lawful processes, we are already dealing with phenom-
ena at the level of Thirdness, and it is only on this level of relations that we
will, according to Peirce, encounter the organizational principles of final cau-
sation. But it must be remembered that even this, for Peirce, does not entail
any sort of fixed and unchanging determinism — since such natural law itself
arises only within the processes of evolution, and as such is necessarily incom-
plete. The oft-conflated relationship between final and efficient causality in con-
temporary science now becomes distinguishable and clear: Efficient causality iis
ineffect the raw power that final causality needs to impose ‘itself upon events.
Lucia Santaella-Braga (1999, 502), paraphrasing Peirce, explains it this way:

  A law is something general and for that reason it is not a force. “For force is com-
  pulsion; and compulsion is hic et nunc. It is either that or it is no compulsion. Law,
  without force to carry it out, would be a court without a sheriff; and all its dicta
  would be vaporings.” Thus the relation of law, as a cause, to the action of cause, as its
  effect, is final, or ideal, causation, not efficient causation (CP 1:213).... Final causa-
  tion without efficient causation is helpless, but efficient without final is worse than
                   68          THE BIOSEMIOTIC APPROACH



                     helpless “by far, it is mere chaos; and chaos is not even so much as chaos, without
                   | final causation; it is blank nothing” (CP 1:200).

                      Semiosis, sign action, is necessarily embedded in sensory material processes,
                                       e a dynamic siide, which allows a process ; of communica-
         Ta

                   and therefor   has both
UR
~
         3         tionsto take place,andaBeer Cras logical, or mediating, side. The first of
    *         4
         Ay) these sides stands under the force of EMCI causality, and the second expresses
        ¥ Oy yp the                    0 finalcausation” * Natural and medical science’s sys-
                    controllinng agencyof
                ees
                   tematic reduction of thedomain of Thirdness ‘to
                                                                to the pure and. simple index-
                  oe
                   icality or Secondness —as it is subject to the coersive raw power of geod
                   causation   — unquestionably has won many victories for these sciences.”> But
                   uncountable numbers of plants, animals, and humans have had to pay the price
                   for the the failed visions of these sciences, that for centuries saw it as the highest
                   wisdom to treat all living beings as asemiotic devices. Lately, and in an attempt
                   to counter the inherent unworkability of this short-sightedness, science has
                  | added the information metaphor to its theoretical repertoire. But as we have
                  |seen throughout this chapter, since even the information metaphor, whenever
                  lies operationalized, is again consistently deprived of every trace of the dimen-
                   sionality of the embodied relations of Thirdness that characterize living organ-
                   isms, I believe that in the end this futile metaphor will only serve to pull the
                     ool over the eyes of ourselves and others.




                   24 ‘The term agency is being used here as a general concept (see chapter 2, note 22), for I explic-
                   itly reject the common contention of the humanistic tradition, since Brentano, that humans alone
                   are privileged with regard to the possession of intentionality and agency. At most, they may be
                   unique only insofar as they are able to use the tools of symbolic reference to be able to conceptu-
                   alize this fact (see Deacon 1997).
                   25 It is necessary here to specify that a law, a natural law, clearly possesses relations of Thirdness
                   in terms of Peirce’s categories, but that Peirce was an implacable critic of modern science’s way of
                   viewing natural laws as purely mechanical laws whose essence is to be absolutely unbreakable, or
                   a “grand principle of causation which is generally held to be the most certain of all truths” (CP
                   6:68). Santaella-Braga elaborates on this: “In clear opposition to this deterministic notion of cau-
                   sation based on a conception of law as absolute, Peirce conceived of law as a living power founded
                   on apeculiar conception of habit giving room for chance, growth, and evolution” (Santaella--Braga
                   1999, 505). In Peirce’s thought, natural laws belong to the cAECEONY of Thirdness, but it is precisely
                   this dimension of natural law that was cut from modern science’s concept of a law per se.
           PART   2

THE   SEMIOTICS       OF NATURE
                      fine
                             »                      wa                              ee



                        ~                                       bev)                    dhe a
                                                         is         Lithes              art age



c
                                                                                                                                                  iePetr eel
CF, nena         fs              pil           ~~                                                                                              F saad hy            aaah
    |                                                                                                                                          ict, @ 7ite,         iat                 a
(




    ~                  a
                                                                                                     Wh       ree                          away       ra9e
                                                                             iw         cae                   eels              Pxvarin          fi       teeta                                  :
                                           n

                                                                                  5 ;                aig ormuabas
                                                                                                          he .4? Se yo jabyinUn Phe r   ae at al fel
                                                                                                                                      uml         tes                                       pe
                                                                                        (ok          aScian, ©:            oi   Ce bee
                      <<
            ——
                                                                                  Hi       ram            a         yr?         ~5         PVM        it IN, utine

                                                                          ‘                      Pa                                       ee      ita: Smtem                    Hides
                             a!            Ae




                                                                    ae                                         | 7 tame                               6          .ccenuhe Lys
                                                !

                                                                              =                  .                                   ie               °   UPesve           wh

                                                                                           ‘ol                        ke
        %
                                                                                                               —           of



                                                                )                                                                                         yi
                                      ~

>                                              ‘i




                                 “~
                                       =




                                                                                                                                          as                 8



                                                                                                                    Ae se otallo =                               els ae
                                                                                                                          s
                                                                                                                      er ine.
                                                                                                                                 i                                 Sex ne
                                                                             i Ba          ea             “Te
                                                                                                                    soni Sys Sea IN
                                                                                                                x          we Pinel


                                                                                           1° se bel ioe ot                                           ae

                                                                                        is dalymeni baer:
                                                                                              conte
                                                                                  otmart      5 Bit tay —




                         1a)          Gemma’              a4,         a
