4
                             Code-Duality



                                  Weismannism

In the 1890s, the German naturalist August Weismann famously showed that
somatic cells and germ cells lead totally separate lives in the organism. A cell
line consists of a clone of cells that can be traced directly back to a single ances-
tor cell, and Weismann argued that the separation between the cell lines that
will become sex cells and those that will differentiate into all of the other cells of
the body takes place early in embryogenesis. This finding was significant, for it
seemed to imply that properties acquired by the organism during the course of
its own life cannot in any way affect the sex cells, and thus, the offspring. In other
words, acquired properties are not heritable —and in showing this, Weismann
hoped he had safely refuted the mechanism for evolution proposed nearly a cen-
tury earlier by the French biologist Jean Baptiste Lamarck (1809) — which is
discussed in some detail in Chapter 6.
   Yet as we shall see, Weismann’s new doctrine has turned out to be far from as cer-
tain as it was for a long time thought to be. For by and large, it is difficult to under-
stand the great and enduring significance ascribed to Weismannism if one does not
also reflect upon the ideological and religious aspects of the scientific controversy
between Lamarckism and Darwinism that this doctrine, more than anything else,
would put an end to. That the cruel and purposeless process of natural selection
should be the real cause behind the wonderful arrangement of life forms in ani-
mate nature — and thus also the explanation for our own human nature — was not
a message that most people liked to believe. Many, therefore, took refuge in various
versions of neo-Lamarckism, doctrines that not only implied the possibility that
traits that one had cultivated in one’s own life could be inherited by one’s children,
but also, and more importantly, implied the belief that there was in nature an inher-
ent striving for perfection — a marche de la nature in Lamarck’s terms.
  It should be noted here that at the end of the nineteenth century, Darwinism
was nothing like the uncontested theory in biology that it is today —and
there was indeed no really compelling biological evidence for its truth (Ruse
1979. Religious forces in the United States, in particular, were capable of suc-
cessfully fighting Darwinism for a considerable portion of the early twentieth
 We          THE   SEMIOTICS     OF NATURE




 century — and, especiallyinpaleontology, the eventual conversion to Darwinism
 became a long, drawn-out affair. Similarly, the animosity against religion was a
 frequent component in Darwinian rhetoric and Weismann himself was a dedi-
 cated materialist with an aversion to the spiritualist and vitalist overtones pres-
 ent in much neo-Lamarckian theorizing of  the time (Depew and Weber 1995).
    Dusty as these conflicts may seem today, there is no doubt that fires are still
_ smoldering within their ashes. For to the modern mind, Darwinism stands for
| rationality, materialism, and clear separation of science from ideology or reli-
 gion  — whereas Lamarckism brings associations of irrationalism and religious
 interference in scientific matters. Thus, still today, critical reconsiderations of
 Darwinism automatically call forth a suspicion that it is, in fact, not just the specific
 postulates of Darwinism, but scientific rationality as such, that is being rejected.
 The old conflicts between science and the Church are not so easily forgotten.
    Here, however, we must nevertheless venture to have a closer look at this
 whole complex of ideas. For we are going to argue that Weismann’s doctrine is
 based on a specific semiotic trick that is characteristic of living systems in gen-
 eral—a trick which Weismann himself could not have uncovered, because it
 presupposes a knowledge about the molecular semiotic dynamics of life pro-
 cesses that had not yet been discovered in his time. And yet, while the inner
 core of Weismannism will be in a certain sense confirmed by this reformulated
 understanding, it is one which in no way supports the aggressive transmission-
 genetic’ reduction of evolutionary biology that Weismannism otherwise seems
 to justify. On the contrary, it appears that the Weismann doctrine depends on
 a duality between analogue and digital representations that opens the door to a
’ sophisticated interaction between the domains of the genetic and the somatic.


                                   Life as a Dead End
 In textbook versions of Weismann’s doctrine, the reader usually is shown a figure
 with a sequence of sex cells connected by arrows from left to right. From each
 sex cell, a diagonal arrow branches off to point to a picture of an adult organism.


 1    Genetics, properly speaking, comprises both a transmission aspect and an expression aspect.
 The transmission aspect is concerned with the transmission of genes from generation to gener-
 ation, whereas the expression aspect deals with the question of how genes actually do produce
 the traits ascribed to them. For most of its history, however, the science of genetics has restricted
 itself to the first of these two aspects, the transmission phenomena, while more or less leaving the
 expression problem for the future. It is one thing, for instance, to claim that the taboo against
 incest is genetically anchored, quite another to explain how a gene might manage to cause such
 an effect. See more on this in Chapter 5, especially Lenny Moss's distinction between gene-P and
 gene-D (Moss 2001). This emphasis on the transmission aspects, of course, has made the reduc-
 tionist strategy so much easier to perpetuate.
                                                              CODE-DUALITY          73




Figure 4.1 Weismann’s doctrine.
                             The filled circles represent sex cells (see text).


This last icon is normally depicted as a dead end with no further connections
to its future sex cells or the progeny derived from these sex cells, as shown in
Figure 4. 1. The adult lions in Figure 4.1 do of course contribute their sex cells
to their offspring, but since, according to Weismann’s doctrine, the sex cells are
unaffected by the actual life of the lions themeselves, this contribution plays no
autonomous role in the scheme and should be left out. This figure is well suited
to illustrate why Weismann’s doctrine blocks the way for the Lamarckian belief
in the inheritance of acquired properties.
   But if the arrows are meant to symbolize straightforward causal connections,
then the figure is less satisfactory. Parents certainly influence the life and sur-
vival chances of their offspring in many other ways than through delivering their
sex cells. Many species exhibit prolonged periods of parental care — and even in
species with no distinct parental care, offspring are typically left to hatch in suit-
able places where their chances of survival are higher than they would be else-
where. Organisms, to a large extent, choose their own habitats and their own
mating partners. They select and consume resources, generate detritus, and con-
struct important components of their own environments such as nests, holes,
burrows, paths, webs, dams, and chemical environments (Lewontin 1983).
   The British biologist John Odling-Smee has suggested the term niche con-
struction for the organism’s own contribution (positive or negative) to the
establishment of suitable ecological conditions for its offspring: “Organisms,
through their metabolism, their activities, and their choices, define, create and
partly destroy their own niches. We refer to these phenomena as niche construc-
tion” (Odling-Smee 1988; Odling-Smee, Laland, and Feldman 1996, 641). That
organisms often outright destroy their own living conditions at a locality is well
known —as, for example, can be seen by the many documented instances of eco-
logical succession wherein one species typically changes the ecology of its local
     74           THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




     environment such that a rival species can then flourish there and, in flourishing,
     wipes out the original species.
          The Darwinian consensus has long been that we can, by and large, neglect
| these kinds of influences, because such activities are seen as genetically deter-
\\ mined. According to this understanding, the genotype determines not only a
   morphological phenotype, but also a behavioral phenotype. Thus, in a statis-
 “tical analysis, the sex cell and its genome can represent the individual and, for
   all intents and purposes, its characteristic activity. It is, of course, admitted that
     the determinism is not complete, and thus the phenotypic variety that may be
     observed in one and the same genotype (or gene pool, if the analysis concerns
     variations inside a population) under different environmental conditions is then
     referred to with (and supposedly explained by) concepts such as reaction norm
    _ or phenotypic plasticity. However, since natural selection plays out over a huge
    alae of generations and among many individual organisms, it is routinely
    ' assumed that the effect of this type of variation will ultimately be averaged out,
 so that one may safely bypass niche construction effects when accounting for
“the mechanisms driving evolution.
| Odling-Smee (2001, 118), not surprisingly, considers this an explaining away
     of the problem:

          To us the idea that niche construction can be dismissed because it is the product of
          natural selection makes no more sense than the counterproposal that natural selec-
          tion can be disregarded because it is a product of niche construction. From the
          beginning of life, all organisms have, in part, modified their selective environments,
          and their ability to do so is, in part, a consequence of their naturally selected genes.
          Niche construction and natural selection are two processes, operating in parallel,
      \ but also interacting.

~       The intricate interplay between natural selection and niche construction may
     be nicely illustrated by the survival strategy that has evolved in one of Darwin’s
     finches, Cactospiza pallida, from the Galapagos Islands. This finch has con-
     structed a niche identical to the niche that elsewhere in the world is occupied by
     woodpeckers. But instead of using  itsbeak directly to drill a hole inthe wood,
     C. pallida has developed a technique of using a cactus spine held in its beak to
     dig the insect out. In this case, Odling-Smee explains, it was not first the anat-
    _ omy of the bird that was formed by natural selection to solve a given task — but
      rather, this finch, like so many other species, utilized a much more general and
      flexible adaptation: the capacity for learning. The ability of the finch to use a
      cactus spine is not guaranteed by the1¢presence ofsome felevant gene (the.gene
     “for thorn digging?) — and yet it develops quite reliably as aconsequence of the
      general ability of the
                          thebird
                              | to profitfrom its experiences interacting
                                                                   in          with its
      milieu (Odling- Smee 2001).                                               —
                                                            CODE-DUALITY            75


  In the context of this book, it would be tempting to say that the bird makes
use of its own semiotic competence to create an interpretant (a habit) upon see-
ing a cactus spine in the relevant situation. And, as Odling-Smee remarks, this
creation of a new way of living (or niche) in itself implies that natural selection is
now driven to reinforce the selection pressure on the bird’s ability to learn.
   In the traditional scheme, then, evolutionary processes may in principle be
described by just two equations. The first describes the change of organisms (O)
as a function of organism and environment (E): d(O)/dT = f (O, E), and the
second describes the change in the environment as an autonomous process: dE/
dT =gE). Already in his influential 1983 paper, Richard Lewontin showed that
if one was to acknowledge the fact that organisms themselves may often influ-
ence their niches, this scheme would have to be changed to a set of coupled dif-
ferential equations reflecting the reality of the interaction between organisms
and environment — and that, in fact, each of them is a function of the other:
dO/dT = f(O, E) and dE/dT = g(O, E). While the process in the first of these
scenarios figuratively might be depicted as species that climb mountains, then,
in the niche-construction scenario, species would jump trampolines in the sense
that in this situation there are no fixed equilibrium points (Lewontin 1983),
   We shall return to the difficulties of upholding an efficient Weismann bar-
rier, in the sense of a noninterventionist view of individuals in the evolution-
ary game of natural selection. But before we pursue this problem any further, it
is necessary to take a closer look at a trend that I will call the genocentric turn in
biology. This is the tendency of biologists to shift the emphasis of their analyses
and investigations from the level of the organism to the level of the gene — see-
ing genes, rather than organisms, as the operational level for selection.


                             Gene Selectionism

With Crick’s articulation of the Central Dogma (see Figure 3.4), Weis-
mannism obtained asort ofmolecular confirmation. For since proteins may,
roughly speaking, be identified with the machinery of the body —and are as
such directly responsible for its activity and behavior — the implication of the
Central Dogma is that the body machinery cannot feed back into the genome.
The body thereby ended as a strange blind alley in evolutionary theory land
scape. It is little surprise that a theory that sees organisms as causal dead ends i
the evolutionary game would sooner or later give birth to the idea that organ
isms, rightly considered, are just instruments for the strategic interests of genes,
It was the Oxford biologist Richard Dawkins who, back in 1976, disseminated
this idea in his well-written book The Selfish Gene. And this was an idea that me
with considerable sympathy both inside and (particularly) outside of biology.
 76          THE SEMIOTICS       OF NATURE




  Figure 4.2 Molecular Weismannism. G = germ cells, S = somatic cells.


| According to this idea, often called gene selectionism, the organisms that classi-
  cal Darwinism focused on as the substrate for natural selection should be seen
  rather as kinds of “survival machines” or “vehicles” that are merely used by the
 genes in their competition for a ticket to the next generation.
     According to this scenario, genes that have instructed their organisms well
  increase their chances of becoming multiplied via their offspring. Thus, while
  the organisms themselves are short-lived, their genes will continue to survive
SS



  as copies or replicas in (statistically speaking) half of the offspring. Genes in
  Dawkins’s terminology thus become replicators: “What was to be the fate of the
  ancient replicators? ... Now they swarm in huge colonies, safe inside gigantic
  lumbering robots, sealed off from the outside world, communicating with it by
  remote control. They are in you and me; they created us, body and mind; and
  their preservation is the ultimate rationale for our existence. Now they go by the
  name of genes, and we are their survival machines” (Dawkins 1976, 21).
     But something is jarring here, isn’t it? Perhaps it’s an over-smart semiotic loop:
  “They created us”? After all, on the face of it, it is we who created the gene. This is
  not a joke, for it highlights the essential trouble with Dawkins’s concept of the
 gene —i.e., its misleading ambiguity as to what kind of a thing the gene really is.
 For in fact, it was the Danish botanist Wilhelm Johannsen who, in 1909, created
  the terms gene, genotype, and phenotype. But Johannsen’s gene was very different
  from the modern idea of genes, since Johannsen certainly did not imagine that
  the gene existed as a material thing.” For him, the gene was simply a tool for cal-
  culations (similar to the measure of IQ that had been introduced at about the
  same time by the French psychologist Alfred Binet). However, as is well known,
  the concept of the gene was soon taken over by fruit-fly geneticists who did not
  have Johannsen’s reservations about a straightforward material interpretation.
  The famous Drosophila Group, led by Thomas Hunt Morgan, came to see the

  2 Johannsen actually compared the concept of the gene as a material structure that resides within
  the cells with the naive belief — of the peasants of his own time — that a team of horses was hid-
  den inside the locomotive.
                                                                 CODE-DUALITY              We.



genes as “pearls on astring” (Morgan et al. 1915) — and after Watson and Crick’s
discovery of the DNA’s double-helix structure in 1953, we finally got the mod-
ern biochemical concept of the gene. It is this biochemical concept of the gene
that is implied when we are told that the human genome contains some twenty-
five thousand genes.”
   But when Dawkins, writing about genes, claims that “they created us,” a closer
inspection reveals that this they does not at all refer to the biochemical genes but
to a much less well-defined entity called an evolutionary gene. The evolutionary
                                                                                                 Q
gene refers to any short piece of DNA on a chromosome that segregates and
recombines with appreciable frequency. Such pieces must be reasonably short,
since it is essential for Dawkins’s hypothesis that the gene itse/f is a replicator,
meaning that it can multiply through replication. And this again presupposes
that this gee is not often broken up; and the longer a gene is, the higher is the
risk that it may be broken up by the processes of genetic recombination (e.g., by
the crossing-over effect of meiotic division, the process whereby new germ cells
are formed.)
   Thus, one strange thing about Dawkins’s gene concept is that nothing guar-
antees that the gene itself need be a functional unit. Sterelny and Griffiths (1999,
79) have put it this way: “If genes are just arbitrary DNA sequences, then most
of them will have no more systematic relation to the phenotype than an arbi-
trary string of letters has to the meaning of a book.” We shall not pursue the
implications of this observation any further here, but content ourselves by not-
ing that a clear understanding of what a gene in the above sense really is recedes
even further when the question is studied in more detail (Neumann-Held 1998).
So much more odd, then, is the claim that these ambiguous and mysteriously
intentional entities should have “created us body and mind.”
   What we will note here, however, and what is especially problematic to a
Dawkinsian understanding, is the well-known chemical fact that DNA mol-
ecules are essentially passive under normal physiological conditions. As I have
argued elsewhere (Hoffmeyer 1997a), it is the very inertness of the molecule
under normal conditions that makes DNA so adequate as a memory carrier.
One cannot well store memory in a substrate that also takes an active part in the
everyday business of the cell.
   But DNA molecules, as Evelyn Fox Keller reminds us (Keller 1995) do noth-
ing and remain inert until the arrival of a varied and highly specific set of pro-
teins that (as we shall see in Chapter 5) have the manifold tasks of opening up


3 Ihad better be careful here. A few years ago, the estimated number ofgenes in the human spe-
cies was something like 80,000. After the publication of the map of the human genome in 2001,
there were reported to be only 30,000-40,000 genes. And the latest estimate I saw had only
20,000-25,000 genes (Nature October 21, 2004).
78          THE SEMIOTICS OF NATURE



the double helix, copying the signifying strand onto mRNA at a chosen site,
modifying this mRNA       in a diversity of ways, transporting the mRNA out of the
nucleus to the “protein factories” (endoplasmatic reticulum) in the cytoplasm,
and much, much more.
     In eukaryotes, the passive DNA is protected by specific proteins inside
the cell nucleus, where it is continuously controlled and repaired when it has
become damaged. In short, the active components of the cell are the proteins
that work together in subcellular complexes or membranes — and, as we will see
in Chapter 5, these complexes are the real “doers” in cellular life that constitute
the agency of the cell. To ascribe such agency to DNA is highly contraindicated
from the chemical point of view.


                                   Digitalism
The widespread tendency to see DNA as the main actor in the unfolding life
process is probably due to the fact that the genetic code, as carried in the DNA
molecules, is a digital code. And, in fact, Western ‘culture is profuse with dig-
italism —by which I mean an exaggerated trustin tl         erformative power of
digital codes (Hoffmeyer 2002a). Let me take a moment here to explain what
I mean.
     The word digital comes from the Latin word{for finger, digitus, and a digi-
tal code isquite generally a code
                             cod based on symbols thar, like the fingers, are dis-
continuous — or instance, the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or the letters of any writing
system ‘oralphabet. The lengthy strings of zeroes and ones that make up the
algorithms in binary computation language have recently come to stand as the
quintessence of digitality, but the prior invention of the book was already based
on a digital code (of letters) — so the modern distinction between digital elec-
tronic media and old-fashioned books is dangerously misleading when it comes
to a clear understanding of codes.
   The alternative to a digital code is an analog code, andthis kind of code is
based an   theprincipleofanalomyiy anol eoechfor instance, the pointers
circle the watch dial in a kind of analogy of the (perceived) rotation of the sun
around the Earth. In the same way, theheight    of the>
                                                      mercury column in a ther-
mometer
      eter can be said tc
                       to analogously re
                                      reflect the magnitude of the actual temper-
ature, One might also call a glove an analog coding of a hand, and in a certain
sense one might even see the wings of the bird as an analogue codification of the
aerodynamic properties of air currents.
     Note, however, that the coding principle in digital codes is necessarily arbi-
trary, telative to the content. That the word horse in English refers to a big graz-
ing mammal with a certain kind of mane cannot be recovered from the form of
                                                                   CODE-DUALITY               79


the letters but must be known through another process, as when speaking to
a Frenchman, that same animal in French has the equally arbitary designation
cheval. Digital codes are necessarily based on symbolic signs (in the Peircean
sign trichotomy), whereas analog codes are based on icons and/or indices (as
discussed in Chapter 8). _                                                        aa
   Since the genetic code is based on a sequence of discrete signs that are grouped
together in sequences of triplets (e.g., the trinucleotide sequence UUU that is
translated to the amino acid phenylalanine), and whose relation to the amino
acids they are coding for is mediated through a complex historically estab-
lished interplay between protein and RNA molecules (see further discussion in
Chapter 5), the genetic code is a clear case of digital coding.
   Let’s return to my earlier point. In Western culture we are accustomed to
think of digital codes as superior to analog codes. He who masters numbers
and letters (or computers!) clearly has a higher status than he who relies on the
less formalized, analog ways of understanding reality. That science accords high
authority to digital coding schemes may of course be traced back to the Galilean
idea (now so widely adopted) that the language of God, or now reality, is math-
ematics. But it is hard to escape the feeling that this privileging of the digital }
representation also somehow reflects the separation between plan and execu-
tion that has been such an important principle behind the success of the indus-|
trial society.
   Since the executionof work in industrial production is supposed to follow
deterministically from the prescribed. suEinythere is left little or no space for
interpretation at the level of execution. “In traditional industrial production, all
creativity was
            delegated  to the planners, and workers were not supposed to add
anything innovative to the process. The element of creativity was not part of
work on the floor.
  If we take this model and project it upon the theory of evolution, a digital;
ist reading of genetic expression follows naturally. For just as the overwhelmin
productivity of industrial society was obtained through a separation of plan-
ning from execution in a master-servant relation, evolutionary theorists ha
argued that evolutionary creativity should be explained by a separation of th
genetic master plan (the DNA) from the mundane operations of the cyto
plasm — with the cytoplasmic processes themselves, of course, obeying the dic
tums of the genome.
  Seen in this way, digitalism may be thought of as yet another example of the
well-known tendency of science to transform the dominating structures of social
reality into natural reality. But this account makes digitalism as a historical bias


4 Planningitself, of course, may contain elements of analog coding such as diagrams or drawings,
but these are generally superstructures based on numerical or otherwise abstract codifications.
 80         THE SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE



 that belongs to a particular historical period, i.e., the epoch of industrial soci-
 ety — and one might perhaps expect that it would gradually loose its hold over
 the imagination of researchers as this form of production loses its dominant sta-
 tus in society.
    In fact, the strict separation between planning and execution is scarcely typ-
 ical anymore for production processes in the advanced sectors of almost any
 modern economy. On the contrary, it is semiotic competence that is now increas-
 ingly in demand. Thus it ought to amuse sociologists of science that digitalism
 now seems increasingly challenged in science by models of embodiment —i.e.,
 models where the bodily anchoring of cognitive or biological functionality are
 seen as essential to that functionality (Damasio 1994: van Gelder and Port 1995;
 Deacon 1997; Etxeberria 1998; Rocha 1998; Lakoff and Johnson 1999).
    The development of clever computers and robots has undoubtedly been facil-
 itating this change of perspective (Hendriks-Jansen 1996; Clark 1997; Ziemke
 and Sharkey 2001; Sharkey and Ziemke 20012, 2001b). The understanding that
 cognitive and biological processes cannot really be comprehended in isolation
 from their character as somatic processes reflects a growing awareness (in the
                                                        ——_—_———

  computer age) of the fact that digital pre-specifications are essentially dependent
  ont he agency   of autonomous structures and mechanisms acting in space and
  time. That such relations are best grasped from within a semiotic frame of refer-
  ence seems obvious to this author (Hoffmeyer 2002a), and the rejection of the-
  oretical positions that ignore the decisive significance of our bédilyexistence for
———__

  cognitive function has been, of course, a central theme in the biosemiotic tradi-
 tion (Hoffmeyer 1996b; Brier 2000; Kull 2000; Danesi 2001; Emmeche 2001;
 Favareau 2001).


                                 Code-Duality
 In 1991, Claus Emmeche and I suggested that life at the most fundamental level
 may be characterized by a dynamic trait that we called code-duality —i.e., a
 recursive and unending exchange of messages between analog and digital cod-
 ing surfaces (Hoftmeyer and Emmeche 1991; 2005).
    As analog codifications, organisms recognize and interact with each other in
 ecological space, whereas as digital codifications (genomes), they are passively
 carried forward in time from generation to generation (in sexually reproducing
 species, after recombination via meiosis and fertilization). Seen from this per-
 spective, life must be understood as semiotic survival — survival via a fundamen-
 tal code-duality.
    Our idea of code-duality was much inspired by Gregory Bateson’s grandiose
 attempt in the book Mind and Nature to draw a connection between thought
                                                                  CODE-DUALITY                  81



and evolution as deeply related processes (Bateson 1979). We were also inspired
by the American biophysicist Howard Pattee’s suggestion that living systems
must necessarily operate through the interactions between two complementary
modes —a      time-independent or symbolic (linguistic) mode and a time-depen-
dent dynamic mode (Pattee 1972; 1997). I shall return to a discussion of Pattee’s
idea of an epistemic cut shortly, but preliminary to that, let us here consider the
original presentation of the idea of code-duality.
   The idea was introduced in the context of a discussion regarding what kind
of status one should ascribe to life. In answering this question, we took as our
point of departure the Batesonian understanding of life as systems possessing
the ability to process information in the sense of “differences that make a differ-
ence.” The following passage is a slightly modified version of the original presen-
tation in Hoffmeyer and Emmeche (1991):
    Who is the subject to whom the differences worked on by such a system should make a
    difference? If one admits at all that living systems are information-processing enti-
    ties, then the only possible answer to this question is this: The system itself is the
    subject. Therefore a living system must exist    for itself— and in this sense it is more
    than an imaginary invention of ours. For a system to be living, it must create itself,
    i.e., it must contain the distinctions necessary for its own identification as a system.
    Self-reference is the fundament on which life evolves, it is its most basal require-
    ment. (Tellingly, this fact does not pertain to nonliving systems; there is no reason
    for the hydrological cycle to know itself. Thus, rivers run downstream due to grav-
    ity, water evaporates due to the solar heat, nowhere does the system depend on self-
    recognition).Another way to express this whole matter is to say that differences are
    not intelligible in the absence of a purpose. If nothing matters, matter is everything.

    But what is the basis of this self-reference that is at the basis of life? We shall suggest!
    here that the central feature of living systems allowing for self-reference — and thus |
    the ability to select and respond to differences in their surroundings — is code-dual- |
    ity, i.e, the ability of asystem to represent itselfintwo different codes, one digital |
    and one analog.’ (Symbolically, this code-duality may be represented through the
    relation between the chicken and the egg.)

    Thus, self-reference clearly depends on some kind of re-description. The system
    must somehow be able to construct a description ofitselfinorder to perpetuate
    itself (Pattee 1972; 1977). This description furthermore must stay inactive in — or at
    least protected from — the life processes ofthe system, lest the description should
    change, and thereby ultimately die with the system. In other words, the function of
    this description is to assure the identity of the system through time; it is the mem-



5   Two decades ago, I suggested a less fully developed version of the idea of code-duality
(Hoffmeyer 1987).
82          THE SEMIOTICS      OF NATURE



     ory of the system. In all known living systems, this description appears in the digital
     code of DNA (or RNA) that is eventually distributed to the germ cells.
     J



  We suggest that it is by no means accidental that the code for memory in liv-
  ing systems is of a digital type. For what must be specified through the memo-
   rized description is not the specific material details of the presently living system,
  but only their structural relations in space and time.® Ifsuch abstract specifications
  could be expressed through an analog code, only very simple systems would be pos-
  sible and those would probably not survive. For a parallel, if human communica-
  tion and memory depended solely on analog codes (¢.g., exclusively on the ability
   to mime) — if, in other words, we did not posses the digital code of language — our
 cultural memory would be as short as that of chimpanzees, and our social structure
  would be accordingly as simple.

   And in a complementary fashion, in order for the system to work the memorized
   description in the digital code must be translated to the physical reality of an actual
   living system. For this translation (the developmental process) to take place, the fer-
   tilized egg cell (in sexually reproducing species) must be able to decipher the coded
   instructions of the DNA’ as well as to follow its instructions in a given way. This
   need for the active participation of cellular structures in realizing the digital codifi-
\| cation of the DNA — into its analogue protein and organism form — shows us that
 _\asort oftacit knowledge is present in the egg cell (Polanyi 1958; Pattee 1977). And
   the existence of this tacit knowledge inherent within the cellular organization must
     be presupposed by, rather than materially built into, the DNA description. Thus,
     the digital re-description alone is far from a total description of the organism.

     The realization in space and time of the structural relations specified in the digital
     code determines what kind of differences in its surroundings the system will actu-
     ally select and respond to. In Uexkiillian terms, these sepcifications determine not

6 For example, if the gene codes for a distinct enzyme, the rate of degradation of this enzyme
will determine how long the enzyme will remain active in the cell, and thus also determine the
concentration of metabolites that are available for catalytic reaction. Since the concentration
of metabolites will often have a regulatory influence on other cellular processes, the gene indi-
rectly also determines the temporal relations between these different processes (see Figure 5.5).
However, the gene cannot, for good reason, determine precisely where in the cell a given molecule
will be located at a given time. This problem may perhaps be illustrated by imagining a protein
that is the size ofafamily car. The cell would, in relation, be the size of Copenhagen (although
spherical rather than flat). And, due to the intricate internal structure of the cell, the freedom of
movement of the proteins inside the cell would hardly be any bigger than the freedom of move-
ment ofa car in the street web of Copenhagen.
7 Please notice that there is no sequence of nucleotide triplets per se — just an endless string of
bases whose “reading” determines what will be acted upon as actual triplets. The base sequence,
CAGTCAAAGAAC, might for instance be read as composed by the triplets: CAG-TCA-AAG-
AAC. But in another reading frame it might be read as C-AGT-CAA-AGA-AC. (See Chapter 5
for further details on the semiotics of the genome.)
                                                               CODE-DUALITY                 83


  just the anatomical and physiological buildup of the organism but also the kind of
                                                                                                     zs
  Umwelt the organism willlget through this realization. A new phase in the perpet-              A
  uation of the system is initiated: thephase of active life. One might say that in this
  phase — the analog phase — the message ofthe memory is expressed.

  Eventually, the system will survive long enough to pass on its own copy of the digi-—
  talized memory (or part ofit) to a new generation; this corresponds to a back-trans-
  lation of the message to the digital form. But this latter process takes on its true
  significance only when seen at the level of the population. For it is the population
  (rather than the single organism) that passes on messages about conditions oflife
  to the memory of    the collective (the gene pool). Thepopulation could in this sense
  be considered a codification that itse/f expresses amessage. This codification, how-
  ever, is necessarily analog — since it has to interact with the physical surroundings, |
  and thus must share with these surroundings the properties of physical extension
  and contiguity.

  The chain of events that sets life apart from nonlife — i.e., the unending chain of
  responses to selected differences — thus needs at least two codes: one code  for action
   behavior) and one code for memory. The first of these codes necessarily
                                                                     must be ana-
  Se                    ee eats digital (Hoffmeyer and Emmeche 1991).

  Looking back at this first presentation it must be noted that many readers,
unfortunately, felt this concept of code-duality to be confusing, and presumably
this confusion has two main sources. One has to do with the way that the term
code is used, since the term has quite different connotations in different disci-
plines (e.g., jurisprudence, genetics, computing). The other source for confu-
sion is more principled and concerns the conception of living creatures as codes.
This idea may easily switch on a warning signal that I am arguing for a kind of
universal pansemiosis. Is everythingin this world just signs, then? Am | claiming
that there is no reality beyond that of signs?
   Let me immediately answer these two questions in the negative. The claim
that the world contains nothing but signs is as reductionistic and unfruitful as
the claim (in the epistemological sense) that all the phenomena of the world can
be reduced to their quanta of matter and energy.
  Admittedly, what Peirce called brute force, or the category of Secondness (see”
Chapter 3),is an irreducible aspect of our world that cannot in a meaningful
way be thought away, as little as chance and Firstness can be neglected. And
because of this, John Deely has introduced the concept of physiosemiosis as a des-
ignation for semiotic processes taking place in inanimate nature (Deely 19903
see also Christiansen 2002; Taborsky 20014; 2001b).
   For example, the meteoric storms of the past are still visible today through the              ‘Aae     )

traces they left as craters on our moon where craters may be seen as an enmat-
tered memory about those distant times. Now, it takes an intelligent being, of
84         THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




course, to decode this connection between real-world states and events and to
interpret the cavities on the surface of the moon as meteor craters. But the pos-
sibility of such an interpretive act was nevertheless latently present in the very
mark of the indentation itself — a mark, to be sure, that nobody took an interest
in before human beings started wondering about the puzzles of the universe.
    Nature’s “forming of habits” — in other words, its tendency to develop new regu-
larities as the result of its own ongoing interactions — has been at work at all times.
Semiosis — “the action proper to signs,’ in Deely’s words (1990) —should not be
seen as an either-or phenomenon that suddenly appeared on Earth when life began.
A more sensible view is that the origin of life initiated new avenues for semiosis to
follow, avenues that implied new and unheard of kinds of freedom. Living systems
are anticipatory, in the sense that they systematically recognize and exploit (inter-
pret) important regularities (causal relations) in their surroundings, and in doing
sO, living systems gain access to the world of genuine triadic sign processes.
   One should therefore distinguish between the kinds of semiotic processes
that occur in physical, biological, and psychological systems. Semiotic freedom
is much more pronounced in the latter two than in the former. In dealing with
purely physical systems, one can in almost all cases get away with disregard-
ing the semiotic dimension, with no lack of explanatory sufficiency. But this
quickly becomes absurd if human nature is one’s concern. Biology falls some-
where between these two.
   However, the word pansemiosis carries connotations to German Natur-
philosophie and especially to Friedrich Schelling’s conception of the world as
panpsychic. And regardless of what Schelling exactly did mean by this — and, as
this is uncertain, I shall not pursue the matter here — it does seem to me inap-
propriate to confuse natural processes with human psychology. But it may not
follow that this quite legitimate rejection of the overwhelmingly anthropocen-
tric notion of panpsychism should be conflated with, and thereby also infect the
reception of the concept of pansemiosis.
     For this latter concept, explicitly, does ot extend humanness to penetrate
the universe at large — but rather sees the human being as one among infinitely
many instantiations of a universal semiosis. But since this confusion seems
inescapable, the term pansemiosis tends to block understanding more than it
advances it. The relevant answer to the accusation of pansemiosis, therefore, is
to make clear that the project ofbiosemiotics neither subscribes to nor advances
the claim that there is nothing in the world but signs.
   Likewise, the concept of code-duality implies neither a reductive pansemiosis
nor a naive anthropomorphism. Having made this clear, let us now confront the
question of what is meant by code in the expression code-duality.
   In its everyday meaning, the word code refers to the customary use of distinct
entities or actions for communicative ends, such as when we speak of a dress
                                                                  CODE-DUALITY               85


code or about different social milieus having different behavioral codes. In semi-
otics, the term has had two rather different designations. Under the influence
of Information Theory, it was used in the ‘60s and ‘7os in the sense of “a con-
text-free set of rules for the encoding, transmission, and decoding of informa-
tion” (Thibault 1998, 125). As discussed in the section on the Central Dogma,
the DNA code has been conceived as a code in this sense.                           zm
    But in attempting to apply this concept, complications abounded even in
these years. For even in the simple cases, where we limit ourselves to considering;
just the essential information transfer from a gene segment of DNA to a func-
tional protein, it has proven to be impossible to speak of a genuinely context-
free and unbreakable set of rules that in all cases will assure the correct transfer
of information. For, as we shall see in Chapter 5, the cellular (or organismic)
context exerts a number of causal consequences at several key steps in this pro-
cess, often in unpredictable ways (via RNA editing, for example, or via ambigui-
ties in the “correct” reading of those stop-codon triplets that determines the end
point for the addition of amino acids to the growing protein chain). Therefore,
when the shorthand term genetic code is now used —as it is, more often than
not — to express the idea that genes are coding for certain specific phenotypic
traits (such as missing eyes in salamanders or schizophrenia in human Seea|
we are of course much farther from a position where one could talk about a con-
text-free code in the precise sense of Information Theory.
    Yet the information-theory concept of code has been, and still is, of great
use in engineering the transfer of data (as distinct frominformation) in tele-
communication systems, and underlies much of the efforts to build “intelli-
gent machines.” Modern semiotics, however, has abolished the conception of a
code as a “simple mechanism for pairing of concept and reference.”*The focus in
recent years has been on understanding  the concept of code as a vehicle for cre-
ation of meaningful activity. Winfried Néth (2000, 216) puts it thus: “Als Kodes
erforschen Semioitiker kulturelle Zeichensysteme der verschiedensten Art, von der
Verkehrszeichen bis zur Mode, vom Morsekode tiber der Kode der Heraldik bis zu
den Kodes des Theaters. Haufig ist mit Kode nichts anderes als ein Zeichensystem
gemeint. (,,Code has been the designation under which semioticians have stud-
ied cultural phenomena of the most diverse kinds, from trafhic signs to fashion,
from the Morse code and heraldry to the theater. Code,   in this context, often
means simply ‘sign system.” — freely translated by Winfried Néth.) From this
point of view, 4 code is a semiotic resource that enables us to create and express
                   —                                                                              x
certain types of meaning but not others. Seen as a sign system, body language,


8   One exception is the die-hard tradition based on Noam Chomsky’s ideas of a generative gram-
mar (Chomsky 196s), and in particular Jerry Fodor's language ofthought (Fodor 1975) or Steven
Pinker’s mentalese (Pinker 1994).
86         THE SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE



for example, is very well-suited to express emotional content such as disgust,
joy, or ennui. It may also, when more artfully used, be narrative — as we know it
from mime. But, as I shall discuss below, it can only with much effort, if at all,
express abstract and logical connections such as nonexistence or denial.


                                Digital Codes
The term digital codes thus covers a whole set of codes, that are alike in that they
are all based on discrete sign tokens as well as an arbitrary (conventional, his-
torical, or customary) relation between the sign token and the signified. This
property endows digital codes with certain special advantages that are unique
to the phenomena we call life and culture. Of these advantages, three in partic-
ular must be emphasized (Hoffmeyer 2001a).    The first isthat messages expressed
indigital codes donot have.to_observe thelimitations offreedom imposed by nat-
ural laws. Possible as well as impossible messages may be expressed in digital
‘codes. Thus, in a novel, Meryl Streep might well have lunch with Socrates; a
mega-size cod might ravage the streets of Oslo; or the wives of pilots might
start giving birth to children having wings. Conversely, it is hard to see how any
of these impossible events should be communicated via analog codings such as
mime — or at least not without additional use of conventional signs of many
kinds, including symbolic cultural gestures and sign language, both of which are
fundamentally digital codes.
   Too, digital codes are, of course, always based in material processes and can
for that reason be destroyed: books may be burned, computers may be smashed,
or the freedom of speech might be restricted. But this kind of destructive action
does not change the reality of that content which has (at least once) been coded,
only the material carrier of the code.
     And exactly the same is the case for the digitally coded message content of
genes. This, too, has the freedom to be impossible in the sense that the fertilized
egg, by executing such coded instructions, could produce a nonviable individ-
ual. And in fact, this happens all the time (among other reasons, because of the
genetic crossing-over processes, whereby the hereditary material is recombined
in new — and not always viable — patterns).Itis this property       of digital codes
that explains the surprising evolutionary creativity of living systems, the incredi-
ble combinatorial capacity and the consequent incessant testing of the eventual
limits for possible combinations.
     The second advantage of digital codes is their time independence and consen-
sual objectivity.
     codes-       Digital
                       are-ideal-co
                                for memory.
                                       des  Only because Plato
wrote down the dialogues ofSocrates do we know them today. Had the dialogues
                                                                CODE-DUALITY              87


not been coded in written language, but instead in mimed episodes, they would
probably not have survived intact for more than a few-Wge
                                                        generations atmost.
   The key to digital codes’ objectivity isthat the codes depend ona shared con-
vention. The Canadian communication theorist Anthony Wilden (1980, 173) has
pointed to one critiacl difference between analog and digital codes (among many
others) as being that “a digital code is ‘outside’ the sender and receiver and medi-
ates their relationship; an analog code is the relationship which mediates them.”
   At first look, this definition might seem to fit poorly with the understand-
ing of the genome as a digital code, because the genome is transferred through
cellular divisions (mitosis or meiosis) and therefore spatio-temporal conti-
nuity is maintained between sender (the parent organisms) and receiver (the
zygote, or fertilized egg). But the topological detail that chromosomes travel, so
to speak, from generation to generation inside a cell shouldn’t detract us from
seeing that it is exactly the principle of separation between germ cell and body
processes (see the discussion on Weismannism, above) that is the deeper rea-
son why Lamarckian inheritance does not work as an evolutionary principle. 3
Thanks to its secluded existence in protected isolation from the metabolic jun-
gle:of the cell —and thus due to its very passivity — the DNA code is capable
of conserving experiences (in th          nucleotide sequences) shaped by past
survival outcomes under the then prevailing ecological conditions. Such struc-
tures are in erently signs of these past relations, and this isexactly why genes are
not functional in themselves, but must be unfolded through the operation ofan
interpreting
      preting agency.
                4
   The third advantage of digital codes is that they can be used astools forabstrac-
tion — and this is why they are necessary for making meta- messages, messages
that deal with the way other messages should be understood. Gregory Bateson
(1972, 177-93) pointed out that such meta-messages may well be communicated
in the analog, and he used the example of young monkeys engaged in “play.” In
these circumstances, when the monkeys snapped at one another while creating
a simulation of a combat situation, this snap would actually signify the follow-
ing meta-message about itself: This is not a bite.
   The negative message — the absence of a bite — cannot be directly commu-
nicated in the analog, so instead it is announced as apositive message: the pres-
ence of a bite-signifying snap. The snap is an indication of something that is or
there. Bateson also commented that this is probably as far as an analogically
coded communication event can go in the direction of the abstract category of
“not.” For real abstractions to take place, digital codes and their more arbitrary
and detached conventions are needed.


9 Lamarckian inheritance                                              —loses the fertility of
                               — by conflating the analog and the digital
their interplay, which, seen semiotically, is the key to evolution.
88           THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE



   Thus, while we still do not know the full syntactic structure of the genetic
code, we know that what are called the regulatory genes, for example, function
as such meta-messages — and the regular occurrence of atavistic reappearances
such as the three-toed horse indicates that actual deletion is not the only way
to get rid of outmoded ontogenetic instructions. Active negation of what still
remains may suffice. Abstraction in this sense thus furnishes a kind of creative
plasticity —in the absence of which, the evolutionary process might perhaps
not have become as rich as it actually is.


                                    Analog Codes
“If you say to a girl ‘I love you; she is likely to pay more attention to the accom-
panying kinesics and paralinguistics than to the words themselves,’ writes
Gregory Bateson (1972, 374). He continues, “We humans become very uncom-
fortable when somebody starts to interpret our postures and gestures by trans-
lating them into words about relationship. We much prefer that our messages
on this subject remain analogic, unconscious, and involuntary.’ Analog codings
such as body language go much further back in evolution than spoken language
does and are also much more strongly anchored in human emotional constitu-
tion. Wilden (1980, 163) says,
     The analog is pregnant with meaning, whereas the digital domain of signification is,
     relatively speaking, somewhat barren. It is almost impossible to translate the rich
     semantics of the analog into any digital form for communication to another organ-
     ioe [On the other hand,|

     what the analog gains in semantics it loses in syntactics, and what the digital gains
     in syntactics, it loses in semantics. Thus, it is because the analog does not posses the
      yntax necessary to say “No” or to say something involving “not” that one can refuse
     or reject in the analog, but one cannot deny or negate.

    It must be admitted that the classification of coding strategies into digital and
analog derives at least part of its attraction from the exaggerated weight that for-
merly was ascribed to such purely formal aspects of human communication as
its grammar, its logical structure, its rationality, and so on. And more than per-
haps anybody else of his time, Gregory Bateson managed to uncover the para-
linguistic and paralogical dimensions of communication in humans as well as
in animals.'° He thereby acquired and advanced an acute understanding of the
much overlooked importance of analog codings in natural systems.


10 More recently, the related fields of Interactional and Conversation Analysis have disclosed
that an amazingly high proportion of everyday, moment-to-moment linguistic communication
                                                                  CODE-DUALITY               89

                                                                                                  ~
   As a semiotic category, however, analog coding is perhaps not quite satis- |
factory, and I shall use it here primarily as a counter-concept to digital coding. |
Specifically, I will use analog coding as a common designation for codings based
on some kind of similarity in the spatio-temporal continuity, or on internal rela-
tions such as part-to-whole, or cause-and-effect. Digital coding, in contrast, will ;
be used to designate sign systems where the relations of sign to signified are due |
to a demarcation principle of purely conventional or habitual origin.
    In Chapter 7, we will have a closer look at endosemiotic analog codings as
indexical and iconic sign processes inside the organism. On the ecosemiotic
level, we have already seen how Jakob von Uexkiill occupied himself with what I
am here calling analog codes. Uexkiill sometimes referred to these as contrapun-
tal duets and noted numerous examples in nature, such as the relation between
flies and spiders or between birds and butterflies decorated with spots as icons
for eyes. He wrote, “By opening their wings they chase away the small birds
that pursue them: These birds automatically fly away at the sight of the eyes
of other small predators that may suddenly appear” (Uexkiill 1982 (1940), 59).
Such spots are an example of analog coding in nature.
   Code-duality therefore implies that the singularis of the digital code is placed
on equal footing with the pluralis of analog codings that make up the biosemi-
osis oflife. This positioning of the single digital code as in a sense equal to the
totality of analog codings is justified by the unique properties of digital codes
that I have discussed above. Moreover, it is precisely the play between these
two types of coding that makes evolution possible, as analog and digital coding
are two equally necessary forms of referential activity. They appeared, I would
argue, as twins in the individuation process that gave rise to life’s internal logic
(see Table 2.1). For as I have written earlier,
   Had it not been for digital coding there would have been no stable access to the
   temporal world —i.e., the unidirectional continuum of pasts and futures — and
   therefore there could have been no true agency or communication. On the other
   hand, had it not been for the analog codes there could have been no true interac-
   tion with the world, no other-reference, and no preferences. To claim that only the
   digital twin is semiotic, whereas the analog twin remains in the sphere of classi-  |
   cal dynamics, is to block the only possibility for transcending the epistemic cut of |
   Howard Pattee. Code-duality and semiosis open up a dimension of our world and |
   its evolution that is left underdetermined by thermodynamics. Organismic “context
   space” expands at an accelerating rate in proportion to the increase in the semiotic |
   sophistication of species;"’ for, simply put, there are so many more different ways to


is grounded in such paralinguistic interaction. For a biosemiotic perspective on this work, see
Favareau (2002; 2007).
11 That “context space expands” in our biosphere is in accordance with the analyses given
by Stuart Kauffman (2000, 151), in the book Investigations, where he shows that the adjacant
     90          THE   SEMIOTICS      OF NATURE



          be smart than there are different ways to be simple (and this may be the reason why
          the speciation rate among mammals is five times higher than the speciation rate
          among lower vertebrates) (Hoffmeyer 20012, 128).

          The concept of code-duality thus illuminates the semiotic core at the heart of
     the evolutionary process’” and thereby also the evolving semiotic dynamic that
     leads life on Earth toward the development of life forms possessing still more
     sophisticated kinds of semiotic freedom (Hoffmeyer 1992).
          Analog and digital codes are tricky concepts, however, because a code that in
     one context is analog may in another context be digital and vice versa. Computer
     games, for example, are of course operating on digital codings and yet the image
     presented on the screen is an analog representation. And the converse is often
SF   true for hieroglyphs, where the isolated signs may (at least in some cases) be
     taken as analog codings — whereas the same signs, when interpreted as part ofa
     text, become symbols making up a digital code.’* The latter case is comparable
     with that of a painting that, when seen in isolation, might perhaps represent an
     aspect of the inner state of the painter’s mind, but which, when seen on the wall
     together with other paintings at an exhibition, becomes instead one of a series
     of discrete signs that, as an ensemble, make up a higher order message. In the ter-
     minology of Bateson, this represents a shift in logical type” in the sense that the
     painting as physical object per se and the painting as an exhibited artifact do not
     belong to the same logical type. One might perhaps even say that it is only in the
     context of the higher logical type that the picture is indeed a painting.
        Paintings, at any rate, would be a very different kind of thing if exhibitions
     did not exist. The exhibition digitizes the work of the artist and at the same time
     conserves it as a painting. Through this operation, the painting becomes simul-
     taneously freer and less engaging. It may now be recombined with other objects
     in collections, in art-history works, or even in interior design. But this increase
     in freedom is paid for by a loss of individual meaningfulness — which may be
     the reason why artists often do not like to sell their paintings.
     rs




     possible —i.c., the set of states that could possibly be realized in the next step of the ongoing mate-
     rial reconfiguration of the biosphere — exhibits exponential growth: “Our biosphere and any bio-
     sphere expands the dimensionality of its adjacent possible, on average, as rapidly as it can.”
      12 Code-duality may also be seen as the semiotic core of cultural evolution (Hoffmeyer and
     Emmeche 1991; 2005 (1991)).
     13 The analog-digital gestalt shifi may in some cases be observed in individual hieroglyphs
     that may function both as ideograms and as phonograms. A hieroglyph resembling an eye may,
     depending on the context, signify either the notions blind, awake, or weep —but it may also sig-
     nify simply the sound ir, because the name for an eye is irt (Den store danske Encyclopedi vol. 8,
     p. 438).
     14 Bateson is here referring to Bertrand Russell’s type theory (Russell and Whitehead
     1910-13).
                                                                    CODE-DUALITY                91



   Examples of such analog-digital shifts are numerous in the biological world,” >
and they are presumably always involved in the kind of phenomena we call emer-
gent. Analog codings, for example, may be digitized when brought to bear in the
processes of quorum sensing. The word quorum is taken from legal language, and
is used in connection with meetings (typically general assemblies) where there
have to be a certain number of attendants for the meeting to be legally compe-
tent to transact business. When this is the case, a quorum is said to apply.
   In biology, guorum sensing has become the designation for a kind of com-
municative activity in bacteria where the density of bacteria present is a causal
factor. In short, quorum sensing is due to a process where each single bacte-
rium excretes a certain chemical compound such that the concentration of this
compound in the medium will reflect the number of bacteria per unit of vol-
ume. Quorum sensing occurs if the compound, after having reached a thresh-
old concentration, binds to a regulatory protein in the cell and thereby initiates
the transcription of specific genes. An interesting example of quorum sensing
occurs in a species of squid, Euprymna scolopes, which hunts small fish by night
on the coral reefs off the coast of Hawaii. Moonlight causes the squid to cast a
shadow that makes it easy catch for predators. As a defense strategy, E. scolopes                    Coot
has evolved a sophisticated way of emitting light that effectively hides its own
shadow. Counter-illumination is the name given to this kind of camouflage, and
it is only made possible by the squid’s symbiotic relationship with luminous bac-
teria called Vibrio fischeri that live in the mantel cavity of the squid. Living off of
food provided by the digestive system of the squid, the bacteria emit light of the
exact same intensity and color as the light reaching the squid from the moon,
and this prevents predators from seeing the squid from below (McFall-Ngai and
Ruby 1998).
   In the morning, the squids bury themselves in the sand and excrete 90-95
percent of the bacteria, which brings their density well below the threshold
level. Apparently the squid is in full control of bacterial growth rate by adjust-
ing the supply of oxygen, and at sunset the population of bacteria reaches the
threshold level once again.”®
    Interestingly enough, the same compound — N-acyl-homoserine lactone
(with a variable acyl group) — seems to be used as a signal in many different
manifestations of quorum sensing. In                fischeri, high concentrations of this

15 Stjernfelt (1992) has observed that the linguistic concept of categorial perception perhaps
might be extended so as to cover transformations from iconic to symbolic representations quite
generally, and this idea concords with the significance I have ascribed here to the analog-digi-
tal shift. An alarmone, as will be discussed in connection with endosemiotics in Chapter 7, is yet
another example of such a shift.
16 A thorough treatment of the biosemiotics behind this phenomenon has been given by Luis
Bruni (2002; 2003).
  92          THE   SEMIOTICS     OF NATURE




  compound” cause an induction of what is called the lux gene, and thereby a
  one-hundred- to one-thousand-fold increase in bioluminescence. The concen-
  tration of N-acyl-homoserin lactone, quite generally then, operates as an analog
  coded message about bacterial density —a message that can then be digitized
  to become a sort of an either-or switch by which, in this case, the squid switches
 _on and off its “false” light.
     The opposite situation, where natural digital codes are transformed to ana-
  log codes, is known for instance from the nervous system. Here, every single
  neuron makes up an either-or mechanism in the sense that, either the cell deliv-
  ers a series of action potentials or it doesn’t. In a typical nerve, however, there
  are large numbers of axons running in parallel, and the accumulated signal will
  come as a continuously varying signal reflecting the fraction of neurons that
  at each time emits an action potential. And, as noted by Favareau (2002), the
  threshold at which a neuron does or does not fire its digital (all or nothing)
  action potential, is mediated throughout by the analog presence of the ever-
  changing number and kinds of neurotransmitter molecules that are currently
  occupying the synaptic gap. Code-duality, then, seems to be as much a property
Cof neuronal transmission as it is of genetic transmission.


                                    The Epistemic Cut
  As already mentioned, one of the sources that inspired Emmeche’s and my
  work on code-duality was the American biophysicist Howard Pattee’s theory
  that life is characterized by its operating simultaneously in two complemen-
  tary modes, a dynamic mode and a linguistic mode. In this connection, Pattee
  refers explicitly to Niels Bohr’s application of the principle of complementar-
  ity to the phenomenon of life (Pattee 1977). In later papers, Pattee talks about
  a semiotic mode rather than a linguistic mode, but in principle the idea is the
  same. In 1997, Pattee discussed his ideas by quoting John von Neumann (1955):
  “We must always divide the world into two parts, the one being the observed
  system, the other the observer... . That this boundary can be pushed arbi-
  trarily deeply into the interior of the body of the actual observer is the content
  of the principle of the psycho-physical parallelism — but this does not change
  the fact that in each method of description the boundary must be put some-
  where, if the method is not to proceed vacuously.” Pattee then explicates his
  idea as follows:
  C Von Neumann defines a physical system, S, whose detailed behavior must fol-
       low from the fundamental laws of physics, since these laws describe all possible


  17    The acyl-group in this case is a 3-oxohexanoyl group.
                                                             CODE-DUALITY               93


  behaviors. But if the particular behavior of S is to be calculated, we must measure
   initial conditions of S by a measuring device, M. Therefore, the essential func-
  the
  tion of measurement is to generate a computable symbol, usually a number, corre-
  sponding to some aspect of the physical system.

  Now, the measuring device also must certainly obey the laws of physics, even in the
  process of measurement, so it is possible to correctly describe the measuring device
  by the laws of physics. One must then think of the system and measuring device
  together as just a larger physical system S = (S + M). But then to predict anything
  about S we must have a new measuring device to make new measurements of even
  more initial conditions. Obviously, this way of thinking gets us nowhere except an
  infinite regress.

  The point is that the function of measurement cannot be achieved by a fundamen-
  tal dynamical description of the measuring device, even though such a law-based
  description may be completely detailed and entirely correct. In other words, we can
  say correctly that a measuring device exists as nothing but a physical system, but to
  function as a measuring device, it requires an observer's simplified description that
  is not derivable from the physical description. The observer must in effect choose
  what aspects of the physical system to ignore and invent those aspects that must be
  heeded. This selection process is a decision of the observer or organism, and can-
   not be derived from the laws (Pattee 1997, http://www.ssie.binghamton.edu/pat-
   tee/semiotic.html)                                                             ~

   A few moments reflection as biologists shows us that not only humans but all
living creatures are fundamentally engaged in processes of measuring, and there-
fore Pattee’s epistemic cut follows automatically from the above consideration:
“We muststdefine an pies cut separating the world from the organism or

mation requires the Reearaa of the knower a the known. Semantic infor-
mation, by definition, iis about something” (ibid). Pattee is anxious to underline
that his epistemic cut is not another version of Cartesian dualism, but only a
descriptive dualism. Inthe perspect
                              perspective ‘of this book it remains, however, a big
question, as to whether or not Pattee is right in this — for central to the current |
investigation is the question: Through what processes exactly could a dynamic
functional mode possibly become a semiotic functional mode? Pattee is not very
specific when it comes to this question.
   As Bohr —and later, von Neumann        — had, Pattee has taken a far oe
courageous step forward in facing the limit paradox that necessarily arises |
when one subscribes to an ontology of natural law, ice., that conception of |
the world that Pattee formulates quite unambiguously in the first few lines
of the quote given above, when he claims that the laws of physics “describe |
all possible behaviors.”
94          THE   SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE




     To transfer Bohr’s complementarity principle of physics’* to the biological
sphere of life seems not, however, to be particularly helpful in solving the limit
paradox. For if complementarity is thought of as being ontological, then we are
right back in dualism, which Pattee explicitly condemns. But if complementar-
ity is thought of as being epistemic, then we must consider it as an assertion to
the effect that we cannot describe the semiotic dimension of the world in the
same language that we use to describe its dynamic aspects. And this, suppos-
edly, is due to the shortcomings of language or of thought as such: The semiotic
aspect of life is, so to say, just a glimmer that we cannot think ourselves apart
from because we are, in an existential sense, wrapped up in it.
     This manner of thinking is, in fact, quite widespread and is related to the
position, recommended by the philosopher Daniel Dennett, called “our taking
of the intentional stance.” Briefly stated, this view holds that we cannot under-
stand the life of other humans (or of animals) without describing those lives as
guided by, or woven into, intentionality. This does not mean that these creatures
possess intentionality as a real property— rather, the thesis states only that we
cannot understand these creatures unless we pretend that they do.
   That scientists and philosophers willingly accept such an absurd conception
of what human life is about in its deepest or most fundamental content — that,
in other words, one accepts that the feelings, experiences, aspirations, sorrows
and desires of human beings (to say nothing of the experiential world of other
forms of animal life) is all just chimerical hot air — bears witness, in my mind,
to how deeply anchored the ontology of natural law is in the self-understand-
ing of the scientific mind. I hope the reader will excuse me for the comparison,
but it really does remind me of the evermore complex (and increasingly less
likely) sets of epicycles that Ptolemaic astronomers had to introduce into their
explanations of the planetary orbits in order to uphold the belief in the geocen-
tric system. Rather than seeking shelter in such powerless conceptions about
what, for all of us without exception, is the deepest and most real content of our
lives — ie., the fact that such life is being experienced — the author shall suggest
that it is instead the ingrained belief in the exclusive ontology of natural law that
ought to be given up.
   This does not mean that we disregard the reality of those laws, but that we
refrain from reifying them as ultimate explanations and first principles. And it
means that we, as Peirce recommended, should understand the natural laws that
we see existing as phenomena that are themselves in need of explanation.


18 The complementarity principle of quantum theory refers to effects such as the wave-parti-
cle duality, in which different measurements made on a system reveal it to have either particle-
like or wave-like properties. In Bohr’s understanding, complementarity reflected the weaknesses
of human language and not any deeper property of reality.
                                                          CODE-DUALITY           95



  Much in the same way that Einstein recontextualized the “universal” laws of
Newton by showing them to be the local products of more general principles,
Peirce saw natural laws as the secondary products of a more general tendency in
the universe to generate regularities (or habits as he often called them). Rather
than seeing the universe as characterized by lawfulness, its primary state, accord-
ing to Peirce, is indeterminacy and chance. And thus the formation of regular-
ities, such as for instance natural laws, must be explained by other means — for
natural law is thus a product of evolution, and not its source.
   The tendency of nature to generate regularities — or, as it is more commonly
described today, to self-organize — may be understood as the very first expo-
sition of the principle that will develop through cosmic evolution to become
semiosis, the ability of living systems on planet Earth (and possibly many other
places in the universe) to form interpretants (or self-maintaining and self-per-
petuating habits, if you like).
   This change of basic viewpoint will allow us to reach a solution to Pattee’s
paradox of the epistemic cut, because now we can assume that not only the
symbolic functional modes (related to DNA function), but also the dynamic
functional modes (related to the functional cytoplasm) are both, in the end,
semiotic functional modes. For the difference between the two modes is, at bot-
tom, a difference in the kind of semiotic dynamics involved. Thus, the sign pro-
cesses characteristic of the dynamic functional mode — i.e., the protein world,
so to say — are indexical and iconic (i.e., analog-coded) rather than symbolic or
digital as are the sign processes connected to DNA function. The analog-coded
signs correspond to the jumble of topologically organized indexical and iconic
sign processes in the cells that are responsible for the interpretation of the dig-
ital genetic instructions as well as for the execution of them. Or, as we wrote
above, “To claim that only the digital twin is semiotic whereas the analog twin       \
remains in the sphere of classical dynamics is to block the only possibility for      ||
transcending the epistemic cut.”                                           —————


                      Replicators and Interactors
Pattee’s distinction between the dynamic and the symbolic (or semiotic)
domains forms a strange and certainly unintended parallel to Richard Dawkins's
distinction between vehicles and replicators, discussed above. As we saw, gene
vehicles is, in Dawkins’s terminology, a designation for organisms and thus for
metabolically driven activities including movements and growth, or in short,
the dynamic domain. Replicators, however, are the genes themselves (in what-
ever way such genes may be defined in Dawkins’s context), and these, of course,
correspond to the symbolic domain in Pattee’s view. But there is an enormous
96         THE SEMIOTICS OF NATURE



difference between the two theories, for the whole point of Dawkins’ construc-
tion is that replicators are the real agents at the scene, whereas the contribution
from organisms (vehicles) are just that of passively assisting in the processes of
copying and spreading as many replicators as possible. Yet for Pattee, for the
symbolic domain to make any sense at all, the measuring processes (i.e, the
processes whereby organisms are sensing and interpreting their environments)
are presupposed; to imagine the relation between the symbolic and dynamic
domains as a master-slave relationship makes no sense. But in Dawkins’s way of
thinking replicators become masters while the organisms/vehicles are obedient
slaves whose untiring efforts only serve to deliver to the replicators the much
sought-after prize of multiplication.
   Metaphorically speaking, one might say that where Pattee thinks that the
organisms of this world use words in order to get along and to produce more
organisms, Dawkins thinks that the words use organisms to produce more
words, and that the organisms are just tools for this self-promoting process.
Seen from the perspective of both Pattee and biosemiotics, Dawkins commits a
logical error in that he treats symbols as if they were things (replicators) — and,
worse yet, not merely things but zhings with purpose, for the very term replica-
tor implies a sort of agency, but an agency that one can hardly imagine to be a
property of aDNA molecule (Deacon 2002, 122). The gene may be legitimately
termed to be a replicative unit, but it can not, in the normal use of language, be a
replicator.’° The American philosopher David Hull (1980) attempted to clarify
this discussion by substituting the term imteractor for the term vehicle. In Hull’s
terms, replicators are units that make more units like themselves (more or less
reliably) and thus conserve and transfer information across generations via the
processes of natural selection. Interactors, on the contrary, are units that spon-
taneously interact with their surroundings in ways that may either promote or
restrict the spread of replicators. Replicators thus form lines of descendants and
have kinship relations with one another. Interactors have causal effects on their
environments in the here and now, only during the course of their own life-
times. In most versions of genetic Darwinism, organisms are interactors, whereas
genes are replicators (Depew and Weber 1995).
    For years now, this dualistic terminology has managed to penetrate and, in fact,
to dominate debates on evolutionary theory. One may then choose to put spe-
cial emphasis on the fact that replicators effect interactors by supplying them with
information that may provide them with a competitive edge relative to other inter-
actors (as in theories of gene selectionism). Or, one may instead put emphasis on
the fact that interactors influence replicators by their decisive role in determining


19 Dawkins would perhaps reject outright the notion of a symbolic domain as something really
existing. But then, how would he propose to solve the von Neumann-Pattee paradox?
                                                                          CODE-DUALITY                  97



which information winds up being, in fact, transmitted to the next generation (as
in classical selection theory). The question resolves to whether replicators or inter- |
actors should be ascribed causal priority in life’s evolution. Seen from the per-|
spective of the present book (see Chapter 3), the answer is that we are dealing|
here with two different kinds of causality, where replicators exert formal causality, |
while interactors exert efficient causality. Final causality, sensi Peirce,” makes use :
of both tools and is, in this context, connected to life’s code-dual structure.
   In short, the replicator-interactor terminology relies on an inherent reifica-
tion that serves to restrict discussions to a nearly rachitic”’ understanding of |
causality. And thus, by re-framing the evolutionary processes as the interdepen-
dent interactions between digital and analog codings (wherein the contents,
coded belong to the historical subject of the lineage, which is both the product
of, and the subject for, selection), biosemiotics de-privileges the theme of ne
competition motive that has, almost to the point of obsession, dominated the
understanding of evolution within contemporary Darwinism.”
   As an alternative to the fetishization of Darwinian competition, the semiotic
perspective makes us turn our investigation toward the processes whereby new
significative patterns are generated and exchanged. Such processes seem to hold
the key to the general evolutionary trend towards the appearance of creatures
that increasingly depend for survival on their semiotic sophistication.


                                           Organisms

Amusingly enough, it was Dawkins and his kindred souls who helped pay-
ing the way for a more biosemiotic understanding of life processes. For in the
attempt to procure the necessary /ebensraum for gene selectionism, they pro-
vided a number of sharp arguments to show that positing the organism as the
basic unit of biology is an irreparably anthropomorphic construction.                                    J

20 “...that mode of bringing facts about according to which a general description of result is
made to come about, quite irrespective of any compulsion for it to come about in this or that par-
ticular way, although the means may be adapted to the end. The general result may be brought
about at one time in one way, and at another time in another way. Final causation does not deter-
mine in what particular way it is to be brought about, but only that the result shall have a certain
general character” (CP 1:211).
21 Young readers may not know the disease rachitis — ot rickets (which, by the way, in Denmark
we call “English disease”) — that is caused by a deficiency of vitamin D, and which, in the child-
hood of this author, was still sufficiently common for everybody to know the characteristically
hollow-chested look of children having suffered from this disease.
22 Ironically, this is an obsession that plays right into the hands ofprecisely those radical social-
constructivist theories (e.g., those claims that reality, or at least the scientific model of it, is noth-
ing but a social construction set up to perpetuate unequal power relations) that many scientists
so despise.
98           THE   SEMIOTICS     OF NATURE



      For example, in most biological models, as well as in everyday folk psychol-
ogy, the prototype organism remains essentially a vertebrate, like ourselves.
Vertebrates are always well-integrated, coherent organisms with well-defined
forms. They consist of genetically uniform cells and have well-defined life cycles,
starting with a single cell and ending in reproduction via the transmission of
germ cells.
   However, by far most organisms of this world are not vertebrates — and most
of them do not obey the aforementioned criteria very well. Neither plants nor
fungi have the kind of individual identity and autonomy that vertebrates have.
Their life cycles do not necessarily start from (or as) single cells, and they are
not as genetically homogenous as are the vertebrates. Many invertebrate ani-
mals also deviate from our conception of how a typical organism lives. Thus, for
instance, many insects undergo metamorphic changes that give them totally dif-
ferent body shapes from that of their earlier life stages — and many corals swim
freely around as individual larvae, but end up as colonies where individuality is
completely extinct.
      The idea that most seriously undermined the classical concept of the organ-
ism was probably Dawkins’s notion of the extended phenotype — for this idea
implied dissolution of the supposed unity between the organism and the gen-
otype. By the term extended phenotype, Dawkins referred to situations where
genes are selected for because of their effect on a different organism than the one
that is carrying the gene. The phenotypic effect of the gene, in such cases, is played
out in a foreign organism.” The most dramatic examples of this mechanism are
probably found in parasites. An example is a species of fungus, Exthomophtora
muscae, which infects and kills ordinary house flies. In addition to killing the
flies, however, the parasite also causes dead females to develop a set of special
traits, ‘such as distended abdomens, that acts as sexual attractants to the male
flies... that are subsequently infected and killed by the fungal parasite’ (Moeller
1993, cit. in Sterelny and Griffiths 1999, 72).
   Similarly, Stephen Jay Gould has discussed the case of the parasitic barnacles
of the crustacean Rhizocephala, which completely take over behavioral control
in the crabs that they parasitize. These parasites suspend the crab’s internal molt
cycle (which might otherwise allow the crab to shed the parasite) and succes-
sively transform the brood care behaviors of the crabs in such a way that they
will start nursing the parasitic eggs instead of their own (Gould 1996, 15-16).
   Morever, not only parasitism, but symbiosis, too, may be of a mutualis-
tic kind, as we saw in the case of the bladderwort in Chapter 3. Such inter-
active mutualism is often so tightly interwoven that it feels more natural to
talk about one joint organism ox a superorganism —as in the case of lichens (a

23.    Vehkavaara (2003) has suggested the term externalized purposes for this survival strategy.
                                                          CODE-DUALITY            99


general term for a mutualistic ensemble of a fungi and algae). Another exam-
ple is the fungus-growing-and-harvesting ant. In this case, the fungi produce
sterile fruit that the ants use to feed their larvae. The subterranean fungus gar-
dens of such ants may be twenty meters long, and the fungi are nursed with
a meticulousness that would awake indignation in the unions of agricultural
workers. This particular example ofinter-species collaboration must be called
an evolutionary success story, for it occurs in more than two hundred ver-
sions, involving different species of ants and fungi respectively. And in some
cases the integration is so complete, that neither the ant nor the fungus could
survive without it.
  Similarly, the partnership between higher plants and fungi that is found
in root modules, mycorrhiza, is also of vital importance for both partners. In
this case, the fungi extend out, as mycelium, into the soil and thereby provide
their plant host with improved access to nutrients and water. In turn, the fungi
profit from access to the organic compounds that are produced by the plant.
The mycelium can also interconnect different plants, even of different species.
Alan Rayner (1997, 63) writes, “By providing communication channels between
plants, mycorrhizal mycelia are thought to enable adult plants to ‘nurse’ seed-
lings through fungal ‘umbilical cords, to reduce competition and to enhance
efficient usage and distribution of soil nutrients.”
  However, there is also a risk connected to this arrangement: “On the other
hand, they can be piratized, as demonstrated by the yellow bird’s nest plant,
Monotropa hypopitys, which by tapping into mycorrhizal networks is able to
divert resources from the trees that participate in these networks (ibid.).
   Another of Rayner’s examples is the rot that is found in hollow trees. Rot is |
intuitively perceived as a disease, but in trees it is often just one link in a nor-
mal recycling process — i.e., a process whereby resources are redistributed from
parts of the tree that no longer take active part in the life processes to those
other parts of the tree where active life processes still occur. The growth of trees
typically proceeds in a thin layer just inside the bark, and as the tree ages, more
and more dead wood is left behind in the middle of the tree. Fungi then degrade
the dead wood in the middle, and thereby initiate a hollowing out of the tree
(called heart rot), which then offers habitats for a wide range of different ani-
mals. By sending roots into the resulting compost, the tree actively recycles the
material derived from its own dead wood.
  Hardly anybody has a full overview of all the species that coexist in an
old tree but, counting microorganisms, the number may well approach one
thousand. Yet this should not surprises us, as the human organism, as is well-
known, is itself the domicile for numerous species of microorganisms that do
useful or even vital work for us — in the saliva, in the skin, in the intestinal
tract, and elsewhere.
    100           THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




          Accordingly, the biochemical and physiological interactions necessary to the
    maintenance of these many symbiotic relations is equally quite comprehensive.
    In the aforementioned case of quorum sensing, the newly hatched squid early
    on develops a ciliated microvillus field that will tend to potentiate the bacterial
    inoculation — and that is capable of preventing all bacteria other than /fisch-
    eri from colonizing the light organ. Yet as soon as the light organ has been inoc-
    ulated with V.fischeri a programmed massive cell death is initiated, whereby the
    ciliated surface coating is again eliminated.
       This “program” is released thanks to a short-lived and irreversible signal
    emitted by the bacteria, writes McFall-Ngai and Ruby (1998). In brief, cells in
    the cavities in the light organ where the bacteria attach themselves respond by
    undergoing comprehensive cytological alterations, during which some of them
    swell to four times their former volume; at the same time, a marked increase in
    the number of microvilli sets in. At this point, the cells start excreting a substrate
    that is rich enough to assure a very short bacterial generation time (time lapse
    between divisions) of approximately thirteen minutes. In the course of ten to
    fifteen hours, the density of bacteria is stabilized at a level that is determined by
    the host organism’s regulation of the oxygen concentration. When the bacteria
    have reached their maximal density, they stop producing the proteins intended
    for formation of flagella — which may indicate that they use their flagella for the
    sole purpose of getting access to the light organ, for after having been so admit-
    ted, the flagellas then become an unnecessary burden (though it is not known at
    this time where the signal that blocks the formation of flagella comes from).
    This slightly pedantic description of the mechanisms behind mutuality in the
_ squid-V fischeri symbiosis is meant to illustrate how very subtle the integration
|between symbiotic organisms often is— and has to be. When organisms that
    are so fundamentally different that they belong to different species (or even to
    different kingdoms) are going to cooperate, they are forced to overcome a host
  of obstacles concerning the establishment of unambiguous reciprocal interac-
’ tions at all levels, from chemistry to social behavior.
~         The Darwinian calculus of gross reproductive advantages and disadvan-
_ tage seems strangely poor in this context, because it reduces almost to mystery
  the minutiae of practical solutions to all the challenges of incompatibility. The
    naked end result, the “increased fitness” that is supposed to explain the eventual
    fixation in the gene pool of mutualistic interaction patterns, tends to hide the
    complex reality of the moment-to-moment lived reality. Or to say it another
    way, by lumping the numerous subtle interaction processes into the one single
    conceptual viewpoint of selection, one has already, in advance, ascribed prior-
    ity to a retrospective view of things. But since such an end point must always
    be unknown to the agents while the process is actually going on, this perspec-
                                                         CODE-DUALITY           101



tive implies a systematic distortion of our understanding of what really happens
when new behavioral patterns appear.                                             od
   From the biosemiotic perspective, it is rather obvious that the “control”
mechanisms overseeing all the numerous reciprocal processes that necessarily
have to be in place, in order to scaffold an initial mutualism between organisms
from different species, need not be digitally and unambiguously coded at local-
ized loci (i.e., on the chromosome   — where, not inconsequentially, mutational
events might spoil the cooperative interaction without being selected against).
Yet outside of biosemiotics, the idea that a nondigitized but relatively stable
semiotic scaffolding of these integration mechanisms might establish itself is a
strongly underestimated possibility, if it is considered at all.


                  The Analog Coding of Epigenisis
Before expounding the biosemiotic view, however, we must first consider a cri-
tique of the classical Darwinian focus on the individual that does not, as the pre-
viously described criticisms do, deal with symbiotic relations (either parasitic or
mutualistic) — but instead claims that ordinary classical individuals should be
understood as conglomerates of competing cell lines —and that these cell lines,
rather than individuals, constitute the units of natural selection.          R
   Yale biologist Leo Buss proposed just this theory in his book entitled The
Evolution ofIndividuality, wherein he delivers a frontal attack on the doctrine
of Weismannism. In it, Buss (1987, 3) writes, “While Weismann’s inheritance
theories were ultimately proved fictional, their corollary— that the individual
is the sole unit of biological organization — was nevertheless incorporated as a
                                                                                      }
tacit assumption in the modern synthetic theory of evolution.” But, Buss con- |
tinues, as far back as when the fundaments of the neo-Darwinian synthesis were
put down, data that contradicted Weismann’s doctrine were already known by.
embryologists. The problem was that embryologists were strangely absent from |
the discussions leading up to the modern synthesis — and so it happened that’
Weismann’s theory was canonized as a synthesis, in spite of its being in disagree-
ment with known developmental patterns. (In fact, development exhibits sig-
nificant variation from one taxonomic group to another, and in some cases
Weismann’s hypothesis does indeed hold — but in most cases it does not.)
  Buss, after reviewing the data on all the main taxonomic groups, shows that
the most common form for development is somatic embryogenesis — where there
is no autonomous germ cell line. In somatic embryogenesis, one and the same
cell line may participate in somatic functions (as stem cells) and yet, throughout
ontogenesis, conserve the competence to form germ cells. This mode of devel-
opment is possessed by all plant and fungus groups and, with a single exception,
    102           THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




    also by all protoctists (unicellular eukaryotic species). And even in the animal
    kingdom, we find somatic embryogenesis dispalyed in no fewer than nine tax-
    onomic groupings (among them cnidarians, bryozoa, and even some annelida
    species (ibid., 21-22)). Thus, the particulars of preformationistic embryogenesis,
    where Weismann’s doctrine does obtain, are in no way typical for life forms on
 our planet.
) And once Weismann’s theory is removed from center stage, the vertebrate
individual loses its favored position in biology as well. With the loss of the indi-
‘vidual as the natural center for the evolutionary process, a new space is opened
 for Buss’s own alternative perspective: “The thesis developed here is that the
 complex interdependent processes which we refer to as development are reflections
 of ancient interactions between cell lineages in their quest for increased repli-
 cation. Those variants which had a synergistic effect and those variants which
 acted to limit subsequent conflicts are seen today as patterns in metazoan cleay-
    age, gastrulation mosaicism, and epigenesist” (ibid., 29).
'       Buss’s book takes us on a fascinating (and essentially semiotic) journey into
  the webs of cheating, humbug, bluff, and out-maneuvering that — according to
| him — were the means that individual cell lines used in their reciprocal compe-
| tition to become multiplied as much as possible. (Chapter 7 examines some of
|these processes in more detail.) On the embryological process, he writes,
          Following a variable period of maternal control on embryonic cell fate, the meta-
          zoan embryo becomes organized into one of several discrete bauplans via inter-
          actions between embryonic cell lineages. The principal epigenetic interactions
          defining cell fate — those of induction, competence, and cell death — are all inter-
          actions in which one cell lineage acts to limit the replication of another, while
          enhancing its own. The fact that embryos develop by epigenesis is prima facia evi-
          dence that these very “programs” represent interactions between variant cell lin-
          eages arising in the course ofthe ontogeny ofancestral forms (ibid., 30).

    Buss’s heavy emphasis on the competition motif as the preferred explanatory
 tool, is, as the reader should surely know by now, not shared by the author of
 this book. But in placing the developmental process in the center of his evolution-
 ary thinking, Buss calls attention to an epigenetic perspective that underlines
 the autonomous significance of a long neglected domain — i.e., the domain that
| have in this book called the analog code. And this domain (or coding) is, in
    fact, nothing more nor less than the semiotic loops coupling embryonic cell
    lines together into a unit that — in spite of all internal competition — presses a
    shared destiny upon them all.
       We can conclude then, that Dawkins, Buss, and many of the others who have
    challenged the classical conception of the individual organism as the uncon-
    tested unit of selection, do indeed have convincing arguments. This, however,
                                                          CODE-DUALITY            103


does not persuade us to accept that genes or cell lines should then be automati-
cally installed in the role that the individual has surrendered.
   On the contrary, it confirms us in seeing evolution in the light of code-dual-       i
ity, for if organisms are not natural units of selection, they are at least natu-
ral units of communication. Via the digitally coded messages in their genome,
they are literally in a line of communication with both their ancestors and their
eventual offspring. And via the multiple analog coded messages of their cur-
rent bodies, they take part in the local semiosphere and interact with other
creatures, whether conspecific or not. The organism must then be seen as a
nodal point in a semiotic landscape — one that gradually changes through
time (evolution) and thereby leaves marks (genetic changes) in the conserva-
tive DNA code.
   It is to some extent a matter oftaste ifyou would like to think ofthese remain-
ing marks by calling them sedected. Since in any case, the proper efficient causality
at issue here lies in the web of analog coded communication, Dawkins’s posi-
tion would actually presuppose that formal causality should be seen as primary
to efficient causality. (But this is a discussion that reminds me more than a little
of the medieval arguments about the gender of angels.)


                The Life Cycle as a Unit of Evolution
In 1985, the American psychologist Susan Oyama of John Jay College in New
York, published an important book in which she recommended that we give
up altogether the idea that the developmental process is directed by some spe-
cial information that is transmitted by genes (Oyama 1985). The information |
that manifests throughout the life cycle of an individual, Oyama claimed, is
rather information that is constructed by and with the developmental process
itself. With a pertinent choice of words, she named her book The Ontogeny of
Information.
   Oyama’s point — which is closely connected to the one taken in the present):
book — is that developmental processes depend on “inform-ation” from a range | |
of different sources, and that genes are only one of these sources, The concep-
tion of a special genetic program that unfolds its predetermined logic through
embryogenesis is mistaken because this program      — if the program metaphor
should be valid at all—is not self-reliant, but only works at all because it is
played out in a context that is derived from elsewhere.
  And, indeed, there is no reason to believe that an organism could be pre- +
programmed to solve the multiple challenges it will meet in its lifetime. In this /
respect, the organism confronts the same horizon of troubles that has finally con-
vinced the would-be creators of “autonomous agents” to change their paradigm
  104          THE   SEMIOTICS     OF NATURE




  from one of rational preprogramming (the old artificial intelligence approach)
  to one of training and learning (Clark 1997).
     From the very beginning, embryogenesis presupposes that tissues in the
  growing embryo have the capacity for selecting and responding appropriately
  to relevant stimuli (which is exactly what an autonomous robot to some extent
  may earn to do but cannot be instructed to do). The developmental process, in
  other words, is not an instructional process, but a process of self-calibration. As
     such it is, of course, supported by the ever-present availability of necesssary pro-
     tein resources that the cell at each moment may derive, by activating relevant
\
    sections   of the genetic library. But basically it remains a process where individ-
  \ uals create themselves in a self-organizing interaction with their environment
   \ (the metaphoric here is my own, not Oyama’).
  r~ ‘Therefore, the ordinary expression—that a gene codes for this or that
  " trait — tacitly takes for granted that the conditions under which such a trait can
     be expressed are the conditions that are normal. In cases where such conditions
  are not normal, however, the trait in question may perhaps not be developed,
  even though the gene is there. And as Paul Griffiths and Russell Gray (1994)
   have pointed out normal conditions is not an unambiguous concept. Genes
   in an acorn, for instance, are supposed to code for the development of an oak
   tree — but by far, ost acorns do not sprout but are eaten or just rot away on the
   forest floor. So in this case, what are the “normal conditions” that this gene finds
(_ itself in? (See Ruth Milikan’s discussion of functionality in Chapter 3).
ec This phrase — under normal conditions — actually hides a whole lot of inter-
   esting things, so that on the one hand we have the genes and on the other hand
   we have all the rest. But here is an interesting symmetry. For just as one might say
   that a gene codes for a trait when conditions are normal, one might equally justi-
   fiably say that each and all other developmental resources code for a trait when
  genes are normal.
      Many bird young, for example, must learn the song of their own species by
  first listening to the song of their parents. To say that their song program proba-
  bly is coded for in the genes if things are normal implies, with the invocation of
  normality, that the bird parents do, in fact, sing. But one might as well say that
  the song of the young is coded for in the song of the parents — presupposing, of
  course, that the necessary proteins (and thus, the genes) needed for construct-
._ ing the relevant anatomical structures in the throat are intact.”*


  24 Molecular genetics has increasingly undermined the simple genotype-phenotype relation-
  ship that was so passionately believed in just a few years ago. For it has become increasingly appar-
  ent that genomic systems exhibit unexpectedly integrative aspects. The lactose-positive phenotype
  in E. coli, for example, presupposes not only that the /ac-operon proteins are expressed, but also
  that the genes that code for adenylate cyclase and for the cAMP receptor protein are expressed.
  “In many cases,’ writes James A. Shapiro (1999, 25), “it is really impossible to assign a specific
                                                                    CODE-DUALITY                105


   This gene-environment          symmetry argument           is the central component           in
a complex of ideas that Oyama, Griffiths, Gray, and others have developed
under the name of Developmental Systems Theory (DST) (Oyama et al. 2001).
According to DST, species-specific
                                traits are formed with the help of structured
sets of developmental resources within self-organizing processes, and there is no
need to appoint any centralized information source. Some of these developmen-
tal resources are genetic, while most others — from the cytoplasmic machiner
of the fertilized egg to the social structurings that influence human psychologi-
cal development — are nongenetic.
   It may perhaps come as a surprise to some readers that such parity between
information sources is suggested at all — for such is the extent to which the rhet-
oric of modern genetics has managed to make us identify heredity and genes as
two sides of the same coin, such that our eyes have become closed to the obvi-
ous. For organisms do, of course, inherit a lot more things than just their genetic
material. Above all, they inherit a suitable milieu or habitat (without which,
such genetic material would remain inert).
   Putting it plainly, mice are not born at the bottom of the sea, and fish are not
born on land. Or, here is a more appropriate example: Cuckoo young are, as is well-
known, hatched in nests belonging to birds of other species, and it has therefore
been believed — following a suggestion by Konrad Lorenz — that the cuckoo, con-
trary to what is the case in other bird species, did not need to be imprinted on by
conspecific adult birds in order to mate with cuckoo partners. It was supposed, in
other words, that correct cuckoo behavior was genetically buffered. A recent study,
however, has shown that, at least in the cuckoo species Clamator glandarius, the
converse is true. Adult cuckoos in this species do actually look for nests with newly
hatched young— not necessarily their own — and then sit in a nearby tree singing
their songs. And this, apparently, is enough for the cuckoo young to take on the
cuckoo song — or to be reimprinted with it — in those cases where they had already
become imprinted with the songs of the foster birds (Soler and Soler 1999).
   The above serves as a good example of the point that I want to argue, because
with regards to it, nobody quarrels with the idea that genetic imprinting is
involved. What is noteworthy (and far too often overlooked), however, is that
the interdependence between genetic expression and learned behavior is so sub-
tle. The latter is not merely an addition to the former, as is often implied. Rather,
the individual organism only emerges out of a process of their dynamic interac-
tion, and the full significance of such alternative types of inheritance only shows
up when one learns to see the intimate interplay between genetic heredity and
environmental heredity.


organismal phenotype to a particular locus, because its gene product(s) can participate in the exe-
cution of multiple cellular or developmental programs.
                                                        »
106           THE SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




      Similarly, Konrad Lorenz's concept of innate behavior was heavily criticized
as far back as the 1950s by the American psychologist Daniel S. Lehrman, who
pointed to many cases that contradicted Lorenz's concept of instinct. In this
 regard, we shall consider here the very illustrative case of prenatal learning by
 doing in ducklings, as studied by developmental biologist Gilbert Gottlieb and
 as discussed in Griffiths and Gray (1994, 279).
‘ Ducklings normally acquire a preference for their mother's species-specific
 call signal from the very beginning of their lives. Gottlieb discovered, however,
 that ducklings would not develop this preference if they were prevented from
 themselves vocalizing while still in the egg. Apparently, duckling embryos have
 to be exposed to their own prenatal call sounds before they can develop a pref-
 erence for the quite different sounds of their mother’s call (Gottlieb 1981). It
 is important to underline here, as Lehrman did and Gottlieb repeated, that
 “these sorts of facts do not show that all traits are ‘learned.’ They show, rather,
 that reliable developmental outcomes occur because of reliable interactions
 between the developing organism and its environment” (Griffiths and Gray
 1994, 280).
    A consequence of this increased emphasis on the importance of the nonge-
 netic resources in the expression of “genetic traits” is that Weismann’s doctrine
becomes directly misleading. For not only is the postulated separation between
the germ cell line and the somatic cell lines, as we have seen, the exception rather
than the rule in the biosphere — but even in those cases where it does apply, it
cannot really be said to play the exclusively decisive role ascribed to it by many
geneticists. Rather, it appears that the supposed dead-end organisms — ie., the
phenotypes    — via their interaction with the environment and with their off
spring, yield a rich causal input to the welfare of the next generation.
      In order to include this richer conception of causality in our understanding of
evolution, Griffiths and Gray (1994, 296) suggest that neither genes nor individ-
uals should be seen as units of evolution, and that such a role should be ascribed
rather, if at all, to the whole life cycle: “The individual, from a developmental
systems perspective, is a process — the life cycle. It is a series of developmental
events which forms an atomic unit of repetition in a lineage. Each life cycle is
initiated by a period in which the functional structures characteristic of the lin-
eage must be reconstructed from relatively simple resources. At this point there
must be potential for variations in the developmental resources to restructure
the life cycle in a way that is reflected in descendant cycles.” Within the frame-
work of such a process perspective, the whole replicator-interactor distinction
becomes rather misleading, for it is based on the unnatural dichotomization
of the developmental process into genes and all the rest. Dawkins (1982, 98),
for instance, says, “When we are talking about development, it is appropriate to
emphasize nongenetic as well as genetic factors. But when we are talking about
                                                             CODE-DUALITY              107



units ofselection a different emphasis is called for, an emphasis on the properties
of replicators” (italics added).
   But this idea only makes sense if one disregards the fact that many of those
factors that, in the course of the life cycle, are responsible for the success of an
individual, are replicas of factors that were responsible for the success of the
life cycle of its parents.   A DNA segment —to stay within the terminology of
Dawkins — is not even itself a replicator in the strict sense of something that is
capable of replicating itself. For the replication of DNA segments cannot take
place without the cellular machinery of proteins and membranes that— con-
sidered as topologically ordered structures—       are in themselves extragenetic
hereditary factors. And a range of other developmental resources are likewise
furthermore required for the life cycle to be realized in a viable way.
   Griffiths and Gray (1994, 300) therefore conclude that “if we insist that a rep-
licator have the intrinsic power to replicate itself, there will be only one repli-
cator, the life cycle. But if we allow the status of ‘replicator’ to anything that is
reliably replicated in development, there will be many replicators.”                         .
   Developmental systems theory is largely consistent with a biosemiotic con-'
ception of ontogenesis and evolution, and probably the most radical conse-
quence of DST is that the dichotomizing into organism and environment is |
severely challenged. In the traditional view, evolution is due to the exposure
of individual variants to selective forces caused by an independently existing
milieu. But according to DST, such variants (here, life cycles) are by necessity
already deeply integrated into the environment, and thus the conception of dif-
ferential success is no straightforward matter: “One variant does better than
another, not because of a correspondence between it and some preexisting envi-
ronmental feature, but because the life cycle that includes interaction with that
feature has a greater capacity to replicate itself than the life cycle that lacks that
interaction” (ibid.). Griffiths and Gray therefore suggest that “life cycles still i
have fitness values, but these are interpreted not as a measure of a correspon-
dence between the organism and its environment, but as measures of the self-
replication power of the system. Fitness is no longer a matter of ‘fittedness’ to an
independent environment” (ibid., 301).
   And this conceptionisnot too distant from the concept of semiotic fitness
   Se
that I suggested in 1997:
  Instead of genetic fitness, evolutionary biology should try to develop a concept of
  semiotic fitness. After all, fitness depends on a relationship; something can be “fit”
  only in a given context. Genes may be fit only under certain environmental condi-
  tions, or environments might perhaps be said to be fit in the sense that their self-sus-
  taining dynamic capacity has been adapted to the actual genotype resources offered
  to them. But if genotypes and envirotypes (Odling-Smee and Patten 1994) recip-
   rocally constitute the context within which fitness should be measured, it seems we
108            THE   SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE



     ishould rather talk about the fit in its relational entirety, that is as a semiotic capac-
      ity. The evolutionarily relevant fitness concept of “semiotic fitness” should ideally
      measure the semiotic competence or success ofnatural systems in managing the gen-
      otype-envirotype translation processes. The optimization of semiotic fitness results
      in the continuing growth and depth of interpretive patterns accessible to life
      (Hoffmeyer 19972, 68).



                             Genes Are Indeed Special
/Although Weismann’s doctrine certainly is not waterproof in its substantial
 sense, it did at least illuminate an important aspect of evolution that is still in
 need of much clarification. This aspect concerns the general role of digital codes
 in evolution.
    Because Weismann and several generations of biologists after him have
 reified the digital code — first as germ cells, then as chromosomes or genomes,
and now, as DNA segments or replicators — it has been thought that this reified
code could carry the weight of exerting efficient causality in the evolutionary
process. And by framing this strange efficient causality as that of a transport pro-
cess (where what was transported was called information), the mystification had
finally been made complete. The missing substance in the concept of genetic
information transport has been thoroughly analyzed by Sahotra Sarkar (1996;
1997) who points out that cracking the genetic code was the result of brilliant
experimental work and was not, to any significant extent, helped by informa-
tion-based reasoning.” “At the very most,’ Sarkar (1996, 199) says, the concept
of a code carrying information “provides a succinct look-up table on the basis
of which one can predict the sequence of the polypeptide chain that would be
determined by a particular DNA chain provided at least five conditions, discov-
ered since 1966, are fulfilled. Unfortunately, if prediction is the goal, these con-
ditions are quite debilitating” (for further details, see Emmeche 1999b).
   I claimed in Chapter 2 that the digital code appeared with the first living sys-
tems as a mechanism for the description of central constituents of the holis-
tic arrangement in prebiotic systems. This description (in DNA code) implied
a self-reference in the absence of which a living system could not become a self

25     Lagree with Sarkar (1996) in his demonstration of the inconsistencies inherent in the infor-
mation concept of molecular biology. From this, however, Sarkar draws the conclusion that we had
better stick to strictly chemical-biological terminology. Biosemiotics draws the opposite conclu-
sion and introduces an explicitly semiotic understanding, seeing information as the exchange of
signs or sets of signs, i.e., coded messages. A thorough discussion of
                                                                     this understanding is given in
Emmeche (1999b). Sharov (1992) also has recommended a semiotic understanding ofbiological
information, and Jablonka (2002), as we saw in Chapter 3, uses a concept of information that is
nearly indistinguishable from the Peircean sign concept.
                                                         CODE-DUALITY            109



Table 4.1 Comparison of gene selectionism to developmental systems theory and bio- .
semiotics (with inspiration from Claus Emmeche).
                                 Gene        Developmental        Biosemiotics
                              selectionism   systems theory
 Anti-preformationism     ~        No             Yes                 Yes
 Causal parity between             No             Yes                 Yes
 genes and other
 resources for the
 ontogenetic process
 Privileged causal role           Yes             No                  Yes:
 ascribed to genes in                                            combinatorial
 evolution                                                          freedom
                                                                 and temporal
                                                                   autonomy
                                                                                 a



(in the sense of a system possessing a stable coupling of self-reference to other:
reference). The role of the digital code is connected, then, to the vertical (tem-
poral) continuation of the self-specifying capacity of life. And in this chapter,
we have seen that, towards this end, the digital code manifests three important
characteristics: temporal stability (memory), rich potential for combinatorics
(renewal), and capacity for abstraction (formation of meta-messages).
  Digital codes, in our understanding, are therefore something special, and we
must consider the possibility that there may yet hide a potential misunderstand-
ing in the DST conception of complete parity between the genes and other
resources of the developmental process. We certainly support the dethronemen
of genes from their relatively uncontested position as deterministic executants »
of control within the ontogenetic process. But on the other hand, their role as
digitally coded sign systems provides them with a unique status that ought to be
recognized. And by seeing life, as suggested here, as being based on the incessant
semiotic interactions between code-dual systems — organisms in life cycles — it
is possible to respect the special role that genes do in fact play, without thereby
privileging them relative to all other factors that contribute to semiotic control
within the life cycles of the biological world.
   Decoupled from the dynamics of cellular life, the genome is at one and the
same time conservative and promiscuous. From the one side it is protected
against changes, and from the other side, it becomes recombined all the time
under the formation of new genetic combinations. In the next chapter, we shall
have a closer look at such genetic semiotics.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Re.
                                                            revretie                                          440                                                      ni,                   ay                   -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E              mre                       ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i    foal        -_



                                                                                                     alga ys mates                                                                                                                            aan
                                                            eimewt                                                et event                                                          Amys 6; sok                                                                      ~ahy acanaae                                                      =


                                                            Sot |ar                                                      eed                                           eng                                            pag                                  eile spe
                          ,                                                                ieee                                                                                                                               ,
                                   :                                                                  oe                                                         eh?                                        a                                 a . wis
                     Sai                                        -                      a                                        a                                                       —                         a                                                  -_
                                                        4                                                                                                                                                                                      i


                                                                                                                                                                                                     ~                                —.,.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Se
                                                                                                                                                 a                                                          re                                 ;
    a                                                                                                                                    as                                                             7        ‘>                                        »!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .

                     (og                                                                                  (                                                                                      arle                     7
                                           og                            :
                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                             =*                                                                                                                                                           ‘
    “a                                                                                                                                                                              =                        »

                               1                  ’                      i
                                                                                                                                                                                    ~~                                                                          -_

    Veer

                                                                                                                                             i                     7                         ,                   Hoy |                                               =i       eM

          7 as                     aa                       ras,                                              -                                          AGENT §           -                     o   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 he we Geeow’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     “Eee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i
                     f         ’                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .

           P                       Oust                                          ie                                 rent,                                        we                 ad <a                                     7 jeehaite                                      6%     su aa
          i.
           °
                                            ae                                                                      ie
                                                                                                                                R                                      oil ay Sait a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         i   e@       Re


     ‘owe                                             * aed                                           al |                          ea                                                   a)                       Ming»                                o             1a wie ae
     aalie                                            asi                                  pei                                      nh                   Ve                         . i,                         (fey)                                     s'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mmen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tureeai                                          es
                                   he                               e                                                               x)

         ribeihs:-seugihiareurmeiuae anc
                                                                                                                                                                       Often                                      aye                              _                 ;\ “Meats ir


          Petite nny                                                         es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Seaeeieeaae
                                                                                                                                                             ALi                     rae                                  ciwragt arenes te
           Ao                              i"                                :              ¢                           »           >                            i v3‘pw                                    Pee                   ‘            , .               siete!

     y           fig!
                    :                                  aabe                                           —s
                                                                                                     of                         rot                  a
                                                                                                                                                                   iw io ay                  i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <n                          fi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t eet                                arahgl
;   a          ed                      es                   oer                       © 5                     On                         ‘                   eo                          re              piri                                 Le                                         Cag | 7"

          ™ =.                             vr)                          1 “A                              :                 :                                          y             Vie.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                                                                                                            wih       is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *                      ow                                   aft


                                                                                                                                                                           '                            vs                                             i
         im)                                                                      ’         os                he                    tee                      a         s?                eee         ke           +           vey                          me                 cre



     nese ate ols                                                                                aes Ci iy,ell                                                                                                                                ig, a ea                                            >             irs      na           es        é

    Pp                   Mie                                Aral                                                  ieee                                                         pure lok Cm
                                                                                                                                                                                         Sarrrgins
    baekiol                                  is             sere?                          pte                                      (aoe a                                     ek rote
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       s:               upkindinp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7!     ‘b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          407                  ee PRET                                   ete                             ala
                          “i                 ows                                           (qc                    ligUry                                                       ')        pobgta pg                        bigtivns                                                                Loads                   hy

                                                        ‘                                                          re         ee ve *aealanhdaiay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      we



          Di   Lig       Pow
                                                       eva.                            :
                                                                                                              oko nha eee
                                                                                                                  ts
                                                                                                                       ae saanaara  cligaaasewt                    dy                   qd           gr r bo™             reinfais


    i                     te                                    he ee                            O                 =a                                    :                          we                      vie       4
    of
    Hie                                }               ee                                                                eae) oneal Ke



                                                                                                                                                                               “2


                                                            !                                                                                                                            i



    om    il4                                           io                   a Pe                                  4°                   me                         Wie                  aa agp
