5
                The Semiotics of Heredity



                           The Logic of Mortality
Because living systems are mortal, they cannot therefore persist in the same
way as rocks or celestial bodies persist —e.g., by internal cohesion or chemi-
cal resistance enabling them to withstand the unending flow of physical change.
Yet even rocks and celestial bodies will disappear eventually — and when they
do, that is definitively the end for those systems as such. Living systems, on the
other hand, have found a way to continually persist — not as the autonomous
physical entities that are living at any one moment, of course — but as templates
that can be used to recursively and adaptively re-create the system. These DNA
templates function as messages that are read and reread over time, and are lodged
within small capsules (such as eggs), each of which contains a fully capable set
of interpretive tools that allows them to retreive the hidden message coordinat-
ing the ontogenetic process, resulting in the birth of a new creature of the same
kind. Theinnermost
          innermost principle of heredity is thus semiotic survival — survival via
a digital description    coupled with an analog |(orttime- space continuous) set of
functionally interpretive tools.
   A big advantage of this kind of persistence (relative to that of rocks or celes-
tial bodies) is its flexibility and adaptive capacity. The flip side of the coin is that
each single living entity must die; survival concerns the living system as type not
as token. Yet even as a type, such systems may not continuously survive in the
long run, since each one always runs the risk of becoming extinct or, suffering
the form of death characteristic to flexibility — ie., irreversible change.
   The proviso that living systems must necessarily die, however, is fortunate
when seen in the light of organic renewal and adaptation. And because organ-
isms, such as the reader and myself, depend on the uninterrupted functioning
of a subtle interplay of some fifty trillion cells, it is obvious from a biochemical
point of view that such finely coordinated systems must necessarily be fragile.
   According to evolutionary biologist Stanley Salthe (1993), there is also a
more fundamental infodynamic necessity that dictates the death of living sys-
tems. Infodynamics is the designation for a set of ideas that integrate thermody-
namics and information theory in the attempt to describe biological evolution
112         THE   SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE




in light of the known physical dynamics of the universe’s development (Brooks
and Wiley 1986-88; Goodwin 1989; Weber et al. 1989; Salthe 1993; Weber
1998b). The essence of infodynamic theory, as it has been developed by Dan
Brooks and Ed Wiley, is that the irreversible expansion of the universe involves
an ongoing generation of new systems — in far-from-equilibrium states — that
consequently possess the potential for self-organization.
   For Salthe, this core insight is closely linked to Peirce’s notion that nature
tends to reinforce habits (CP 7:15). The self-organizing tendency that infody-
namics sees in nature implies a continuous establishment of new informational
constraints at the same time that the space of possibilities tends to become
steadily diminished due to the growing sum of such constraints.’ In the begin-
ning we have vagueness and flexibility, but gradually habits (decreasing the
possibilities of what may happen next) grow denser as the system becomes
more and more rigid and ultimately dies. Salthe sees the universe as emerging
through an endless succession of developmental processes where the funda-
mental theme is the same: a movement from immaturity through maturity to
senescence and death — which then becomes the substrate for new beginnings.
This phasic scheme plays out on all levels of complexity, that is to say, not just
for individuals, but also for ecosystems and species, families, and even higher
taxonomic categories.
   As far as the semiotics of heredity is concerned, however, Salthe’s very gen-
eralized perspective points to a potential inconsistency   — for the finely elab-
orated dynamics of heredity that one finds at the level of individuals does nor
seem to be paralleled in other types of dissipative systems. A digital code that
can bring back, in a sense, no-longer-existing system states, is a very special
phenomenon that is 7ot found outside of the life sphere — and even there, in
organic evolution, such digital codes have been “invented” only rarely. A dis-
sipative system such as, say, a tornado may perhaps be said to exhibit some
kind of self-reference, but here, as in other nonliving systems, the self-referen-
tial activity is not based on digital codifications (Hoffmeyer 1998a) — and thus
tornados always die out without leaving offspring capable of exhibiting indi-
vidualized kinship relations.
   Seen as a dynamic mechanism, code-duality is the essential link that con-
nects individual and population. Reproduction implies that in each generation,
the interplay of analog-coded phenotypes in the population's ecological space
leads to the formation of cohorts of digitally coded genotypes (or kimfloks,

1 Milan Kundera paints a nice picture of this relationship in The Unbearable Lightness ofBeing,
when he compares life to a symphony. In the beginning the symphony is wide open, so that
many thematic strands still can be taken up and woven in, however, as the composition proceeds
through stages, the composer becomes more and more bound to choices already made. By the end
of the symphony’s last movement, freedom has become fairly limited.
                                           THE   SEMIOTICS   OF HEREDITY           113



a somewhat specialized term that I will explain below). Each of these then
becomes recoded or “back-translated” into phenotypes (phenotypic codes)
via the ontogenetic process. The mechanism behind these perpetual codings
and recodings is the subject matter of the present chapter. Here I shall claim
that these processes of coding and recoding do indeed reflect a general info-
dynamic tendency in our world— but also that the “invention” of the digital
code instituted a whole new creative dynamic which is unique for life and can-
not be described in the generalizing terminology of currently formulated info-
dynamic theory.
   Rather, events in code-dual systems are individualized to an extent that
makes analysis based on quantitative measures (such as averages or concentra-
tions) inadequate. And because of the incredible combinatorial power of digital
coding systems, organic evolution emetges as an open, semiotic, and (in a deep
sense) unpredictable system. This openness cannot be captured in the infody-
namic description that instead operates on the idea of inherent attractors in our
universe as the ultimate directional powers behind the evolutionary process.
   To understand evolution, I shall claim, requires a biosemiotic conceptual
frame.


                       Acetabularium acetabulum

The unicellular algae Acetabularia acetabulum is an absolutely singular creature.
Biologist Brian Goodwin (1995) spends almost a whole chapter discussing this
animal in his book on the principles of morphogenesis in biological systems,
How the Leopard Changed Its Spots, and as can be seen in Figure 5.1 this uni-
cellular organism has a life cycle that brings it through a sequence of distinc-
tive forms. The full-grown alga is three-to-five centimeters long and its bottom
consists of a root-like structure (called the rhizoid) by which it attaches itself to
rocks in shallow, subtropical waters. This rhizoid is the zone of the cell where
the nucleus, and thus the genome, is localized. Through an outgrowth from this
area, a stalk is formed, and at the other end of this stalk, there is a graceful cap
with a diameter of about one-and-a-half centimeters. An analysis of this gigan-
tic cell throws an interesting light upon the relation between genes and cellu-
lar structure.
   If an experimenter makes a cut through in the middle of this stalk, the
lower part (with the genome) will regenerate a new cap identical to the old
one — and it will continue to do so, even if the experiment is repeated many
times. The upper part, on the contrary, will only live for a few weeks lon-
ger and will then die. This result corresponds well to conventional wisdom,
since the information about morphogenesis is thought to reside exclusively in
114          THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE



the digital code of the genome. If, however, the algae is cut through in three
parts — rhizoid, stalk, and cap — the cap and the rhizoid will again behave as
already described, but now the stalk exhibits a capacity to regenerate a new
cap. Still, under these conditions, the stalk cannot repeat this performance
and will also die after some time.
   The conclusion to be drawn from this experiment is clear enough. The mor-
phogenetic process is zor the direct product of the genes alone, since, in the stalk,
it continues to go on without the genes. The stalk, on the other hand, is depen-
dent on gene products (proteins) that can only be produced when a nucleus is
present (i.e., only in the rhizoid). When the stalk has used up its store of protein
resources for the morphogenetic process, this process comes to a standstill. The
digital code, thus, is necessary for the continuation of life, because it is needed
for the formation of new proteins — but the analog codes in the cytoplasm of the
stalk are responsible for the concrete execution of morphogenesis.
      As is depicted in Figure 5.1, the life cycle of Acetabularia begins with the
fusion of two isogametes thus named because they are all of the same size and
structure (iso=alike, gamete=germ), contrary to the relatively tiny spermato-
zoa’s and huge egg cells found in species with sexual differentiation. The prod-
uct of this fusion is called a zygote, and when this zygote has been formed, it
will slowly sink to the bottom where, thanks to a gluey substance excreted right




Figure 5.1 The life cycle of Acetabularia acetabulum showing the main stages of devel-
opment from zygote formation through stalk growth to the formation of the mature
form, followed by cyst formation and release of isogametes as the cycle starts again
(from Goodwin 1994, 75, with permission).
                                             THE   SEMIOTICS   OF HEREDITY            II5



after fertilization, it will attach itself to whatever rock it happens to land upon.
From the bottom of the otherwise symmetrical zygote is now formed a little
outgrowth destined to become the rhizoid zone, and from the opposite end the
stalk will appear. The difference in light between the two ends of the zygote is
the releasing factor for this differentiation process. Goodwin explains, “There is
something about the internal dynamic organization of an egg that makes spher-
ical symmetry unstable, so that any perturbation, an internal fluctuation of ions,
say, or an external stimulus, will get it started. What light and the other stimuli
do is influence where the axis will appear, but it is not the cause of axis forma-
tion itself. It is just a trigger that initiates something that is poised and ready to
go, like a sprinter at the start of a race” (ibid., 41).
   The self-organizing semiotics of the cytoplasmic structure is thus in control
of the morphogenetic process right from the earliest beginnings of new life. The
protein specifying resources of the genome are needed for this process to suc-
ceed, but considered, as it so often is, as a self-sufficient blueprint for ontogenesis,
something very essential is missing. Digitally coded descriptions are, as already
stated, only partial: they support the journey of the zygote through its life cycle
in much the same way a musical score supports the work of a symphony orches-
tra. In both cases, the digital codifications must be there, but they are not them-
selves in charge of events (and, in fact, can themselves do nothing at all, as they
are both inanimate). Certainly, they do not specify their own interpretation in
the real world of spatio-temporal continuity. This is where living, analog codifi-
cations must take over. (A noteworthy difference to the orchestra metaphor, it
should be pointed out, is that — unlike the performance of a symphony orches-
tra — the ontogenetic process doesn’t need a centralized conductor. The bodily
semiotics of cellular interaction is in this regard considerably more self-suffi-
cient than the semiotics playing out among musicians in an orchestra.)


                     The Semiotics of Reproduction
It is this tight interdependence of the digital and the analog that the geno-cen-
tric perspective systematically overlooks. Reproduction does lead to changes
in the gene pools of populations — but these changes do not, as such, tell us
much about what goes on at the locus where organisms actually live and die.
Here, we find that the concrete result of reproduction is, as we saw, the forma-
tion of new cohorts of genomes, each of which is embedded in the nucleus of
an actual zygote. It was just these cohorts that Claus Emmeche and I tried to
make visible by giving them a designation of their own, kimflok  — from the
Danish, kim= germ, flok=crowd (Hoffmeyer and Emmeche 1991). The result
of reproduction, as seen in the light of evolution, is simply the formation of
116           THE   SEMIOTICS     OF NATURE



ever new unique kimfloks — for the term kimflok both includes the concept
of life cycle at the population level, and constitutes the basic temporal unit of
a lineage (the generation).” And it is at this level that the process that is retro-
actively called natural selection takes place — for it is not nature as an abstract
entity that selects.
   Darwin was careful to underscore the fact that that natural selection was
not similar to artificial selection as known from breeding stations, for natu-
ral selection is a selection without a selector. Nature has no overseeing breeder.
‘The very expression,

      natural selection, thus contains a semantic contradiction that may well be the main
      source for the continued confusion that Darwinism has occasioned — inside as well
      as outside of biology. On one hand, science vehemently maintains a conception of
      nature that makes it nearly unthinkable that anything like value could possibly be a
      part of it. And then, on the other hand, scientists easily talk about this odd concept,
      natural selection. But how could one (i.e., the presumed subject of the term, ature)
      select without somehow basing this selection on criteria of one sort or other, and
      thus on some underlying system of value? Is it possible that the extreme metaphoric
      strength of the designation natural selection is due to its successful concealment of
      this blatant semantic contradiction — one which in our unconscious imagination
      (and in our emotional fundament) endows the concept with causal and volitional
      capabilities that, as a matter of fact, we perfectly well know that it does not possess?

   Since most of us in biosemiotics do not share the ordinary scientific reluc-
tance to deal with the eventual occurrence of value as a genuine relation in the
workings of the natural world, we don’t have any troubles in placing the value
where it belongs, which is at the level of the code-dual system, the lineage. It is
the lineage — seen as a historical and transgenerational subject° — that acts as
the selective agent via its overall reproductive patterns. By virtue of the genetic
texts carried forward by its individual members (i.e., the kimflok) the lineage is
maintaining — and continuously updating — a selective memory of its past that
in most cases will be a suitable tool for dealing with the future.
      To say this differently, the lineage’s present is evaluated relative to an inter-
nal standard based on past successes — and the logical structure of such a pro-
cess is very much like the logical structure of the human act of selection. When

2 The word lineage here is used in the conventional sense of a succession of ancestors and
descendents, parents and offspring.
3 Populations are, contrary to lineages, coterminous with the concrete individuals living here
and now. The lineage is a historical subject and has a kind of collective agency as such, since its des-
tiny as a temporal integrative structure is continuously influenced by the collectivity of inter-
actions of its single units with their environments     — much in the same way that multicellular
organisms are integrative structures interacting with their surroundings via the activity of indi-
vidual cells.
                                           THE   SEMIOTICS   OF HEREDITY           Lay



a teacher, for example, selects the boys for the class football team, he naturally
bases his selection upon a set of values that reflects his expectations of how to
optimize the chances of winning matches. The present (the set of pupils at hand)
is evaluated relative to the past, as reflected in the teacher’s previous experiences
coaching football games. So ifwe accept the metaphor about selection iz nature,
the lineage (i.e., the spatio-temporal continuum of changing kimfloks) must be
the entity occupying the logical position of the selector in the process.
   The activity of the kimflok in its dealings with a variety of conditions will
be reflected in the overall outcome of reproduction and, thereby in the geno-
type pattern of the next kimflok. The lineage thus, by way of its kimfloks, inces-
santly scrutinizes the ecosemiotic niche conditions and through this activity
automatically brings about the formation of new interpretants in the form of a
concrete reproductive pattern as manifested by the next generation’s kimflok.
Seen in this Way, it turns out that natural selection is at heart a semiotic process,
whereby single organisms — both enabled and constrained as they are in their
activity by their belonging to the overarching project of the lineage — act as
semiotically competent agents in the survival game of the code-dual system.
   Seen in this light, it follows that speciation (the processes whereby new species
come into existence) does not necessarily have to be a gradual process whereby
new hereditary material (e.g., mutations) slowly accumulate in the gene pool of
a population. It might as well, or perhaps even more likely, occur via the estab-
lishment of new intra-specific interpretive patterns —as I will be discussing in
Chapter 6.
   In our discussion so far, however, we have not focused on cases of asexual
reproduction such as budding, root suckers, or offshoots. But even in spe-
cies with widespread vegetative reproduction, there is most often some point
in the life cycle where sexual reproduction does take place. Apparently, sexual
reproduction results in a considerably more extended reshuffling of the genetic
material inside the population. And from a semiotic point of view, sexual repro-
duction is particularly interesting because a variety of subtle semiotic interac-
tion patterns have evolved to make sure that relevant mating partners (or their
sex cells) are recognized and attracted while less relevant mating partners are
ignored or rejected.
   This is the case, for example, in two species of tree-living crickets with closely
overlapping habitats in the eastern United States: Oecanthus quadripuncta-
tus and Oecanthus nigricornis. In general, male crickets attract females by the
sounds of the “songs” that they create while rubbing their specialized forewings
against each other, producing series of fast pulses that endure for several min-
utes at a time. Yet the members of these two species reproduce at the same time
of the year. It is therefore important that females do not confuse the songs of
their own males with the songs of males from the other species. The key to this
118           THE SEMIOTICS      OF NATURE




problem turned out to be pulse rate; the songs of O. nigricornis had a much
higher pulse rate than the songs of O. quadripunctatis. The pulse rate is aug-
mented in both species when temperatures are rising, but this doesn’t bother
the females — rather, they merely shift their preferences accordingly, and now
are safely attracted to even faster pulse rates (relative to one another) than before
(McFarland 1987, 339-60).
   It is alpha and omega for the efficiency of sexual reproduction that the two
sexes find each other and mate at the right time, and the literature is actually
bulging with descriptions of intricate semiotic mechanisms to assure this. Let
me here just mention the surprising case of cooing in ring doves of the species
Streptopelia risoria (Cheng 1992) that we have elsewhere described as follows:
      Before a female ring dove lays her eggs, she and her mate go through a series of
      courtship displays. As courtship proceeds, hormonal changes in the female trigger
      the growth of follicles in her ovaries, each of which eventually bursts to release an
      egg. Recent experiments have shown that if a female dove is operationally hindered
      in making the so-called “nest coo,” she will not be able to ovulate, despite enthusi-
      astic courting by males. In control experiments, tape recordings of nest coos were
      played to females with no males present. Now follicles began to grow. The conclu-
      sion is simple: Female doves that coo during courtship are not (only) cooing at the
      male — they are cooing at their own ovaries, to trigger the release of eggs.

       One can only guess, of course, how such a strange mechanism has actually evolved.
      But at least it seems to indicate, that the set of habits involved in courtship and thus
      the cooing was in fact more safely correlated with the timing of mating, than any
      simple endogenous release system would have been. The obvious although specula-
      tive explanation is that the cooing behavior is a measure of the state of the relation
      between two birds, which is superior to a simple measure of the state of the female
      organism itself (Hoffmeyer 1998c).

   The ring dove example is only one of probably millions, but it highlights
how the subtlety of synchronizations and chemical communication that must
be reciprocally tuned between organisms involved in social behavior is stun-
ning  — yet scientists at present are only scratching the surface of this new area
of biosemiotic study.


                                 Epigenetic Heredity
It is a strangely overlooked fact that genes are not the only important hereditary
contribution from one generation to the next. Environmental conditions and the
social heritability of learned behaviors often prove to be just as vital hereditary
factors, insofar as the very viability of the offspring will often depend critically on
both the parental choice of breeding place and parental care in general. But there
                                           THE   SEMIOTICS   OF HEREDITY            119



is also another kind of heredity that is directly connected to reproduction and yet
is not caused by genes. This kind of heredity is called epigenetic heredity.
    One of the first to track this kind of heredity was the American biologist
Tracey Morton Sonneborn (1905-81), who for most of his life worked on the
little unicellular protozoa Paramecium (Figure 5.2). In Paramecium, reproduc-
tion is mostly vegetative: cells simply divide into two daughter cells. At inter-
vals, however, Paramecium will enter a process called conjugation, where two
Paramecium cells create a cytoplasmic bridge between them. They then use this
bridge for an exchange of haploid (half chromosome) micronuclei —a process
that formally corresponds to sexual reproduction.
  Sonneborn noticed that some Paramecium strains, which he dubbed &d/-
ers, produced a toxic compound that might kill other pavamecium strains, and,
through breeding experiments, he showed that the competence to produce
this toxic compound was dependent on genes in the cell’s nucleus. But at the
same time, his experiments showed that a cytoplasmic element called kappa was
involved. This cytoplasmic element had the effect of making the killer strains
resistant to their own toxic compound. When kappa was lost from the cells,
those Paramecium strains would then become sensitive to the toxic compound.
Many years later, it was learned that kappa was, in reality, a symbiotic bacterium
capable of sustaining life inside the cytoplasm of Paramecium (Preer 1996).
   This phenomenon is called endosymbiosis and occurs in many species. In fact,
all modern cells, called eukaryotic cells, are endosymbionts — since it has been
shown that important cellular organelles like mitochondria and chloroplasts
(and possibly several others) are all but certainly descendents from once free-liv-
ing bacteria that have now lost the ability to survive and reproduce outside of a
eukaryotic cell (Margulis 1970).
   The inheritance of cytoplasmic endosymbionts may at first seem to be a some-
what unusual kind of cytoplasmic inheritance, yet it may possibly be quite wide-
spread. Sonneborn, certainly, showed genuine cases of cytoplasmic inheritance
in Paramecium, and his discovery is worth considering in detail here.




Figure 5.2 Paramecium. The surface is covered with rows of cilia (from Goodwin 1994, 7,
with permission).
120            THE   SEMIOTICS     OF NATURE




   As can be seen in Figure 5.2, the surface of Paramecium is covered by
cilia — hair-like protrusions that can move around like small whips. There are
hundreds of these cilia sitting in long rows from the front to the back of the organ-
ism, and thanks to the coordinated movement of all these cilia, the Paramecium
can move freely around in the water. Eventually, Sonneborn discovered that one
of his Parameciums had an unusual stripe that, upon closer scrutiny, turned out
to be caused by an inversion of one of the rows of cilia. Sonneborn then showed
that this new trait (dubbed melon stripe) was heritable.
   The really interesting discovery, however, came when he tried to see what
would happen if he operationally turned around one of the rows of cilia in
a normal Paramecium. Surprisingly, he found that in this case the new trait
was inherited by daughter cells, even though here the genes were untouched
by the intervention. What happens in this case is that when a Paramecium
is extending its surface structure in preparation for the division, it uses the
already existing structure as a template. New molecular units are assembled
using the model of the old surface, so that the inversed row of cilia will auto-
matically be copied to the daughter cells. So here again we find, as we did in
the above-mentioned case of Acetabularium, that the concrete 3-D morpho-
genetic processes are not exclusively predetermined by the genome, but are
controlled equally (if not more so) by extragenetic factors in the cytoplasm or
membrane structures.
   This should not surprise us, really, as the cells in a multicellular organism are
often very different from one another and only a very limited fraction of the
genes is actually transcribed by any one of them. Early on in embryogenesis,
almost all cells loose their totipotentiality —i.e., their potential to become vir-
tually any kind of cell at all. A determination (more properly, a series of deter-
minations) takes place whereby the cells, bit by bit, become more and more
specialized with each divison, so that after a certain point in time, a given cell
can no longer become, say, a liver cell, but only a nerve cell. Sophisticated mech-
anisms exist to make sure that once such a determination event has occurred,
it will be conserved in that cell line.* Thus, the Italian embryologist Marcel
Barbieri has observed that in addition to the genetic DNA memory, there also
exists an epigenetic cell memory (Barbieri 2001, 109).
   The mechanisms that bring about this stepwise epigenetic cell memory are
not well-known, but they depend, among other things, on enzymatic modi-
fications of the chromatin —i.., the complex of proteins and DNA whereby
the DNA double helix is fixed into a more or less compact 3-D superstructure.
DNA sequences that end up inside this compact superstructure are quite inac-
cessible to the enzyme complexes involved in transcription. Thus, according


4     Acell line consists of any given cell and all the daughter cells that ever derive from it.
                                             THE   SEMIOTICS   OF HEREDITY          121



to the current view, genes that are not supposed to be transcribed in a given
cell line may perhaps be “put away” — coiled into those compact regions of the
DNA (see Figure 5.3).
  The classic example of such chromatin marking is what is called parental
imprinting, whereby one of the two X chromosomes is permanently inactivated
in this way. Specifically, mammalian females are born with two copies of the X
chromosome, one inherited from the father and the other from the mother, but
one of them — either the father’s or the mother’s — is always inactivated right
from the beginning by chromatin marking. This inactivation is then passed on
to the daughter cells so that in the end, the X chromosomes of all the cells in the
body will be of either maternal or paternal origin.
   In addition to chromatin marking, there also occurs a widespread methy-
lation of the DNA —an enzymatic process whereby a methyl group (CH;) is
attached to specific “letters” (bases) in the DNA. This methylation seems to
be an essential mechanism for the tissue-specific inactivation of distinct genes
throughout embryogenesis — and thus for the determination process whereby
different cell lines in the growing embryo end up as different types of tissue.
How cells manage to re-methylate newly formed chromosomes at the exact
right positions after each cell division is not known. Yet, so they do.




                                          decondensation




                                          - Euchomatin
                            S           Transcribed region




Figure 5.3 Heterochromatin is the designation for inactive regions (nontranscribed
regions) of the DNA that are coiled up into a compact structure (modified from Solomon,
Berg and Martin 1999, 301).
122       THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




   It was long believed that epigenetic inheritance systems only applied to
somatic cells, and that the meiotic division leading to the formation of gam-
etes (haploid sex cells) would wipe the slate clean (i.e., remove methylations
and chromatin markers). But increasingly this fine picture is starting to crack.
At least in plants, chromatin markings may sometimes survive meiotic purifica-
tion to influence the expression pattern of the genes in the next generation — a
phenomenom called paramutation (Hollick, Dorweiler, and Chandler 1997;
Sternberg 2000).
   From a theoretical point of view, it might be noted that what was not too long
ago characterized as the se/f-replicating and deterministic entity of the genome
has increasingly become understood to be a changeable and flexible point in
an ongoing process. Yet, after all, what should have hindered nature in profit-
ing from the obvious possibility for evolutionary innovation that springs from
chromatin reconfigurations’ vast potential for inheritance?
   Chromatin reconfigurations exhibit an interesting case of analog coding that
supersedes or builds upon a prior digital codification. The analog coding of the
DNA superstructure doesn’t destroy the underlying digital coded specifications.
Rather, it (in effect) p/ays with them, tentatively organizing them into new pat-
terns of decipherment. And only time and investigation will show how far such
mechanisms have been realized in living systems.


                                The Genome

The genome, i.e., the sotality ofgenetic hereditary material in a cell of a given
organism, is an impressive piece of chemistry. In eukaryote cells, the genome is
divided into a number of distinct units (chromosomes) each of which is con-
stituted by a linear DNA molecule (a double helix) looped around spheri-
cal complexes of protein units (with a diameter of eleven nanometers) called
nucleosomes. Certain domains of the helix (the heterochromatin) are packed
into an even denser hypercoil structure with a diameter of thirty nanometers
(for comparison, the diameter of the DNA helix itself is only two nanometers).
Yet, in spite of the compact folding, it remains fairly astonishing that approxi-
mately three meters of DNA can be packed into a cellular nucleus with an aver-
age radius of no more than one one-hundredth of a millimeter.
   Only a minor part — some 5 percent — of the genome is occupied by actual
genes in the form of DNA sequences that will eventually be transcribed into
proteins, and it is far from clear what the rest of the DNA is good for. Yet as
we have already seen, there are some regulatory potentialities connected to the
macrostructure of chromatin which might contribute to the need for an abun-
dance of DNA. Perhaps there might also be unknown tasks of DNA connected
                                                THE   SEMIOTICS     OF HEREDITY              123



to cellular division. Furthermore, some nongenetic areas of the DNA are taken
up by pseudogenes that have interesting potentials for the evolutionary process,
as we shall see later in this chapter. In any event, research on DNA sequences
and structure proceeds extremely rapidly in these years, and answers to such
questions may soon be forthcoming.
   What has been learned recently is germane to our discussion at hand, for bio-
chemists have been surprised to find that there is very little difference among
taxonomic groups concerning the total amount of DNA per cell. Apart from
bacteria (which are prokaryotic cells), and yeast and fungi (that clearly have less
DNA), there is no systematic increase in the amount of DNA per cell to be
found amongst the other main groups of living systems. A toad, for example,
has more DNA than a human. And even though the average content of DNA
in insects is lower than it is in mammals, it is easy to find insects that have much
more of “the glorified compound” than we have ourselves. One could perhaps
think that this apparent disproportion might be due to the low percentage of
protein-coding DNA, but as we shall see, the numbers don’t get much better if
we shift to a comparison of the content ofthe true genes across the groups.
   Considered as a digital code, DNA consists, as is now well known, of sequences
of four nucleotide bases, conveniently abbreviated to A, T, G, and C. Thanks to
the base pairing mechanism, whereby A and T, and G and C, respectively, are
paired with each other through weak forces (hydrogen bonds), one may —at
least in principle — explain how new strings of DNA or RNA can be formed as
replicas of the already existing strings. (It should be noticed, however, that DNA
molecules, when seen from the standpoint of biochemistry, consist of electrically
loaded three-dimensional atomic shapes, rather than just of sequences.)
   When considered at this level, the difficulties connected to explaining how
a gene may be transcribed to RNA and later translated to protein are conspicu-
ous. To take just the first of these two processes, it involves, first of all, the disen-
tangling of the DNA string from the chromatin complex it is bound to in order
to allow the enzyme RNA polymerase II (which catalyzes the formation of the
primary RNA transcript as a copy of the DNA) to get past the nucleosomes.
The DNA helix must then be cut through at the exact place where the gene is
situated and the two strings must be physically unwound from each other to
keep pace with the movement of the enzyme down along the DNA strings.
   The accomplishment of these tasks presupposes a precisely coordinated spa-
tio-temporal interaction between the active surface domains of many proteins
and transcription factors — as well as the precise spatio-temporal interactions


; As we saw in Chapter 4, there is no simple definition of agene — thus, by ¢rwe genes in this
context I simply refer to the biochemical genes as traditionally defined: those sequences of DNA
nucleotides coding for a protein.
124        THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




between transcription factors and the specific area of the surface of the DNA
helix. Sometimes this implies a cooperative interaction between elements of the
DNA molecule that may be separated from each other by up to a thousand base
pairs (see Figure 5.4).
   The formation of the initiation complex itself (Figure 5.4) is semiotically
controlled in ways that are yet only barely understood. First and foremost, 2
range of extracellular signals may eventually be bound to receptors at the cell
surface, and thus release an intracellularly mediated activation or inhibition of
the transcription factors. In some cases, hormones can pass directly through the
cell membrane and take part in the process via their bindings to transcription
factors — while proteins released through transcriptive processes at other local-
ities at the DNA molecule may inhibit or enhance the formation of the initia-
tion complex.
    The reason why I have been dragging the reader with me through the minu-
tiae of biochemical complexity involved in the regulation of transcription has



                                      ene             a
                                      ome




                                                     SSS
                                                                                  3"




Figure 5.4 Initiation complex formation for a structural gene in a eukaryote cell. The
DNA thread is seen to loop around a nucleosome (an aggregate of proteins) so that in
one direction (towards the 3'-end) it is bound to a transcription complex consisting of
the transcription enzyme polymerase II (or, POL Il), and a range ofdifferent transcription
factors. Among these should be mentioned the TBP (TATA-binding protein), that bind
to the sequence of the DNA string called the TATA box, which defines the locus for initi-
ation some twenty to thirty base pairs away (here indicated as a small white rectangle
encircled by POL II). Thanks to the looping around the nucleosome, other sequences of
the DNA string, called enhancers (ENH) — separated from the TATA box by perhaps sev-
eral thousands of base pairs   —are brought close to the initiation complex, which they
may possibly influence through the mediation of regulatory proteins (TAFs and Act)
(Modified from Mathews, van Holde and Ahern 1999, 1094).
                                            THE   SEMIOTICS   OF HEREDITY           125



been to make it clear that digital codes necessarily are extremely complex — and
that their modus operandi is dependent on difficult and energy-consuming sys-
tems. Again, were it not for the fetishization of the gene as a kind of self-repli-
cating controller (a thoroughly incorrect conception on every count, as I argued
in Hoftmeyer 1996b), none of this should be surprising. Indeed, we can recog-
nize the true dynamics of the process from our own experience with such codes.
It usually takes a child approximately two years to learn the digital code of spo-
ken language and —as observed by the neurobiologist Terrence Deacon (see
Chapter 8) — this always takes place in a strongly supportive linguistic milieu
including other active interpreters — in the absence of which, one might well
doubt that a child could learn to master the art of linguistic reference at all.
   Similarly, when the concrete spatio-temporal complexities involved in digi-
tal-analog recoding processes are considered in detail, it becomes much harder
to accept the everyday jargon of genes for this or that trait in human psychol-
ogy (e.g., promiscuity, alcoholism, and xenophobia). For as soon as one tries
to invent concrete biochemical models to explain how a fraction of a mole-
cule (here, DNA) could possibly be she cause of such disparate and long-dis-
tance effects, the conceptual difficulties begin piling up exponentially. Recently,
the biochemist and philospher Lenny Moss has suggested that we distinguish
between two different concepts of the gene. Moss calls these concepts gene-P
and gene-D   —where gene-P is the ordinary phenotype-related gene concept,
such as the gene for blue eyes (or for a distinct defect of the drosophila wing),
while the gene-D concept refers to the gene perceived as a transcriptional unit,
inside of which is contained a molecular template serving as a resource base for
the production of gene products (RNA molecules or proteins). This is the gene
that draws our interest from an ontogenetic point of view, as D genes are deter-
mined by their molecular sequence of nucleotide bases, but undetermined with
respect to their phenotypic effects.
   Now, it could happen that occasionally a P gene and a D gene may be one and
the same   — but such a case would turn out to be a lot rarer than many people
would expect (especially given the widespread tendency to mistakenly think of D
genes as P genes). For example, the gene for cystic fibrosis may appear at first glance
to be a gene-P — but this gene-P would in most cases, as we now know, be related
to a gene-D that describes the sequence of amino acids of one of a family of pro-
teins that are used for trans-membrane ion channels (Moss 2001). While gene-Ds
are often molecularly well defined, gene-Ps are most often postulated from very
indirect evidence (e.g, purely statistical evidence) and the confusion of the two
gene concepts into just one concept of the gene tends to conceal the vague status
of those gene-Ps (e.g., “the gay gene”) that so often appeals to the public imagina-
tion — and that thereby spreads the general misunderstanding that genetics has a
much firmer grip on human psychological traits than in reality it has.
126           THE SEMIOTICS     OF NATURE



    For almost a century now, genetics has been focused almost exclusively on the
 transmission aspect —i.e., the question of how the genes become transmitted and
 their frequencies changed down through the generations — at the expense of the
functional aspect — i.e., the question of how genes actually bring about those traits
 of the organism that they are claimed to cause. It is only now— now that we are
 finally beginning to get a clearer picture of our human genetic constitution through
 a number of big mapping projects like the Humane Genome Project — that we are
 gradually becoming aware that the gene does not fill its not-too-long-ago supposed
 role as the ultimate (bordering on magic) explanation for biology.


                              Caenorhabditis elegans
In a way, the simplistic picture of genes as unambiguous determinants for phe-
notypic traits was already beginning to crack as work progressed in mapping
the relation between genes and behavior in the little one-millimeter-long nem-
atode Caenorhabditis elegans (usually called C. elegans, since almost nobody
remembers this long name). In the mid-sixties, Sydney Brenner— one of the
leading scientists behind the detection of the genetic code      —selected C. ele-
gans asa model organism for the genetic studies of behavior, on the basis that its
short life cycle and small size (less than one thousand cells in total) made it an
excellent candidate for genetic analysis. Brenner’s ambition was to make a com-
plete mapping of the structure of the nervous system in this worm, and then to
relate this map both to the organism’s genes, as well as to its behavior. Brenner
(1974, 72) optimistically put it this way: “In principle, it should be possible to
dissect the genetic specification of a nervous system in much the same way as
was done for biosynthetic pathways in bacteria or for bacteriophage assembly”
(cited in Schaffner 1998) — and this quote may well serve as a prime example
of the reductionistic credo that dominated biology in the second half of the
last century. That the dynamics of the nervous system should, at least in prin-
ciple, be “inscribed” in the genetic machinery in the same way that metabolic
processes are in bacteria, was the basic premise for the project. But Brenner saw
that if one was going to prove this, the fruit fly—with its hundred thousands
of nerve cells — would already be much too complicated. In C. elegans, on the
other hand, there is, as we know now, exactly 302 nerve cells.
      Today, forty years later, it can safely be said that C. elegans is the most fully sci-
entifically described multicellular organism on Earth. More than two hundred
research teams — or approximately one scientist per cell — have helped in study-
ing this little worm. Every single cell has been named and described and even
all of the approximately five thousand synaptic connections between nerve cells
are known. (These synapses are uniform from animal to animal, but not totally
                                                THE   SEMIOTICS     OF HEREDITY              127




identical with one another.) Moreover, a complete map of the organism's entire
hereditary material has been constructed, partitioning its 19,900 genes in the pre-
cise sequence that they appear upon its mere six chromosomes (Schaffner 1998).
   The project has been closely followed by the philosopher of science Kenneth
Schaffner, and here we shall stick to the thorough review of the project that
Schaffner (1998) gives in Philosophy ofScience. An important aspect of this work
concerns the response of the worm to various chemical compounds — that is,
taste and smell and the behavior connected to these senses. As intensely studied by
Cornelia Bargmann and her team, C. elegans is able to distinguish between at least
seven classes of compounds which either attract it or repel it. Only two pairs of sen-
sory neurons are engaged in this task, and only approximately twenty genes were
shown to be necessary for the normal functioning of these neurons. Still, however,
it has not been possible to establish any simple correspondence between gene and
behavior in this case. In 1993, Bergmannss group reported the following:

   One way to identify genes that act in the nervous system is by isolating mutants
   with defective behavior. However, the intrinsic complexity of the nervous system
   can make the analysis of behavioral mutants difficult. For example, since behaviors
   are generated by groups of neurons that act in concert, a single genetic effect can
   affect multiple neurons, a single neuron can affect multiple behaviors, and multi-
   ple neurons can affect the same behavior. In practice these complexities mean that
   understanding the effects of abehavioral mutation depends on understanding the
   neurons that generate and regulate behavior (Avery, Bargmann, and Horovitz 1993,
   495, cited in Schaffner 1998).

Based on the available evidence, Schaffner distilled eight general principles, or
rules, said to account for all the possible relations between genes and behay-
ior in “this extraordinarily well-worked-out simple organism” (Schaffner 1998,
220), and he sums up these rules in the table given here as Table 5.1.
   Under Schaffner’s conception, these eight rules —ru/es that, in fact, only
generalize the already known principles of genetic pleiotropy,° genetic interac-
tion, neuronal multifunctionality, plasticity, and influences from the environ-
ment — ought to count as standard assumptions for the continued study of the
relations between genes and behavior in more complex organisms as well.
   Yet most interesting to note in a biosemiotic context is the fact that, even in
this extremely simple organism, one cannot completely explain behavior with-
out also considering the aspect of learning. Thus, for instance, C. elegans exhib-
its a remarkable plasticity in its behavior when it is starved, or if the density of
the populations grows too great. “Water-soluble chemicals that are strong attrac-
tants to naive animals are ignored by crowded, starved animals,’ writes Sengupta

6 Pleiotropy is the designation for the phenomenon whereby one single gene has an effect of sev-
eral different phenotypic traits.
128         THE SEMIOTICS     OF NATURE



Table 5.1 Rules for the relation between genes and behavior in C. elegans (modified
from Schaffner 1998, 301).

 1k     many genes !one neuron                                "        ~

 Ds                !one type of behavior
       many neurons!                                                nares
 3:     one gene! many neurons (pleiotropy)
 4.     one neuron ! many behaviors
5.      stochastic development! ! different neural. connections *
 6.   _ different environments/histories !!different behaviors ‘2
                                    ant behavior (combinatorial effects).



The! can be read asas vaffect(s), cause(s), or lead(s) to
* in prima facie genetically identical (mature) organisms.


et al. (1993, 243), adding that “these changes induced by crowding and starvation
persist for hours after the worms are separated and fed” (cited in Schaffner 1998).
It has furthermore been shown that if C. elegans is exposed to fatigue or dimin-
ished food intake during its development, it may enter a dauer state—meaning
that the larval phase is extended, so that the worm may survive for four to eight
times longer than it would be able to in the normal (post-larval) state. And pher-
omones emitted by the worm itself are implicated in the process.
   One interesting aspect of C. elegans’s biology that Schaffner does not himself
address is that the worm isa very “brainy” creature: nearly one third of its cells are
nerve cells! This is significant, because it takes a lot of energy to run a nerve cell.
Humans at rest, for instance, spend 18 percent of their metabolic energy just to
maintain the nervous system — even though it occupies a mere 2 percent of their
total body weight. The burden of maintaining a brain is relatively more demand-
ing in small animals like birds and monkeys, since the brains of those animals
make up nearly 10 percent of their body weight. Brain size, in fact, most com-
monly correlates with the social and behavioral complexity that the animal has
to cope with, and only reflects body size to a limited extent. It simply takes a cer-
tain amount of neurons to coordinate a given activity such as breathing, running,
or singing — and this burden can often be so high that the brain size of an animal
species will be limited by the amount of food energy the species typically is able
to procure for its progeny (since early brain growth makes such particularly high
demands on the access to metabolic energy).     The evolution of suckling in mam-
mals some two hundred million years ago, therefore, was very likely a decisive
prerequisite for the later development in these animals of much bigger brains.
   It is therefore no surprise that the number of neurons in C. elegans is very
accurately controlled. The loss of a single nerve cell in a nematode may make it
unable to leave offspring because it consequently cannot lay eggs. But an increase
                                           THE   SEMIOTICS   OF HEREDITY           129



in the number of nerve cells is also potentially lethal, because the increased
drain of energy leaves the worm without sufficient strength to leave offspring.
Accordingly, C. elegans does what nearly all other animals do. It produces far
too many nerve cells relative to what it needs and it then gradually kills those
cells that show themselves superfluous through the process of programmed cell
death or apoptosis (which I will discuss below). Neurons that do not yet exhibit
sufficient synaptic activity after a certain period of time has elapsed are treated
as superfluous, and only those neurons that have proven to be functional are
kept alive. The integration of this communicative logic into the general growth
dynamics of the larva apparently is so efficient that the number of surviving neu-
rons invariably ends up as exactly 302. It is worth noting that this apparent deter-
minism does not depend on rigid genetic predetermination, but results from an
organizational principle rooted in the semiotic interplay of neurons in the grow-
ing brain, in their ever-changing contextual situation. We shall call this organiza-
tional principle semiotic emergence and examine it in some detail in Chapter 7.
   For now, it will suffice to consider what Schaffner calls “the principal take-
home lesson” in his summation of the analysis of the C. elegans project— the
realization that “genes act in complex interactive concert and through nervous
systems, systems that are significantly influenced by development, and exhibit
short- and long-term learning that modifies behavior. The environment plays
critical roles in development and also in which genes are expressed and when.
Characterizing simple ‘genes for’ behaviors is, accordingly, a drastic oversimpli-
fication of the connection between genes and behavior, even when we have the
(virtually) complete molecular story” (Schaffner 1998).
   In short, it seems that the reductionist credo that Brenner expressed in
1974 — “In principle, it should be possible to dissect the genetic specification of
a nervous system in much the same way as was done for biosynthetic pathways in
bacteria or for bacteriophage assembly,’ a credo that apparently has nourished the
extraordinarily generous flow of funding to such gigantic research programs for
the last forty years — was, it turns out, not only a gross oversimplification, but was
false. The dynamics of the nervous system cannot reasonably be said to lie inscribed
in the genes in the same way metabolic processes in bacteria are inscribed in their
genes. And to get to the bottom of what really may be going on here, such sim-
plistically causal assumptions and methodologies are going to have to be replaced
with much more sophisticated ones, as I shall argue at length below.


                           The Human Genome

The assumption that a map of the human genome could be equivalent to
the book of life or even to the holy grail of developmental biology is a mes-
sage that has been industriously circulated by both grant-seeking scientists and
130          THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




story-seeking journalists. Again and again, we have been told that our genes
are the hidden keys to our psychic and physical well-being or lack thereof. And
still —long after most scientists have abandoned their initial overestimations
for the project — newspapers regularly announce in big headlines that now sci-
entists are close to identifying this or that gene for major health threats such as
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, alcoholism, or even cancer and vascular disease
(in addition to even more outrageous claims linking genes to such nonbiologi-
cal phenomena as racism, musical talent, and likability).
   And the message has gone through. For now a large majority of people in the
Western countries unquestioningly believe in this myth. Apparently, the general
public did not see the significance of a February 11, 2001 news release issued by
the scientists behind the Humane Genome Project — the project that for over
a decade had been engaged in mapping the humane genome, gene by gene. The
announcement made that day revealed that not only did the sum total of human
hereditary material contain thirty thousand genes (or less than one-third of
the expected number) — but even more striking, that it was found that most
human genes are not unique to our species at all, but are also identically present
in other species. Indeed, it now turns out that only a few hundred human genes
will ot also be present in closely related forms in other mammals, such as the
mouse. Craig Winther, president of Celera, one of the leading forces involved
in the Humane Genome Project, admitted, “This tells me that genes can’t possi-
bly explain all of what makes us what we are” (Strohman 2001). With as few as
ahundred unique genes at our disposal, one does not need a deep study of the
catalog of human shortcomings to conclude that there cannot possibly be one
diseased gene for every sin.’
   The hegemonic status of “DNA-ism” probably owes a lot to some rare but nasty
diseases, such as muscular dystrophy, that do in fact depend on a deficiency in
only one gene. The disease gene in this case specifies a deficient protein, dystro-
phin, which muscle cells cannot deal with in a normal manner, and so the carriers
of the dystrophin protein-producing gene become seriously ill. But monogenetic
diseases such as muscular dystrophy are atypical. Indeed, they make up less than
2 percent of our total human disease load. To the extent that genes are “responsi-
ble” for major disease patterns, many more than one gene in isolation are always
involved   —and these gene complexes form part of a lifelong dynamic interplay
with the body and its myriad of ongoing, nongenetic processes (Strohman 2001).
      Moreover, it has been shown that even a clearcut monogenetic disease like
PKU (phenylketonuria) exhibits a considerable range of variation as it is mani-
fested at the phenotypic level. For instance, not all patients suffering untreated

7 Perhaps, rather, there is one for each human virtue, as Claus Emmeche has playfully
commented.
                                           THE   SEMIOTICS   OF HEREDITY           131



PKU will demonstrate any disturbed cognitive development. This is so because
the concentration of phenylalanine in the brain is dependent on a diversity of
factors that influence the efficiency of the blood-brain barrier — and so not all
patients’ brains reach toxic levels of the nondegradable amino acid (Scriver and
Waters 1999).
   Given all this begs the question of how a few hundred genes can determine
whether an egg will become a baby or a mouse? The explanation must be that
genes do not —as previously supposed — correspond to distinct functions in the
organism. Rather — and both embryological and neurobiological research bears
this out overwhelmingly     — genes function as signposts in a dynamic interplay
with each other and with the network of proteins and membranes in the grow-
ing embryo. It is not the genes per se, but their interplay and interpretation in
the cell that counts.
  And again, current research in molecular genetics increasingly shows us that
this is so. Noncoding repetitive sequences of DNA are everywhere involved in
the coordinative processes that decide (in a genuine sense — more on that forth-
coming) which genes in a cell will or will not be transcribed at a given time.
James Shapiro (1999, 26) has suggested that these repetitive sequences are the
parameters that determine the “system architechture” characteristic for differ-
ent species and he claims that “resetting the genome system architecture through
reorganization of the repetitive DNA content is a fundamental aspect of evolu-
tionary change... [a] resetting process that can occur without major changes in
the protein coding sequences.”
   To illustrate how an understanding of the workings of genes as signposts
(rather than as causes or blueprints) facilitates an understanding of why it does
not necessarily take many unique genes to assure that a given fertilized egg devel-
ops into a human being rather than into a mouse, let us consider the growth of
an embryonic tissue layer in the virtual organism Scitoi mesoib. We shall spe-
cifically observe the dynamic growth of a neural tissue layer called strap that
normally is regulated by the concentration of a signal molecule, sizapin, which
gradually builds up due to its excretion from an underlying embryonic cell layer
(Figure 5.5, top and middle). Normally, when sivapin reaches a certain concen-
tration inside the cells of the sivap layer, further cell divisions — and thus further
growth — will come to a stop.
   Now, suppose that a mutation hits the gene sir which specifies the enzyme
(sirapin synthetase) that catalyzes the formation of sirapin in the underlying tis-
sue layer. Such a mutation might eventually cause a slight decrease in the cata-
lytic activity of the enzyme, and the mutated embryo would therefore produce
sirapin at a slower rate. Consequently, the sirapin concentration in the sirap layer
will stay below the threshold value for an extended period and, accordingly, the
relative size of the sirap neural tissue will be increased (Figure 5.5, bottom).
132         THE   SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE



                                        Early phase



The formation of a new sirap-layer is indicated in dark. Cells in the newly
formed layer grow and divide unless growth is inhibited by the signal
molecule sirapin, which is produced in the underlying layer (light cells)

                                    Late phase - Normal

eS      A   A     I   Te ES Ee A    A    AE    A   A    TS TT ST SETI A    I   SS SS SS    SE


Sirapin production is catalyzed by the enzyme Sirapin Synthetase (ST)
and the gene specifying ST is called sir. Sirapin will slowly diffuse into the
upper sirap-layer and block any further growth

                                  Late phase ~ Mutation


Ft    int cue     a   RL CERI A   AAO    eit, tee eats    aie ES ace aEan ae eH    ELH a


A mutation in sir has caused slightly decreased Sirapin Synthetase activi-
ty leading to a decreased production rate for sirapin. As a consequence,
sirapin concentration in the newly formed tissue only reaches the inhibi-
tatory level at a later time allowing for extended growth of this tissue.
Figure 5.5 Fetal development of sirap tissue in the virtual organism Scitoi mesoib (see text).


   This simple yet realistic model easily explains how small mutational modifi-
cations might eventually provoke severe changes in morphology or instinctual
behavior in an individual or a species. Large-scale morphological change may
therefore take place without any new genes being involved at all — and in cases
where such changes affect the eventual formation of brain architecture, it fol-
lows that new behavioral patterns may appear simply through the modification
of already existing genetic material.
   Very probably, the addition of new genetic functionality had been a major
theme in early evolution — say, for the first three billion years. Yet when those
lineages that would become, respectively, H. sapiens and C. elegans separated
some hundred million years ago, most of the fundamental genes that modern
species carry were already present. Protein evolution since then has mostly been
variations upon the same ten thousand to twenty thousand basic themes, where
small adjustments in the properties of proteins have changed the interplay of the
settings for embryogenetic semiotic control.
                                           THE   SEMIOTICS   OF HEREDITY          133



   The key here is the idea that the ontogeny of morphological and behav-
ioral traits is secured through a sophisticated mechanism of semiotic scaffold-
ing— and thus is only in a very indirect and mediated way, based essentially on
genetic scaffolding. For to modify genes is to change the way that different pro-
cesses are “tuned to one another”     —and the product that results from such a
process bears no simple relation to the mutation itself. From a semiotic point of
view, what happens in the siv-mutant is a weakening of the signal involved in fit-
ting the growth of one cell layer to another. Thus, in the case of the mutant Scitoi
mesoib, the cells in the sirap tissue layer do not recognize the signal in time, and
this delay in the interpretive response has the effect of allowing the growth of
this to continue for an extended period of time.
  Genes, then, do not specify traits in the adult organism, and in a way they
do not even specify proteins. They do, of course, mechanistically determine the
amino acid backbones of given proteins (although it should be remembered that
a plurality of processes — such as RNA editing, protein folding, and protein tar-
geting — all contextually interfere in the simple causality of this otherwise seem-
ingly deterministic process). However, since proteins are not just molecules, but
are always also semiotic tools, what the genes really do specify is the efficiency of
semiotic modulators. They serve to adjust the screws, as it were, in the biosemiotic
machinery of the organism. Therefore, in order to adjust the predominant meta-
phors by which we think about the relations between genetic regulation and the
semiotic reality of life, let me suggest a model of the genetic system as 4 comput-
erized inventory-control system —i.e., a system for ascertaining that the appro-
priate stock of molecular resources are always present when the cell or organism
needs them for its never-ending semiotic interactions. In this inventory-control
system, individual genes appear like the ever-present (though largely unseen)
application options that only become available for use through the activation of
different menu bars in our computer software applications. In these “menued”
gene ensembles, there are application options for chromatin structure, applica-
tion options for the proteins involved in the cell-division apparatus, application
options for catabolic and anabolic enzymes, application options for membrane
related proteins and other structural components, etc.
   Decisions on which application menus should be activated, as well as which
options made available through the activation of these “menued” gene ensem-
bles should actually be realized at any given time, will depend on the intricate
semiotic interplay of the total cellular system as it may be biased in any given
moment by the relative concentrations of important modulatory proteins. This
context-dependent event is most properly referred to as a decision in this sense,
for that term highlights the fact there is no one element deterministically caus-
ing one thing to happen over another, but that the selection is a function of the
system state and its needs at any given moment.
134         THE   SEMIOTICS     OF NATURE




   In this heuristic, every activated application option functions as a release
mechanism whereby the production of a new resource is initiated and stored in
the proper department of the cell. Mechanistically, this initiation corresponds
to the RNA polymerase reaction whereby a particular gene is transcribed into
RNA. As long as the given menu option is activated, the corresponding mRNA
production will continue and protein synthesis will go on. But the moment it is
interrupted, mRNA degradation will naturally ensue and this will rapidly bring
any further synthesis of that particular protein to an end.


                                           Spam
In addition to the operational genes that most people equate with the very con-
cept genes, the genome contains huge stores of hidden, never sought-after menu
items — what scientists call pseudogenes —that potentially may be brought
into circulation, and thus may come to play a role in evolutionary changes.
Pseudogenes are areas of the genome that are nonfunctional in the sense that they
are not available to the transcription process — but which nevertheless exhibit
remarkable similarity to known functional genes in their base sequences.
    Thus, before the mid-1970s, DNA was considered a very static molecule. But
it has become very clear since then that there exist quite a number of mechanisms
whereby sequences on the DNA molecule may be duplicated and even change
positions on the chromosome. Such mechanisms have led to the formation of gene
families —i.e., families of narrowly related functional genes, as well as pseudogenes.
    Pseudogenes are of evolutionary interest because, unlike functional genes, they
 are not expressed and, therefore, are not subject to natural selection. Since they do
not in any way contribute to the success or failure of their carrier organisms, they are
free to undergo mutation without incurring the selectional consequences that nor-
mal genes do. (For normal genes mutate just as frequently, but those mutants that
express functional deficiencies are accordingly sorted out.) Pseudogenes therefore
represent a tacit resource base of latent proteins with unexplored properties — from
which natural selection may eventually pick up new functional genes.
   The hemoglobin gene family nicely illustrates this dynamic. Since oxygen dif-
fuses through tissue slowly, animals beyond a certain size must find a way to
solve the challenge of getting enough oxygen into their tissues. Insects have
solved the problem by developing small air channels (trachea) but this solution
only works because insects’ body mass is so small. (Conversely, this may be the
reason why insects never become big.)*


8 It is interesting that in the Coal Age, more than three hundred million years ago, dragon flies
with a wingspan of more than sixty centimeters flew around. The explanation might be that the
atmospheric oxygen pressure (concentration) was higher then than it is now.
                                          THE   SEMIOTICS   OF HEREDITY         135



  In vertebrates, however, the solution to this same problem is hemoglobin —a
highly specialized protein molecule with a capacity to carry forward a small iron-
containing molecule (a porphyrin) that will bind oxygen reversibly — meaning
that it will take up oxygen wherever there is plenty of it (for instance, in the
lungs) and give it off where it is lacking (for instance, in tissues). The delicate
biochemical task that the hemoglobin molecule performs is to keep the highly
reactive oxygen molecule safe inside the 3-D protein structure while it is trans-
ported around the body. In molecular models of hemoglobin, the iron porphy-
rin (called hem) can be seen to consist in a nearly flat structure enclosed within
a hydrophobic depression of the protein molecule.
   The oxygen molecule extends perpendicular to this plane     —but is cut off
from entering into unwanted interactions thanks to a well-placed unit of the
amino acid histidine that safeguards the configuration. A corresponding histi-
dine unit fixes the hem group on the other side of the plane. These two histi-
dine units occupy position numbers 93 and 64, respectively, in the sequence
of 150 amino acids that make up the hemoglobin chain (as counted from the
N-terminal, i.c., the end of the polypeptide chain that carries a free amino
group    — NH,). And it is exactly these two amino acids that have remained
unchanged by natural selection throughout the five-hundred-million-year-long
history of hemoglobin evolution (whereas changes have occurred on almost all
of the other positions).
   I have not digressed into the discussion of these biochemical details because
I expect the reader to nourish a sudden longing for an understanding of hemo-
globin biochemistry. Rather, I have done so because these details hold an impor-
tant key to unraveling the intricate interplay between digital and analog codes,
as disclosed by mapping the evolutionary history of this and other gene families.
Human hemoglobin is in reality a complex (a tetramer) of four subunits each
of which is a protein chain of just under 150 amino acids. All four subunits are
derived form the same ancestral protein chain but pairwise they are now slightly
different and are called alpha and beta chains respectively.
   Significantly, the early embryo doesn’t form any of these two subunits, but
instead forms ksi and epsilon chains that deviate somewhat from the alpha and
beta chains of the adult hemoglobin. Towards the end of embryonic develop-
ment, a fifth chain is made called the gamma chain —this is because the oxy-
gen supply for the embryo comes through the placenta, and it therefore needs a
special hemoglobin tuned to this temporary — but life-sustaining for that time
period  — condition. And for a short period around birth, the newborn baby
even produces a sixth chain of proteins called the delta chain.
   Such variety in the kinds of hemoglobin chain formation found through the
embryogenesis of one individual is a relatively recent phenomenon, in terms of
evolution —as is disclosed by comparing hemoglobin chains from a number
136          THE SEMIOTICS OF NATURE



of different species, as in Figure 5.6. This figure shows that the original oxy-
gen-carrying protein was a monomer not very different from the protein, zyo-
     —a protein that nowadays is used for storing oxygen in muscle cells.
globin
Approximately five hundred million years ago, the gene involved in the protein
synthesis of myoglobin underwent a duplication, where one of the gene cop-
ies became the ancestor of the myoglobin genes found in all higher organisms
today, while the other gene copy, in time, developed (probably as a pseudogene)
to become a proper oxygen transporter— and shis gene thus became the pro-
genitor of all the world’s hemoglobin genes today. Thus, all later species in this
lineage have separate genes for myoglobin and hemoglobin.
   In retrospect, it is easy to see this evolutionary development as a reflection
of a new “size strategy” in evolution. In the small animals of early evolutionary
time (e.g., the protozoans and flatworms), there was not much need for an oxy-
gen transporter, since the distance to the surface of the animal would always be
insignificant. But as animals increased in size, and as a result began to feed on
smaller animals for their nourishment, oxygen transportation became a major
challenge. Four hundred million years ago, a second gene duplication occurred
through which the ancestral forms of a/pha and beta chains were established.
Since then, all organisms in the lineage have both alpha and beta chains in their
hemoglobin. In natural history, this corresponds with the divergence into sharks
and bony fishes, and the evolutionary line of the latter that led to the reptiles
and eventually to the mammals.
      Similarly, the gene duplications behind the divergence of the specialized fetal
hemoglobin chains occurred some two hundred million years ago, which roughly
corresponds with the appearance of placental mammals — where the particular
oxygen-binding properties of these chains would be needed for the special tasks
of ensuring an adequate supply of oxygen to the embryo. And thus the number-
ing of the chromosomes in the upper part of Figure 5.6 refers to the positions of
the different hemoglobin genes on the human chromosome as they are today.
Like the musical motifs of a classical symphony that are interwoven in a variety
of ways to form the experience of a unified whole, so we see how evolution lit-
tle by little has managed to weave the hemoglobin themes into one another to
form a functionally optimal unity. But contrary to the product that is the sym-
phony, here there is no composer behind this evolution, and its dynamics must
be explained by means of natural processes. Again, we shall search for the expla-
nation in the dynamics of code-duality, the digital mutability and combinato-
rics of pseudogenes coupled to the incessant process of trial and error exhibited
by the kimflok in its interaction with its niche.
   The code-dual dynamics that take place in this evolutionary process are not
all that different from the code-dual dynamics that play out in cultural evolu-
tion — and the modern-day phenomenon of e-mail spam throws an interesting
                                                  THE       SEMIOTICS   OF HEREDITY      137




                    [Chromosome 22)       [Chromosome 10)
                         ME           §                &(    th,    ¢
                    —                        ¥;   Me




            &   :   3


 of
 Millions
  ago
  years




Figure 5.6 An evolutionary tree for human hemoglobin. Above is shown the arrange-
ment of human hemoglobin genes over three different chromosomes. Sequences that
are still transcribed are shown in dark gray. The very light areas are no longer transcribed
in humans, but are now pseudogenes. Below is shown a time axis (in millions of years)
indicating approximately when different hemoglobin genes appeared (modified from
Mathews, van Holde, and Ahern 1999, 234).


light upon the dynamic operations of code-duality. All over the world, this
word spam has come to signify the widespread interruption of privacy caused
by the invasion of one’s electronic mailbox by unwanted and unauthorized ads.
Yet few persons outside of the English-speaking world know that this new sig-
nification of the word spam originated with Monty Python’s Flying Circus. In
that one of their comedy routines, a group of Vikings in a diner sang a chorus of
“SPAM, SPAM, SPAM, lovely SPAM, wonderful SPAM” in an increasing cre-
scendo, drowning out other conversation, much like unsolicited e-mail drowns
out other e-mail in one’s in-box. Likewise, the song’s endlessly repetitive lyr-
ics suggest an endless repetition of worthless text, similar to what is contained
within the e-mail variety of spam.
   Now, technically the term spam is a primultima (or telescope word) formed
by the contraction of spiced ham and was invented as a marketing name for a line
of canned meat. But although this term was consciously invented, it is safe to say
that neither the original inventors of the brand name, nor the Monty Python
troupe, had any idea of the particular worldwide fame awaiting the word as a
referent for something which would not even exist until long after the time that
these two groups were using this one term to serve totally different ends in two
totally different contexts.
      138        THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




         The metaphoric transformation of spam from the Monty Python setting to
      the Internet vocabulary was a creative act, but the reason that it stuck was that it
      happened to hit an unfilled locus in linguistic space —Le., a nonverbalized but
      increasingly general experience in modern society. And through this metaphor-
      ical transformation onto the experiential space of the Internet, the term has now
      become a semiotic actor in its own right, generating a whole range of new spam-
      related habits. Because of it, we can now engage in making rules for internet ser-
      vices to eliminate spam or discuss and administer punishments for what might
      be called spam perps. And we may eventually expect further conceptualizations
      to develop on top of the original concept (e.g., tele-spam or bio-spam). In this
      way, new terms are scaffolding devices for cultural development.
         The point is that the coining of the term spam was a creative response to the
      needs of a new cultural situation. But as such, it was not the result of some sin-
      gle thinker’s conscious deliberations and action. Instead, it grew out of already
      existing linguistic resources, more or less spontaneously, by a sort of tacit con-
      sensus. And because of this, Iwant to argue that one can see the appearance of
      the term spam as a prototype       case for the origin of new digitally coded signs not
      only I in culture, b but also in nature — most specifically, iin evolution. The digita-
          a              Ea                        oo

      lization of the Monty Python sketch      in one simple phonetic sequence served
      toOSscaffold a complex social
            ANIMES COM R SeeOCs     experience by making it an easy general resource for
      communication. And thiskind of informative and novelty-generating scaffold-
      I

      ing, I suggest, is exactlywhat genes in general are good for.
|L—     ~ genes
          New          may often be formed through very much the same kind of scaf-
      folding conversions that we have seen to be instrumental in furthering the inclu-
      sion of new words in a language. Thus, in the case of the new term spam, the
      decisive point was the conjunction of pointed meaning (submitted by Monty
      Python) and social need (created by the widespread experience). Likewise-in
      the biological realm, we can suppose that gene duplication that was accompa-
      nied down through generations by what geneticists call the “hitchhiking” unex-
      pressed copy asnonessential or “masked” genetic material (and thus prone to
   all kindsofnonlethal mutations) would assure the availability of a rich resource
__ pase for potential
             otential fucure
                          re genes.
      The decisive cause of the birth of a new functional gene would be a lucky
      conjunction of two events: 1) an already existing nonfunctional gene might
      acquire a new meaning through integration into a functional (transcribed) part
      of the genome, and 2) the gene product would hit an unfilled gap in the semi-
      otic needs of the cell or the embryo. In this way, a new gene becomes a scaffold-
      ing mechanism, supporting a new kind of interaction imbuing some kind of
      semiotic advantage upon its bearer. It would thus be proper to refer to this phe-
      nomenon as semiogenic scaffolding. For by entering the realm of digitality, the
      gene's new semiotic functionality becomes available not only to the cells of the
                                                 THE   SEMIOTICS     OF HEREDITY               139




organism carrying it, but also to future generations — and, if we allow for hor-
izontal gene transfer, even to unrelated organisms. Digitality in the life sphere
assures the sharing (objectifying) of functions (and, in the human case, ideas),
and thereby also their conservation through time.
   But this very function is itself dependent on the relative inertness of the
genetic material and its very indirect and highly sophisticated way of inter-
fering with the worldliness of cellular life. Genes, like human words, do not
directly influence the world aroundthem (which is why we “do nott be
                                                                  believe

w    ee hone              bags Soomel
                                some living system _ interprets. them. And just as
Merere rth me pepon                             tio: support human activity and com-
munication, sodoinert, intrinsically meaningless genes support cellular activity
and communication. In thenext section, I will explain in detail how this can be
so — and why genes and words are the two most marvelous scaffolding tools
ever created by nature.


                                    Organic Codes
Translations of sequentially coded messages used to support dynamic activity
in space and time — e.g., from the passive world of genes to the active world of
proteins — are necessarily complex, multilayered processes. And so far we have
only touched upon the initial complexities of this process: the transcription step
from the string of DNA nucleotides to the complementary string of RNA nucle-
otides. Yet the real difficulty begins when one has to assure the correct coupling
between molecular surfaces belonging to combinatorial sets of very different
kinds of monomers — i.e., nucleotides and amino acids, respectively. For there is
no chemical or molecular isomorphy between genes and proteins — and thus
the problem of gene to protein svanslation has been solved only by the devel-
opment of specific molecules, transferRNAs (tRNAs) that can build a bridge
between them.
   Embryologist Marcel Barbieri has suggested the term organic codes for these
molecular “bridges” and in 1985 introduced his idea of semantic biology: “The
function of an organic code . . . is to give specificity to a liaison between two
organic worlds, and this necessarily requires molecular structures — the adap-
tors —that perform two independent recognition processes,’ writes Barbieri
(2001, 99).”


9 Barbieri (2003, 94) notes the following three general characteristics of codes: “1) They are
rules of correspondence between two independent worlds, 2) they give meanings to informa-
tional structures, and 3) they are collective rules which do not depend on the individual features
of their support structures.” An organic code is thus a more restrictive concept than the concept
140          THE   SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE




   Prototypes of organic codes in this sense are the small tRNA molecules that
are often (conveniently) depicted as a kind of cloverleaf structure. One of its
loops carries an anticodon, i.e., a triplet that is complementary (re base pairing)
to a distinct signifying triplet, or codon, on the mRNA molecule         — while at
the opposite end of the tRNA, there     is a binding site for the particular amino
acid that has become associated with the codon in this case. For example, to
codon UUU on the mRNA, there will be a distinct CRNA with the anticodon
sequence AAA — which, on its opposite end, has a binding site for the amino
acid phenylalanine. The base-pairing mechanism (AAA UUU) thus assures
that this specific tRNA will be attached to UUU triplets (and nothing else)
on the mRNA.
   The role of (RNA molecules here is to act as adaptors. These molecules can-
not themselves bring about the translation of mRNA to protein, any more than
an electric adaptor by itself could connect a European plug into an American
socket. Rather, somebody must see to it that the plug and the socket come into
contact with the adaptor and with each other in the right way.
   Likewise, to carry out the task of connecting mRNA to tRNA and its amino
acids, cells create and keep at their disposal a specialized and very complicated
aggregate of RNA and proteins called a ribosome, that (in synchrony with a host
of interdependent enzymes) assures the correct ordering of temporal and spa-
tial relations throughout the translation process (Figure 5.7). This ribosome trav-
els down along the mRNA string at an amazing speed, recognizing each codon
and arranging the specific tRNA molecule with the corresponding anticodon in
such a way that the amino acid on the other end comes into a position to form
a peptide bond with the amino acid from the preceding tRNA placement. The
nascent and still growing protein chain is thereby gradually left free behind the
ribosome as it travels its way along the string.
   Considered as a semiotic process, this translation process whereby the mRNA
sequence is converted to a sequence of amino acids (i.e., to a protein chain), is
a strongly ritualized process that does not seem to leave much interpretive free-
dom to the ribosome, and therefore to the cell. But when studied in more detail,
complexities appear that may change this initial and far too simple image.
   For example, recent experiments have shown that the termination of the
translation process is not the well-defined process it was once thought to be.
Under certain conditions, the ribosome apparently may bypass the stop codon

of analog codes used in this book, and one might perhaps consider Barbieri’s organic codes as
an intermediary form between the digital and the analog. In the Peircean sign taxonomy, such
organic codes belong to the category of symbols. The research horizon of biosemiotics, however,
reaches far beyond just symbolic codings and includes all and every kind of semiosis going on in
nature. Still, Barbieri’s analysis does throw light on many of the same phenomena that we are con-
cerning ourselves with here.
                                            THE    SEMIOTICS   OF HEREDITY         141




                                  Nontranscribed strand




Figure 5.7 The translation process; see text (modified from Solomon, Berg, and Martin
1999, 268).

which would normally signify an end to any further prolongation of the newly
formed amino acid string— and as a result, an unexpected tail of amino acids
can become joined to the protein chain (Gallant and Lindsley 1998). Possession
of this “tail” in turn, causes the protein to be very short-lived since the cell's
“internal quality control system” (the proteasomes) will now more easily pick it
out for scrutiny and degrade it. Moreover, depending on which protein we are
talking about, many other effects may result, including the formation of a malig-
nant cell line.
   Another interesting locus for possible contextual interaction is at the
initiation of the translation process. Topologically, the translation pro-
cess usually takes place right outside of the nucleus, which is connected to
the rough endoplasmatic reticulum. The immediate RNA transcript that is
formed when the enzyme RNA polymerase II transcribes a segment of the
DNA must therefore be transported to the cytoplasm through pores in the
nuclear membrane. But because the genes of eukaryotic organisms contain
a number of introns — sequences that do not code for amino acids “meant
to” enter the protein — the RNA transcript must first undergo a compli-
cated editing process whereby these introns are cut out, and the remaining
parts of the RNA transcript (the exons) are successively spliced together in
the correct order.
142        THE SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




Figure 5.8 RNA splicing. U1, U2, U4, Us, and U6 designate different small particles
that are themselves complexes of proteins with snRNAs (from Barbieri 2003, 103, with
permission).



   This process is taken care of by a spliceosome, an immensely complicated molec-
ular machine that, again, is assembled by the cell itself and that in size resembles
the ribosome. It also, like the ribosome, does its job through the use of a smaller
adaptor molecule called small nuclear RNA (snRNA or snurps). Here, too, this
process is analogous to tRNA translation, as snRNA likewise contains two inde-
pendent recognition sites — one for the initiation point of an intron and one for
the end point of the intron. “The two recognition steps are independent because
                                            THE   SEMIOTICS   OF HEREDITY            143




Figure 5.9 Alternative splicing. Splicing of the alpha-tropomyosin gene (in rats) illus-
trates how many exons may be spliced together in different ways to form different
mRNA transcripts in different tissues (modified from Mathews, van Holde, and Ahern
1999, 1100).



the first step could be associated with different types of the second one, as dem-
onstrated by the cases of alternative splicing; writes Barbieri (2003, 104).
   In alternative splicing, exons are spliced together in an order other than the one
in which they originally may have appeared on the chromosome. Alternatively,
one or more exons may be cut out in some cells, but not in others. A dramatic
example of this is found in the gene coding for the protein a/pha-trypomyosin —a
protein that plays a regulatory role for the actin-myosin complex responsible for
contractive processes in organisms, e.g., in muscles. As seen in Figure 5.9, the
twelve exons contained in this gene may be combined in at least seven differ-
ent ways in different tissues. How cells in striated muscles “know” that they are
supposed to splice alpha-tropomyosin together in one way, while cardiac mus-
cle cells “know” to splice the molecule in another way, is unknown — but pre-
sumably cell-specific proteins interact with the spliceosome. And the number of
known eukaryotic genes exhibiting alternative splicing tendencies is presently
well over a hundred and still growing.
   In some cases, the process of splicing is supplemented with a real editing of
the mRNA, whereby certain nucleotides are added to or removed from the
144        THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE



string  —or are exchanged with other nucleotides. Such an editing process is
known, for example, from research into human apolipoprotein B —a protein
that is excreted to the blood from the liver or, to a lesser extent, from special
glands in the intestinal tract. Lipoproteins is the name for a group of proteins
that assist in the transport of lipids in the blood stream. And while the gene
apoB, which codes for apolipoprotein B, is edited to become          amRNA of 14,100
base pairs (resulting in a protein consisting of 4,536 amino acids) in the liver, the
same gene in the glands of the intestinal tract is edited to become a mRNA con-
sisting of 7,000 base pairs, resulting in a protein of only 2,152 amino acids.
   The reason behind this, it has now been shown, is that the shortened length
of the intestinal apolipoprotein B is the result of an enzymatic intervention that
leads to the formation of a stop codon (i.e., a sequence that marks the end of the
translation process) in the mRNA. This enzymatic intervention is a deamina-
tion of a Cytosine unit at position 6.666, which is thereby converted to a Uracil
unit, resulting in the formation of a stop codon (Chen et al. 1987). The two ver-
sions of the apolipoprotein B have the same capacity as far as transport of lipids
is concerned, but the short intestinal protein is removed from the blood much
faster than the liver version, and because of this, the intestinal version does not
have the additional role of activating another enzyme involved in lipid biosyn-
theses (LCAT = Lecithin:Cholesterol Acyltransferase). RNA editing thus is
used to modulate the properties of gene products in order to tune them to the
needs of each particular tissue


                              The Cellular City
While DNA spends most of its time sitting passively and rather tightly packed
inside the nucleus, the vast majority of vital life processes actually take place in
the many various structures of the cell that, somewhat misleadingly, are lumped
together under the term the cell’s cytoplasm. This term is inherited from a time
when our technical instruments had not yet made it possible to see the complex
inner architecture of cells in terms of organelles, membranes, and filaments that
are present in this so-called plasma. And yet, it is precisely the subtle, never-end-
ing interplay between the nucleus and these internal membranous structures
that makes the cell a holistic organizational unit in itself. In the absence of these
differentiated structures and their functions, the genomic specifications would
not make any sense. One way to illustrate this complexity, as I have previously
suggested, would be to compare the cell with a big city:
  Ifwe think of the cell as a city like Manhattan, the nucleus of the cell would per-
  haps cover the area of Central Park while the membrane around the cell would be
  situated about as far from the center of the cell as the Bronx is from Fifth Avenue.
                                            THE   SEMIOTICS   OF HEREDITY              145



  In such a city, a protein molecule would be the size of a family car. And it would
  have almost less freedom of movement within the cell than a car has in Manhattan.
  Membranes and stop signs steer every single protein round and about in well-
  ordered patterns (Hoffmeyer 1996b, 73).

   The semiotics of this intracellular traffic is one of the most fascinating topics
in modern biochemistry. We have, in the preceding pages, followed the route of
the genetic specifications from the closed chromatin structure of the DNA to
the ribosomal protein-synthesizing machinery bordered by the nuclear mem-
brane. And precisely here is where two questions arise that, upon further scru-
tiny, show themselves to be closely connected: (1) How does the protein string
fold up to form the highly specific three-dimensional structure that it does?
(2) How do the proteins know how to get to the right spot in the cell —or,
to put it in the figure we used above, how do the cars find their way around
Manhattan? The answer to both questions appears to concern a class of protein
complexes that have been given the name of chaperones    —a suitable designa-
tion, since these protein complexes have, as their task, to make sure that newly
formed (or, more generally, unprotected) proteins do not “get into trouble.”
  At first glance, one should think that the folding of a protein into the right
conformation would be a nearly impossible process. The biochemist Cyrus
Levinthal once calculated that the enzyme ribonuclease, consisting of 124 amino
acid units, will have approximately 10°° possible conformations — and thus if
one imagined that the molecule could “test” 10° possibilities per second, it
would still take 10°° years to work its way through a considerable part of this
vast possibility space. And yet, it has been shown experimentally that ribonu-
clease in vitro folds up correctly in approximately one minute. The solution to
Levinthal’s paradox (as to many other paradoxes of this kind) seems to be that
the folding process occurs through a series of intermediary steps that are not
given beforehand — but which are all energetically “downhill” processes — thus
leading to the correct conformation, as if the folding process itself had been led
down through an imaginary and irregular funnel.
   Newly formed peptide chains do nevertheless find themselves in a somewhat
vulnerable condition in vivo, since their hydrophobic areas have an inherent
propensity to aggregate with the hydrophobic areas of other peptide chains.
This is where chaperone protein complexes enter the picture, as they protect
newly formed chains against such unwanted interference. For example, if the
virgin protein is intended to serve inside one of the cellular organelles (e.g.,
the mitochondria), its N-terminal end will carry a specific signalling sequence
that signifies to the relevant chaperones that it needs help. The chaperones then
“protect” the unfolded chain from aggregation with the nearby peptide chains,
and deliver it at specialized receptor loci on the surface of the organelle where
passage through the outer and inner membrane will be allowed. Such passage
146             THE   SEMIOTICS         OF NATURE




         Vesicles
         budding
         off from
         trans face
         of Golgi




                      Golgi complex 4

                                        Vesicles arriving               Rough endoplasmic
                                        from RER to cis                 reticulum (RER}
                                        face of Golgi       :
                                                            'Colt
                                                             membrane


Figure 5.10 Protein targeting. Proteins intended to work in the cell membrane or lyso-
zomes are processed in several steps that take them through the lumen of the endo-
plasmatic reticulum and the membrane sacks of the Golgi complex (modified from
Mathews, van Holde and Ahern 1999, 1107).

occurs through interactive gate mecahnisms in the membrane, with the help of
specific transport proteins that discriminate between proteins destined for the
cell lumen, membranes, or matrix. (In some cases, chaperones are also involved
inside these organelles.)
   Proteins intended for use in the cell membrane, or in the lysozomes — or that
are destined for excretion into the extracellular space — undergo a rather more
complex series of transfers. Here also, amino acid sequences at the N-terminal
end elicit the relevant cue for other interlocutors in the process — which in this
case is routed through the rough endoplasmatic reticulum (RER) and the Golgi
complex, as depicted in Figure 5.10.
   Let us take the opportunity here to briefly comment on these peculiar com-
partments of the eukaryotic cell, the RER and the Golgi apparatus. While bac-
teria send degradative enzymes out into their surroundings so that they literally
swim in a soup of nutrients “like maggots in a piece of cheese” (to use Christian
de Duve’s pithy expression), eukaryotic cells instead ingest morsels of their
surroundings and degrade the eventual nutrients they might contain through
endocytosis.
      In endocytosis, a confined cavity is gradually formed through the invagi-
nation of the membrane. Then, through a combined fission and fusion of the
cell membrane, the cavity is eventually released to the cell’s interior as a vesicle
(Figure 5. 11). Christian de Duve has suggested that endocytosis was an impor-
tant ingredient in the evolution of the eukaryotic cell. For in the eukaryotic cell,
                                             THE   SEMIOTICS    OF HEREDITY              147




Figure 5.11 Vesicle formation through membrane invagination.

the ratio between surface and volume is a mere one-twentieth of the ratio that
it is in bacteria. The eukaryotic cell therefore can only maintain sufficient flows
of nutrients and waste compounds to and from the surroundings because of its
extended internal area of membranes — these enclose sacks of internal space that
topologically are part of the extracellular space with which it stays connected,
through the constant flow of vesicles derived from the outer membrane.
    These “sacks” are the structures that in the eukaryotic cell form the rough
endoplasmatic reticulum (RER), the Golgi complex, and the endosomes and
lysozomes. Thus, while the plasma membranes of bacteria are simultaneously
engaged in virtually all of the cell’s internal and external activities, eukaryotic
cells have, thanks to these internal organelles, evolved a division of work so that
the metabolic processes (including protein synthesis) are relegated to the inter-
nal membranes — whereas the outer membrane has been set free to take care of
communicative tasks in interaction with the external surround.

  Most characteristic of the eukaryotic plasma membrane is that it is almost exclusively
  adapted to communication and exchange with the outside world. It is fitted with a
  variety of transporters, pumps, channels, and gates; and, especially in animals, it ver-
  itably bristles with receptors of various kinds hooked onto sophisticated transducing
  machinery. All in all, the eukaryotic plasma membrane appears as a boundary organ-
  elle of enormous complexity, in keeping with the almost irreconcilable requirements
  of cells obliged to be continually or intermittently open to a variety of substances
  and influxes and closed to many others. Such a development would probably have
  been impossible with a plasma membrane cluttered by biosynthetic and transloca-
  tion systems, let alone respiratory chains and photo systems (de Duve 1991, 67).

   The synthesis of proteins that travel through the RER begins, as usual, in
the cytoplasm, but in this case the first sequence to be synthesized is a special
148         THE SEMIOTICS OF NATURE



N-terminal squence destined to be recognized by a special signal recognition
particle (SRP) that is itself a complex of both protein and RNA. SRP binding
immediately stops the continued prolongation of the protein chain and thereby
makes sure that the protein will not be formed at the wrong place —i.e., outside
of the RER. And at the same time, SRP operates as a chaperone for the nascent
peptide chain.
   SRP assures the recognition of a definite protein at the RER that will be
capable of binding the ribosome in such a way that the signal sequence at the
N-terminal end is eased into the RER. Having brought about these benefits,
the SRP is then released, allowing the translation process to be resumed. And
at that point, the protein being synthesized is actually pulled through the mem-
brane where it is finally set free and the signal sequence is eliminated.
   While the newly formed protein is still inside the RER, a very important pro-
cess takes place: this is the process of glycosylation — i.e., the formation of a cova-
lent bond”® between the protein and a carbohydrate (sugar). Carbohydrates are
a richly varied group of compounds in which various sugar units are chained to
each other. In monosaccharides, the sugar unit appears alone; in disaccharides
they are chained two and two; in oligosaccharides there are only a few units in
the chain; and in polysaccharides there are many. Carbohydrate chains are not
necessarily linear, as are polypeptide chains making up proteins, but are often
branching. When carbohydrates are bound to proteins, the resulting molecules
are called glycoproteins — and these glycoproteins constitute more than half of all
proteins in eukaryotic organisms.
   The glycosylation of proteins implies a significant increase in their struc-
tural diversity and makes them suitable for use in communicative tasks.
The intracellular and extracellular recognition tasks (whose complexity and
importance to the organism is only now becoming a major focus of modern
biochemistry) are often entrusted to glycoproteins. Likewise, it is the carbo-
hydrate endings of glycoproteins “displayed” on cell surfaces that direct the
interactions of cells both with other cells and with their surroundings — and
that, therefore, are responsible for the precise migrations of cells during
embryogenesis, for the control ofcellular growth, for endocytosis, and for the
often fatal oncogene transformation whereby a normal cell is converted to a
cancer cell.
   Glycosylation, as mentioned, starts little by little in the RER, but the major
part of this task is carried out and completed in the multilayered membrane
enclosures of the Golgi apparatus — where each enclosure is, in fact, a minature


10 A covalent bond is the name for an ordinary chemical bond in which two or more atoms
share electrons — this in contrast to the much weaker hydrogen bonds characteristic of base
pairing in DNA.
                                                 THE   SEMIOTICS      OF HEREDITY              149




glycosylation factory of its own. The transport of proteins from the RER to
the Golgi complex occurs via a process where a protein-filled vesicle buds off
from the RER and begins traveling towards the closest unit of the Golgi com-
plex (called the cis-end), After having been processed in the cis, Golgi-sack pro-
teins are sent further on to the next Golgi sack, again by means of a vesicle,
where they are further processed, and so on through the row of intermediary
Golgi units, until the proteins finally arrive in the tvans-end. From there, they
are either delivered into the cytoplasm as functional organelles (e.g., lysozomes,
peroxisomes, or glyoxysomes); to the cell membrane; or perhaps to be excreted
into extracellular space.
    Significantly, each and every one of these transport processes is accompanied
by a labeling process so that each vesicle, on the one hand, contains a load of
proteins to be used at an identical destination — and, on the other hand, will
be both recognized and accepted at precisely this address. For that purpose, spe-
cific molecular protein signs are attached to the membrane of the vesicle, in
functional anticipation of a complementary protein awaiting a corresponding
segment of the membrane at the destination. This latter protein, in comple-
ment with the first protein, assures that the fusion occurs at the right position.
These complementary pairs of proteins have been given the telling designation
SNARE proteins.”



                                 Signal Transduction
We have now discussed the apparatus at the disposal of the eukaryotic cell for
the interpretation of its own genomic messages in some detail. But we have only
sporadically dealt with the question of how the cellular context— the matrix of
tasks a cell must confront at a given time in a particular tissue (or if it is a free
cell, in a particular environmentally conditioned situation) — might itself exert
true causal efficacy over this interpretive process.
   For example, we have seen how the ontogenetic determination of cell lines
for specific roles in the tissues may be caused by specific methylations of DNA,
as well as by chromatin markings. We have also seen how a whole set of tran-
scription factors have to work together just for the formation of an initiation
complex that could bind to the DNA at the location where transcription shall
begin — or, in other words, for the cell to get an answer to the question: Where
on the chromosome is the message stored that describes the protein that is
needed right now?


 ut For those who like to know such things, these are called soluble N-ethylmaleimide sensitive
fusion protein attachment receptors. Note, too, the two irreducibly biosemiotic terms sensitive and
 receptor embedded in this mainstream biochemical nomenclature.
150            THE   SEMIOTICS     OF NATURE




   We have seen that different tissues are capable of using the same gene as a rec-
ipe for quite different mRNA molecules; we have seen how this can be done
by the complex editing and splicing of exons together in different ways; and
in order to explain this latter process, we referred to the presence of cell-spe-
cific proteins.” And, finally, we have followed the widely distributed network
of semiotically marked routes of the protein-synthesizing apparatus crisscross-
ing in and out through cellular organelles. Thus, we must conclude that there is
no lack of “screws to adjust” if signals from the cellular surroundings should be
allowed to interfere with the interpretation of genomic recipes.”
      Collectively, the processes responsible for the canalization of messages from
the surroundings to the interior of the cell are called processes of signal trans-
duction. Luis Bruni has thoroughly analyzed the biosemiotics of signal transduc-
tion —and his work is one of the most fascinating examples of how a semi-
otic understanding of biochemical processes may open our eyes to the holistic-
dynamic coherence of cellular life that remains rather hidden in the traditional
descriptions (Bruni 2003, 2007).
      Signal transduction is a remarkable process because it does not, as one might
perhaps naively suspect, imply that signals from the outside somehow find their
way into the cell, and then successively instruct the cellular machinery to initiate
distinct activities.'* Instead, what happens is much more interesting and semiot-
ically complex, and typically consists in the following three steps: 1) the primary
molecular signal is received at the surface of the cell because it is recognized
by a specific glycoprotein, a receptor; 2) the receptor responds to the signal by
changing its conformation which then activates a mediator protein in or at the cell
membrane; and 3) the mediator again activates a secondary signal on the inside
of the membrane, initiating the cascade of processes which will then take place

12 Recently it has been shown that microRNAs (miRNAs) have regulatory influence on how
cells handle mRNA. Hundreds of microRNA genes have been found in different species. “With
miRNA roles identified in developmental timing, cell death, cell proliferation, haematopoie-
sis, and patterning of the nervous system, evidence is mounting that animal miRNAs are more
numerous, and their regulatory impact more pervasive, than was previously suspected,” writes
Victor Ambros (2004) in a review article for Nature. So, of course, the story oflife, we keep find-
ing out, goes deeper and deeper and deeper.
13     For, of course, there are also a multitude of other “screws” that I have refrained from describ-
ing to the reader. For example, termination of transcription factors were only briefly mentioned.
Yet one very important factor in the regulation of how the cells make use of the protein resources
available to them through transcription and translation is the turnover times of proteins — i.e., the
question of how short- or long-lived they are. And as we can see from the footnote above, the list
of mediating factors being discovered between the gene and its expression is growing every day.
14 Oddly enough, it should be noted, it is precisely this kind of description that is so rife with
hidden anthropomorphism      — assigning communicative and directive signal status to things in
themselves— that is posited (without objection) in mainstream materialist science, and rejected
in biosemiotics!
                                            THE   SEMIOTICS   OF HEREDITY          Isl



within the cell. Taken together, what occurs is a kind of translation of a signal
caught at the cell surface to a message formed in the intracellular molecular sign
system of the cell. This process may be seen as a case of what Barbieri has called
an organic code — here, it is a signal-transduction code (Barbieri 2003, 110).
  An even more surprising aspect of this process is that the secondary signal
is normally one out of just five molecular agents — namely, cyclic AMP, cyclic
GMP, inositol triphosphate, diacyl glycerol, and calcium ions. At the biochem-
ical level, it therefore looks as if an abundance of riches on the sending side
(where more than a hundred different primary signals are known, such as hor-
mones, growth factors, and neurotransmitters) is met by a thought-provoking
poverty at the receiving side. Yet, a bit of reflection shows that this circumstance
is actually the strength of the system, because the key to the critical dynamics
that are involved is a semiotic one, and not a merely chemical one.
   When the body is stressed and orders the adrenal medulla to secrete epineph-
rine, a multitude of different things will occur simultaneously in different tis-
sues. In the lungs, a relaxation of muscles will take place; in the liver, free sugar
units will be mobilized from the carbohydrate stores of glycogen; fat tissue cells
will start degrading their lipid stores; and cells in the intestinal canal will react
by dampening peristaltic activity. One and the same molecule (epinephrine)
thus releases a range of different responses and different activities in different
kinds of cells, exactly as when the conductor of a chorus gives just one hand cue
and gets sopranos, altos, tenors, and basses respectively to respond with four
different intonations. And when one and the same sign can signify a range of
different things to different cells, even though these cells are genetically per-
fectly homogenous, it is because all cells in the adult organism are descendents
of embryonic cells that at some stage in development became determined for
just one distinct cell destiny—a process that also comprised a fixation of the
frame for the semiotic receptivity, or interpretance, of the cell line.
   For illustration, let us now pursue the path taken by the signal-transduction
process released by epinephrine. Whether we talk about muscle cells, liver cells,
fat cells, or cells of the intestinal tract, the epinephrine molecule is always recog-
nized by the same kind of beta 2-adrenergic receptors that, via a mediator called a
G-protein, activates the formation of the secondary signal — which in this case,
is always cAMP. In eukaryote tissues, cAMP has the quite general effect of acti-
vating a protein kinase — i.e., an enzyme that activates other enzymes by attach-
ing phosphate groups at distinct amino acid locations. And this is the point in
the process where the cellular “memory” — fixed, as it were, through the embry-
onic processes of cell determination — will make a difference.
   For cells in different tissues often have very different enzyme profiles. Thus,
whereas the protein kinase in liver cells causes activation of the enzyme phos-
phorylase b kinase—the activity of which causes an activation of the enzyme
152          THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




phosphorylase, an enzyme that catalyzes a cascading degradation of glyco-
gen —the same kinase in fat tissue cells (adipocytes) will activate the enzyme
triglycerol lipase, thereby initiating degradation of their lipid stores. The take-
away lesson here is this: Instead of equipping cells with sophisticated sensitiv-
ities towards multitudes of signals, evolution has chosen to provide them with
an ontogenetically canalized interpretive diversity — based on a diversity of tis-
sue subcultures, each with its own characteristic receptivity.
    But exceptions to this rule do occur. Steroid hormones (hormones from the
adrenal cortex and sexual hormones), for example, are solvable in lipid and
therefore capable of penetrating the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane on their
own. Inside the cell, the steroid hormone binds to a specific mobile receptor that
helps it to penetrate the nuclear membrane, where the steroid molecule attaches
itself to certain hormone-responsive elements on the DNA —and this allows the
hormone to influence the transcription rate of nearby genes. In this case, we
must conclude that early ontogenetic determination has created a tissue-specific
sensitivity. The difference in the modes of operation between steroid hormones
and other hormones reflects the physiological fact that the effects of steroid
hormones are supposed to last for a long time.
      Thus, while epinephrine takes care of bodily reactions to suddenly appearing
situations that demand extraordinary efforts — situations that most often dis-
appear as suddenly as they appear —a       steroid hormone such as estrogen exhib-
its a cyclical pattern over a period of several weeks. Correspondingly, the role
of the adrenal cortex steroid hormones (g/ucocorticoids) is to assure long-term
adjustments of the metabolism. The point is that the effects of epinephrine play
out through an activation (and in some cases, an inhibition) of already available
hormones    — whereas the steroid hormones have to re-activate dormant path-
ways or activate new transport systems.
   We must now deal with a complication that we have so far kept out of the
discussion, namely the concentration effect. Receptors of all kinds exist in vast
numbers at the cell surfaces — on the order of 10°-10° receptors per cell — and
the effect of external signals caught by these receptors depend on the degree of
saturation, i.e., the percentage of present receptors that actually bind the sig-
nal molecule. Cytosemiotic signs are almost never single molecules, then, but
the relative concentration of these molecules (Kilstrup 1998). But this does
not imply that the cellular response is numerically proportional to the con-
centration of the molecular sign. As we shall see below, biochemical response
depends on a balance between synthetic and degrading processes, and enzy-
matic activity normally has an S-formed dependence on concentration, where
the steep midsection of the curve corresponds to a very small interval on the
concentration axis. Concentrations below this tiny interval will elicit insignif-
icant amounts of enzymatic activity   — while concentrations above it cannot
                                                    THE   SEMIOTICS     OF HEREDITY               153



produce any further increase in the activity. The result is a kind of enzy-
matic digitizing of the response into only two possible options: response or
no response.”” It is often said that epinephrine starts a cascade of degradative
processes, whereby glycogen is split into its individual sugar units — but the
implied meaning always is that epinephrine is present in a sufficiently high
concentration for the saturation degree of beta 2-adrenergic receptors to reach
above threshold level.
   Cellular constituents, signal molecules included, exist in a constant flux of
degradative and synthetic processes, and in order to increase the concentration
of a signal molecule (e.g., cAMP), the rate of its synthesis must exceed the rate
of its breakdown. Thus, if the saturation degree of the receptors is below the
critical value, the formation of new cAMP molecules cannot compensate for
the constant cellular degradation      — and protein kinase activity will then not
be activated. The effect, rather, will be comparable to pouring water into a wash
basin with no plug in it. In order to keep up even a minimum water level, the
faucet must be turned up enough so that its input into the wash basin compen-
sates for and exceeds the constant outflux down the drain..
   Of special interest in this connection are the mediators that transmit the
messages between the primary and the secondary signal molecule. Often these
mediators consist of a G-protein (thus termed because it binds to guanosine
diphosphate, or GDP). When the beta 2-adrenergic receptor is activated by epi-
nephrine, the G-protein is stimulated to exchange GDP for GTP (guanosine
triphosphate) and this elicits the conformational change in the G-protein that
activates its neighboring enzyme, Adenylate cyclase, to produce the secondary
signal molecule, cAMP. And here comes the point: The G-protein itself pos-
sesses a catalytic activity that results in a slow conversion of its newly acquired
GTP to GDP, and it thereby inactivates itself. The result is that each receptor
that is hit by an epinephrine molecule causes a short-lived peak production of
cAMP. Consequently, the number of receptors hit by an epinephrine molecule
per time unit is decisive for the release of an effect; either there will be a response
or there won't. And this number directly reflects the concentration of hormone
in the surrounding blood.
     A dramatic illustration of the physiological significance of the G-protein is
seen in patients suffering from cholera, a disease caused by the bacterium Vibrio
cholerae. This bacterium excretes a compound that inhibits the GTP-splitting
activity of the G-protein. This has the consequence that the G-protein of the
intestinal cells cannot get rid of its GTP and, as a result, continues to stimulate
cAMP synthesis. Among the many regulatory tasks of cAMP is to control the

15    The characteristic, but lonely, exception to this rule is the digital signs of the DNA molecule
that are actively kept away from the metabolic processes ofthe cell.
154           THE   SEMIOTICS     OF NATURE




intestinal excretion of water and sodium, and the effect is the virulent diarrhea
so well-known in cholera.
   Here too, and as we’ve seen in so many different signal-transduction pro-
cesses, different kinds of G-proteins are available for one and the same recep-
tor —and the same G-protein may service different kinds of receptors. The
cellular response to a signal will therefore depend not only on the concentra-
tion of the signal molecule, but also on which other internal signal-transduction
cascades may be occurring simultaneously at that particular time. This occasions
an interesting increase in the interpretive variability and semiotic freedom of
the cell (freedom understood here as a loosening of the rigid causal bonding of
one signal to one response).
      For now, however, we must leave behind the cellular city at this point, even
though we have only skimmed the surface in describing some of the many
aspects of its complex, sleepless traffic. Other interesting cytosemiotic themes
that I have not touched on here include apoptosis (induced cellular suicide), the
production of antibodies, and the cytosemiotic breakdown that leads to the for-
mation of cancer cells. I shall however, return to treat these themes in the chap-
ter on endosemiotics (Chapter 7).
   Before leaving the fascinating level of the cell, however, it must be empha-
sized that even though the cell is usually thought of as a mere subunit in a multi-
cellular organism, it is much more accurate to acknowledge that each individual
cell, functions as an integrated unitary autonomous and autopoetic system’°
based on finely tuned sets of coordinated semiotic control loops.’” The inter-
pretants generated through the cytosemiotic processes must therefore be under-
stood as holistic cellular configurations in time and space.


                            The Semiotics of Ontogeny
At this point, we have seen how genomic instructions are channeled into the
chain of semiotic relations that, taken together, incorporate the cell into a des-
tiny determined by its topological position in the early embryo. To complete our
analysis of the semiotics of heredity, however, we must now attempt to follow
the genomic instructions further on to the production of the kimflok — from
which the instructions themselves were originally derived one generation earlier.
To do this is essentially to analyze the semiotic relations governing the develop-
mental process ofthe individual.
   As a first step along this path, we must consider the process whereby
the individual is formed —the process of fertilization or conception. The

16     use the term autopoetic here in the sense given it by Maturana and Varela (1980).
17     Exceptions to this rule are the degenerated red blood corpuscles or cancer cells,
                                           THE   SEMIOTICS   OF HEREDITY           155



modern idea of the individual as the focal point of the life process is quite
new. Traditionally, rather, the family (what biologists call the genus) was seen
as the emotional or organizational center of life. As mentioned earlier, biose-
miotics will posit the family—understood as the lineage ofrelated individu-
als —as evolution’s individual.
  Single individuals are carriers of a code-dual dynamic that is played out in
the semiotic field made up of both individual and population; this field can-
not be reduced to comprise only one of these two units. This consideration is
not meant to challenge the legitimacy of the individual as the central unit oflife,
nor shall I in any way deny my own personal acquaintance with the emotional
roots of this idea. The consideration may, however, be justified to the extent that
current debates more and more often invoke belief in “the inviolability of the
individual” on biological conceptions of humanness. Such an invocation, for
example, often occurs in the context of ethical debates on modern reproductive
techniques, and especially as an argument against free access to selective abor-
tion (which will be further discussed in Chapter 9). Seen from the biology of
biosemiotics, however, a human life does not necessarily start at conception. For
conception is the term designating the passage from a haploid to a diploid exis-
tence. For each individual diploid human being, this passage is of course deci-
sive — because for him or her it initiates an irreversible journey that necessarily
ends by death and annihilation. The same however, is not necessarily the case for
haploid human life — i.e., life as a germ cell, whether sperm or egg. In fact, in our
sex-cell-producing tissue, every one of us carries cells that — through an unbro-
ken chain of cell divisions — descend from the earliest forms of life on Earth.
   These germ cells do change down through generations (or else there could be
no such thing as evolution), but considered as cells they constitute a rather infi-
nite and unbroken chain of divisions. No sex cell in existence today came from
anywhere other than this unbroken chain. For one of the first things to hap-
pen in human development is, as we have seen, that the cell lines destined to
become sex cells (gametes) are segregated from the rest of the cells and kept clear
of those determining processes that impact so decisively upon all the other cell
lines. And if we have children, one or a few of these particular cells will live on
for yet another generation. Thus, our haploid sex cells are, presumably, the clos-
est we will ever come to eternal life.
   The first task of the egg in relation to conception is to make sure that sperm
from foreign species cannot penetrate the egg wall. Especially in species where
conception takes place in an unprotected milieu —as, for example, in sea
urchins — this poses a problem. The sea urchin egg is enveloped in a protective
membrane of vitteline that is surrounded by a gel of the same kind of glycopro-
tein that we discussed in the previous section, and this membrane effectively pre-
vents the penetration of sperm cells. However, since species-specific fertilization
156           THE SEMIOTICS OF NATURE



should not be so prevented, evolution has left a few cracks open in this fortifi-
cation of the egg.
   Sea urchin sperm cells are activated by certain compounds in the membranes
of the egg, and these compounds also attract the sperm cells chemotactically.
Cheered up by this promising reception, sperm cells now break down their own
acrosomal membrane, releasing a bucketful of degradative enzymes that help the
sperm cell travel through the protective glycoprotein gel and penetrate the vit-
teline membrane. Making the process even more fine-grained (and spectacu-
lar), the plasma membrane of the egg is equipped with multitudes of microvilli
(small extensions from the membrane), and when the sperm cell approaches,
some of these microvilli lengthen and then veritably envelop the sperm head and
fuse with it, at the same time drawing the sperm head inside the egg, creating a
fertilization cone. Within three seconds, the cell membrane is now depolarized,
 which prevents additional sperm from fusing with the plasma membrane — and
 thus prevents polyspermy. This fast-acting blockage is followed by a somewhat
slower excretion of enzymes that, by different biochemical paths, establish an
efficient and lasting blocking against further fertilizations (which might lead to
chromosome numbers that the cellular machinery couldn’t handle).
      Only the cell nucleus of the sperm cell enters the egg, whereas its midsec-
tion — containing the mitochondria that furnish the energy for sperm move-
ment — and its flagella are left outside. At conception, the two haploid nuclei
fuse under the formation of a diploid individual, as waves of calcium ions are
simultaneously released from stores in the endoplasmatic reticulum of the egg
cell. These waves serve as an activation signal for the fertilized egg that it can
now initiate the developmental process. Most importantly for our purposes, it
should be noted that the interaction between the sperm and egg here is thus in
no way a simple fusion process. Rather, the almost billion-years-old semiotic
game of accomplishing conception here seems (if the reader will allow me the
image) to possess that mixture of eagerness and thrill that will, much later in
evolution, come to characterize the mating rituals in animal species — not the
least of which, our own.


                               From Egg to Individual
In Chapter 2, we looked at Hans Driesch’s famous experiments from 1892, in
which he separated the first cells from a sea urchin embryo, and observed that
each of them developed to become a pluteus — a normal if somewhat small, lar-
va." The results of this experiment posed a fundamental problem for biolo-

18     Since that time, Driesch’s experiments have been reproduced in many laboratories the world
over with positive results. But they are not valid for all kinds of organisms. In most invertebrates,
                                                  THE   SEMIOTICS     OF HEREDITY              157




gists — for how can life attain its variegated multicellularity if each single cell
in the embryo can by itself develop to become a whole organism? The answer to
this question is simple but decisive: Cells communicate. Colloquially put, each
single cell will, from its interactions with its neighbors, learn to give up its ambi-
tion of becoming a whole individual and, instead, be content to be a specialist
in the task of serving as part of just one small area of tissue.
   The phenomenon whereby a cell that can yet become anything becomes, in
fact, this or that, is called zzduction — and the phenomenon plays out in numer-
ous clever ways throughout the branching chain of events that constitutes the
developmental process. Positive induction is at work, for example, when the early
notochord (the embryonic vertebral column) in amphibians induces the overly-
ing ectoderm layer to develop as nerve cell rather than as skin cell. Conversely,
negative induction is at work when the inductive course of events is inhibited
due to a too large number of neighboring cells (Gilbert 1991b).
   I have already mentioned Leo Buss’s fascinating theory about the evolution
of multicellularity as a compromise between a survival struggle among cell lines
and a survival struggle between individuals. Here it is in his own words:
   The thesis developed here is that the complex interdependent processes which we
   refer to as development are reflections of ancient interactions between cell lineages
   in their quest for increased replication. Those variants which had a synergistic effect
   and those variants which acted to limit subsequent conflicts are seen today as pat-
   terns in metazoan cleavage, gastrulation, mosaicism, and epigenesis. The conservatism
   of early ontogeny is held here to reflect the interplay between selection at the level
   ofthe individual and selection at the level ofthe cell lineage, under the strong influ-
   ence ofancestral constraint. ... The principal epigenetic interactions defining cell
   fate — those of induction, competence, and cell death — are all interactions in which
   one cell lineage acts to limit the replication of another, while enhancing its own
   (Buss 1987, 29-30; italics added).

   In order to fully comprehend the logic of Buss’s theory, one must be acquainted
with a peculiar circumstance about metazoan cell biology — that is, the fact that
the cells of these organisms cannot both move and divide. Eukaryote cells usually
move by the use of either flagella or cilia’’. These are whip-like extensions filled
with bundles of long tube-shaped structures called microtubules. These micro-
tubules are fastened at their base to a structure called the microtubule organizing
center that operates like a motor to drive the flagella or cilia around. The micro-

for example, early embryo cells are already allotted their future destination, thanks to asymme-
tries in the original egg. Due solely to their positions in different zones of this egg, therefore,
cells immediately receive their basic determination. Development in more complex animals, as
we have seen, does not work so straightforwardly.
19 Cilia are shorter than flagella and execute coordinated movements a little like rowing the cell
forward. Flagella function rather as propellers, with wavelike movements.
158       THE SEMIOTICS OF NATURE



tubule organizing center is also sometimes called the basal body, or the centriole,
or even the kinetosome — the plurality of terms reflecting the fact that this body
may be located at quite different positions in different cells, and that research-
ers have not always been aware that these different findings referred to one and
the same organelle!
   Most relevant to our concerns is the fact that microtubules also function as
hardware in the internal cellular transport system in a variety of ways, and most
importantly as threads that extend from the microtubule organizing center to
attach to the chromosomes to draw the two homologous chromosomes, each to
their respective daughter cell, during the critical processes of cell division. Thus,
both the formation of flagella and the mitotic division require the presence of a
microtubule organizing center. Yet, as shown by Lynn Margulis, this structure
does not have the ability to execute both tasks at the same time       — at least not
in those unicellular organisms from which multicellularity originally descended
(Margulis 1981). (Indeed, this may be why ciliated cells from metazoans may well
regain the capacity to divide, but to do so they must first get rid of their cilia.)
   Many contemporary species of simple metazoans deliver their gametes directly
into the surrounding sea water, where fertilization takes place — at which point
the egg traverses the usual divisions that lead to formation of a morula, a solid
ball of undifferentiated cells. At this stage, cells acquire cilia and organize them-
selves as blastula (Figure 5.12). And here is where the trouble begins; having
developed cilia, the cell cannot divide anymore. (In some taxonomic groups, a
solution to this problem was never found, writes Buss.) Instead, those organ-
isms evolved ways to skip the blastula stage and complete their development
without ever moving by cilia. More commonly, however, most metazoans did
find a solution, the most popular of which consisted in a functional partition-
ing — whereby a minor fraction of the cells don’t develop cilia and therefore
maintain the ability for division instead:




Figure 5.12 Development of blastula in amphibia. The figure shows the three layers,
ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. (Modified from Luria, Gould, and Singer 1981,
320).
                                                   THE   SEMIOTICS      OF HEREDITY                159



   These cells, however, can proliferate in only one direction. Since the primitive form
   is a sphere traveling in water, the proliferating cells cannot grow into the water col-
   umn without producing a mass of cells which would certainly increase drag on the
   embryo, interfering with further movement. Neither can the proliferating cells
   grow over the surface of the sphere, for to do so would obliterate the ciliated surface
   necessary for locomotion. Only one alternative remains. The only remaining place
  Jor these cells to move is into the sphere itself: The movement and subsequent prolif-
   eration of cells from the blastular surface into the center of the blastular sphere is
   gastrulation. Animal gastrulation is the metazoan solution to the requirement of
   simultaneous development and movement (Buss 1987).”°

In turn, the gastrula undergoes a symmetry break that divides it into three dis-
tinct layers with different destinies: ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. Cell
lines derived from the ectoderm become skin or nerve cells (including the cells
of the sensory organs); cell lines from the mesoderm end up in bones and mus-
cles (including the cardiac muscle, the heart) or in the vascular and reproduc-
tive systems; and cell lines from the endoderm come to constitute the structures
of the intestinal tract.
   Seen from Buss’s neo-Darwinian vantage point, the premium in the ances-
tral competition between cell lines was to become a sex cell, with the implied
chance of continued life for yet another generation. This favorable position,
however, is only open for a small minority of embryo cells — the rest must suf-
fer the wrong of differentiation and the loss of all further expectations for eter-
nal life. This then leads Buss to pose the following question: “How could an
organism evolve such that some cells in that organism abandon their own capac-
ityfor replication?” (ibid., 53).
   Even if one does not embrace Buss’s strong adherence to the competitive
schema of evolutionary mechanics, this question seems basically to be a fruit-
ful one. Individual cells in our body have no idea that we exist — but they ney-
ertheless collectively reproduce us from second to second throughout the entire
seventy-five-plus years of an average human life. Indeed, we would not be here
now to ponder the question if this were not the case — but this doesn’t make
the enduring “unselfishness” any less strange.” For we are so accustomed to
thinking of ourselves as unitary entities, that it may be useful sometimes to be

20 Most students of biology have wondered at this peculiar process whereby the blastula flat-
tens at one pole and then invaginates itself under the formation ofa gastrula (similar to what hap-
pens when you push a tennis ball to form a cavity in it — Figure 5.12). But according to Buss, this
simply was the most effective way to solve the basic dilemma of the metazoan cells in our remote
water-living ancestors.
21 Selfish in the biological sense means merely “that done for the continuation of one’s own sur-
vival” — thus describing basically every single act that an individual cell normally does (e.g., grow,
metabolize, reproduce, self-repair). How any of this could become “sacrificed” and “subsumed”
under the workings of some other priority is the profound question at issue here.
160           THE SEMIOTICS     OF NATURE



reminded that each one of our fifty trillion cells possesses a significant degree of
autonomy —a       fact that is sadly confirmed by the eventual occurrence of diseases
such as cancer. Cancer is the out-of-control population explosion that precisely
appears when ordinary somatic cells stop letting themselves be persuaded to stay
in their fixed and — seen Darwinistically — unpromising position in the tissue.
      From our ancestors among the protists, each one of our body cells has inher-
ited the entire machinery needed for unicellular life: the genetic code, transcrip-
tion and translation enzymes, highly organized but flexible cytoskeletons, etc.
And, as Buss writes, “The cells of a developing metazoan embryo follow the
same rules governing any self-replicating system: They divide until some exter-
nal force limits their further replication” (ibid., 77-78). This “external force” is
biosemiosis and consists in the informative (and sometimes disinformative) mes-
sages emitted from other cell lines — messages that are capable of influencing
growth processes in neighboring cell lines. Buss writes, “The metazoan innova-
tion is the evolution of epigenetic controls on the growth of developing cell lines,
which provide restraints on their inherent propensity for self-replication in a
precise cascade such that cell lineages organize themselves into a functional bau-
plan” (ibid., 78, emphasis added)».
      The establishment of these semiotic intercellular control mechanisms was
not an easy process, as evidenced by considering how rare the appearance of
the multicellular life form has been in evolution. The first eukaryotic cells may
be dated back approximately nine hundred million years (Bitter Springs forma-
tion) and some two hundred million years after this, we find metazoans that are
supposed to have belonged to extinct, but known, phyla. The property of sul-
ticellularity has arisen in seventeen out of the twenty-three monophyletic pro-
tist groups, but only in three of these seventeen multicellular taxa (specifically,
only in plants, fungi, and animals), has cellular differentiation developed in
more than a handful of species (ibid., 70). The real difficulty for evolution, then,
was thus not to develop viable multicellular forms of cellular life. The problem
was to find a reproducible dialogical process inside the growing clone of cells
descending from the same zygote — a semiosis that could make sure that some
cell lines undertook (or perhaps more properly, could be fooled into undertak-
ing) somatic duties on behalf of the common weal, even though they themselves
would thereby die as individual existents.
      In a certain sense, it is the differentiated multicellular organisms that intro-
duce death as a common fate of living things. A profist, say an amoeba, does
not die as a natural outcome of its life cycle—for it won't stop existing just


22 Such epigenetic controls form a subset of what, more broadly, may be called semiotic controls.
23. A monophyletic (Greek, “of one race”) group consists of a common ancestor and all its
descendants.
                                             THE   SEMIOTICS    OF HEREDITY             161



because it divides; rather, it now continues its existence doubly as two units (and
then four, and so on). And even if individual amoebae regularly end up as food
for other organisms, the surviving divisions of those very same amoebae will
almost certainly have spread over the area. With the metazoans, however, this
kind of survival is no longer possible. The differentiation process creates a new
kind of “self” — one that is bound to a particular cellular architecture that can-
not persist in the same simple way that free cells persist. Buss (1987, 78) writes,
“Metazoan development today is manifestly a process of the sequential origin
of, and interaction between, cell lineages arising in the clonal progression from
the zygote. The fact that metazoans develop via a complex of epigenetic inter-
actions between cell lineages is prima facie evidence that the principal modes of
metazoan development arose as variants in the course of ontogeny.”
   As an illustrative case, Buss refers to the ontogeny of the eyeless mutant of
the axolotl salamander     — which, as the name implies, produces an individual
without eyes. Here we see that, under normal conditions, the amphibian eye is
produced by chemical interactions between the newly formed optic vesicle and
the embryonic ectoderm layer. A chemical inducer produced by the optic vesi-
cle is used for the scaffolding of this interaction. What happens in the eyeless
mutant of the axolotl is that this step is disturbed because the ectoderm of the
mutant does not respond properly to the inducer —so that no eye is formed
and the mutant emerges blind. However, this is not the only problem that this
poor creature has to cope with — for it is also born lacking the capacity for leay-
ing offspring.
   This incapacity results because the eyeless mutant develops a secondary defi-
ciency in the region of the brain called hypothalamus, which will only properly
develop through induction via signals that are sent to it from the developing
eye. In the eyeless individual, no eye exists to direct the development of the
hypothalamus, and thus the hypothalamus does not develop to the point that it
can produce gonadotropin hormones — and in the absence of these hormones,
the individual becomes sterile. Ihave commented upon this state of affairs else-
where as follows:
  The deficiencies of the eyeless mutant clearly illustrate the tinkering ways in which
  ontogeny has become scaffolded by evolution. There is presumably no reason why
  the development of the hypothalamus should depend on the presence ofa func-
  tional eye, other than that the eventual formation of the eye takes place in a location
  that happens to be anatomically close to that region of the brain where the hypo-
  thalamus is normally developed in this lineage. Making the development of the
  hypothalamus dependent upon the prior formation of an eye effectively assures that
  the hypothalamus will become constructed at exactly the right moment in embryo-
  genesis. And this is precisely the situation that is not the case, of course, in the eye-
  less mutant. But rare mutants are statistically of little concern in evolution. Rather,
162           THE SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE




Figure 5.13 The normal sequence of steps in the development of the amphibian eye
(modified from Coulombre 1965).


      the axolotl eye just happened to be in the neighborhood of the nascent hypothal-
      amus region in zormal individuals — and it is most likely for no other reason than
      this that evolution managed to exapt the eye for a secondary role as an ontogenetic
      switch for the initiation of proper development of a hypothalamus. As Buss says,
      “Ontogeny must reenact the interactions which gave rise to it” (Hoffmeyer 2007,
      157; Buss 1987, 97).

In the terminology of this book, one might say that ontogeny is safeguarded by
the myriads of semiotic scaffolds that depend on one another in long chains of
successive and deeply interdependent steps.


                            The Individualized Brain
“Evolution is a process of tinkering rather than of engineering,’ as Francois Jacob
(1982) famously proclaimed. And items constructed in a tinkering way typically
bear witness to the detours taken on the path of their construction. A part that
was formerly used for one purpose might somewhere along the path have been
                                                 THE   SEMIOTICS     OF HEREDITY               163



recruited for some other purpose without thereby loosing the structural prop-
erty that made it functional for the original purpose. Likewise, in evolution,
markers of the ways that organisms were originally constructed are often main-
tained in the present form of the organisms as testimony to the unique histor-
ical route that evolution took in creating them. And one might also formulate
this realization the opposite way around, as Walter Garstang (1922) did when
he turned Ernst Haeckel’s famous dogma on its head by claiming, “Ontogeny
doesn’t recapitulate phylogeny, it creates it” (cit. from Gilbert r991b, 346).
    Induction plays a constructive role in evolution by facilitating evolutionary
changes that affect sets of finely tuned relationships between different function-
alities. Exactly because the formation of organs is coordinated via the inductive
communication between parts (i.e., through biosemiosis), changes in one place in
the process may often cause compensatory changes in other places. Raissa Berg
has introduced the expression correlation Pleiades for this phenomenon (Berg
1960).’One fascinating example of a correlation Pleiades is the variety of snout
forms in dogs — from the narrow jaw of the German Shepherd Dog to the flat
face of the Chow Chow or Bulldog. These variations are genetically fixed and
each of them represents a new harmonious arrangement of many bones fitted to
each other as well as to the attached muscles. And, in spite of the bizarre forms
that dog breeders have excelled in bringing into being, all these snout forms,
even the Bulldog’s, are capable of carrying out normal and critically important
dog activities, such as moving the jaws, shaking the head, or barking.”
   Thus we see that embryogenesis exhibits an inexhaustible fund of sophisti-
cated semiotically controlled adaptations. Here, however, we shall consider just
one: the growth of nerves in the embryo from their source in the spinal cord
to the peripheral muscles and organs they eventually connect with. Nerve cells
grow by extending their axons from an area in the tip called a growth cone that
literally feels its way forward along the cell surfaces it passes by. This occurs with
the help of small protrusions from the growth cone called filopodia that extend
or contract themselves depending on the kind of signals that they receive from
the surfaces of other cells or from the extracellular matrix (see Figure 5.14).
   Developing nerve cells are not given any kind of geographic genetical infor-
mation beforehand that could tell them where to go to and what to connect up
with in the body. Nevertheless, all the muscles and organs of the body end up
being correctly connected to their corresponding nerve cells. Considering the

24 The Pleiades is a fascinating group of stars that can hardly be discriminated with the naked
eye —as though they belong together!
25 Anexception to this rule, though, concerns dogs with a very short face (such as the bulldog)
where, apparently, it has not been possible to compensate for the alterations in skin area through
corresponding alterations in bone structure — which now leaves the dog with the well-known
look of extra skin hanging off of its face.
164          THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




Figure 5.14 Filopedia (modified from Wolpert, Beddington, Jessell, et al. 2002, 354).

vast distances that nerve cells must sometimes overcome to reach the periph-
eral muscles, it is clear, however, that all this precisely targeted growth cannot
be based just on local signposts. Thus, the initial phase of axon growth is safely
guided via a trace of chemical attractors — and this explains why nerve cells ini-
tially are assembled in those thick bundles, that we call nerves.
      Asthegrowthcone approaches the peripheral tissues, however, genuine explor-
atory search behavior sets in, as nerve cells individually attempt to find a desti-
nation that needs ennervation. The embryo here uses a principle that is found
throughout development: it creates a number of nerve cells that far exceeds the
number eventually needed — and this causes a kind of Malthusian/Darwinian
competition between nerve cells to find a useful connection. Correspondingly,
organs or muscles that need ennervation excrete an aptly named nerve growth
factor that attracts the growth cones via the filopodia. Not all nerve endings
 are fortunate enough to find a locus for ennervation and those that do not are
 quickly eliminated. In fact, they kill themselves. For each single nerve cell car-
 ries within it an internal “suicide program” to release a series of self-destruc-
 tive enzymes dependent on conditions (intracellular or extracellular inducers),
 Thus, if the growth cone leading the nerve cell does not manage to hit a substan-
 tial concentration of nerve growth factor (and thus receive the suicide preempt-
ing signal), it will initiate its self-destruction program and die. The result of this
amazing mechanism, called apoptosis, is that the nerves that do reach their tar-
gets for ennervation will survive, whereas the others will disappear.
   The brain, and the entire nervous system, is therefore to a large extent shaped via
an interactive, online process — a process governed by use and disuse, reflecting the
local contextual situation of the embryo (and in human beings, the first few years
of life). The strong overproduction of nerve cells that takes place in the embryonic
                                             THE   SEMIOTICS    OF HEREDITY             165



brain also results in a corresponding overproduction of possible synaptic connec-
tions. And again the principle at work that will trim this chaos into order is neu-
ronal selection —where nerve cells will only avoid programmed suicide (apoptosis)
if synaptic connections are feeding them a sufficient amount of sign activity.
    This was confirmed by experiments where kittens’ right eyes were covered so as
to admit no light during a critical period immediately after birth. Although the
shades were later removed and the kittens again received reflected light through
their right eyes, they would never become able to see with this eye — and, in
fact, had become functionally blind in the right eye. What explains this result
is the phenomenon of synaptic competition. Since the visual cortex only received
impulses from the left eye, a// the synapses that connected to the optical nerve
from the right eye died away and were eliminated. And although the right eye
later actually began to send signals again, those signals could not get through to
the visual cortex because all the previously vacant cortical synapses were now
occupied by nerve threads emerging from the left eye (Gilbert 1991a, 644).
  And, of course, it turns out that the genetic indeterminacy of the vertebrate
brain is actually its greatest strength. This is especially obvious in human beings,
where the brain continues to grow and actually adds 250,000 new nerve cells per
minute in the initial period after birth. The American neurobiologist Terrence
Deacon writes,

  Cells in different areas of the brain are not their own masters, and have not been given
  their connection orders beforehand. They have some crude directional information
  about the general class of structures that make appropriate targets, but apparently lit-
  tle information about exactly where they should end up in a target structure or group
  of target structures. In a very literal sense, then, each developing brain region adapts
  to the body it finds itself in. ... There need be no “preestablished harmony” of brain
  mutations to match body mutations, because the developing brain can develop a corre-
  sponding organization “on line,’ during development (Deacon 1997, 205).

   In short, the developing human nervous system has the ability to take stock
of the situation — i.e., to let its maturation process depend on the presence (and
absence) of distinctive marks in the growing embryo. The biological logic behind
the formation of nervous systems in nature is to delegate increasing amounts
of power away from the level of the species and to the level of the individual.
Genetic adaptations take generations to construct, whereas the brain can effec-
tively wire itself up in the lifetime of the single individual. In the large scheme
of things, the appearance of species with brains corresponds to a concretiza-
tion or individualizing of the semiotic subjecthood that in more primitive spe-
cies unconditionally resides at the level of the species. With the creation of more
and more sophisticated brains, the individual increasingly takes power over its
own actions and becomes an autonomous semiotic agent in its own right.
 166        THE SEMIOTICS      OF NATURE



                            The Semiotics of Heredity

 I began this chapter with a discussion of mortality as the logical precondition
 for heredity. But we have seen that mortality is perhaps a property unique to
 multicellularity, whereas unicellular life forms — lacking individuality in the
 sense that I have been discussing above — can only properly “die” by being exter-
 minated at the species level.
    In the same way, heredity is too, after all, mostly an invention that only mul-
 ticellular organisms can really make use of. In unicellular organisms, the role of
 the genome as an efficient inventory-control system is quite obvious — but in
 multicellular organisms, these digitally coded specifications have the additional
 task of mediating an ontogenetic process, and this endows the organism with a
 real heritability in the sense of a temporal reconstruction of a complex spatial
 structure by the help of alinear set of digitally coded instructions.
   We have seen that the fusion of the spermatozoon with the egg is fol-
 lowed by a wave of released calcium ions departing from the point of pene-
 tration, whereby the egg becomes activated to initiate this lengthy, complex
 process of genetically informed reconstruction. We have also seen in detail
 how the intracellular structures and membranes that the egg inherits from
 its mother organism — the endoplasmatic reticulum, the mitochondria, the
 Golgi system, and, not the least, the plasma membrane — are responsible
 for the long series of cytosemiotic processes that alone make this recon-
 struction possible.
    The fact that the species-specific origin of the genome that we know is deci-
 sive for which organism the ontogenetic reconstruction will produce (e.g., that a
 snail genome will lead to the appearance of a snail-type living system and a wolf
 genome will lead to the appearance of a wolf-type living system) has implanted
 the conception in the minds of biologists that the genome controls the ontoge-
 netic process, rather than filling the more modest role of being one tool among
 others for this process.
     I find this former conception unfortunate, because it blinds us to the semi-
 otic competences of the cellular system. And in my work in biosemiotics, I am
 trying to advance an understanding according to which the genome (both in
, unicellular and multicellular species) is, in effect, an inventory-control system,
  with the distinction that in multicellulars, access to the inventory-control sys-
  tem goes through a user interface — and that this interface is the product of hun-
  dreds of millions of years of evolutionary history in a narrow interplay between
  user (organism) and system (genome). New routines have incessantly been built
  upon older routines in such a way that the menu items that each cell can access
  is finely adjusted to the menu choices that this particular cell made in an earlier
  stage of its ontogeny.
                                        THE   SEMIOTICS   OF HEREDITY         167



  In sum, I do not claim any Lamarckian interaction in the sense that the user
organism can occasion the introduction of purposive improvements directly into
the inventory-control system. But I am not afraid to adopt a modified version of
the far more interactive Baldwinian scheme — as I will in the next chapter.
                         i                                   ~


     x                             i                                                    Ls                 o fk

                                                                                             wx          ay




          d                            halt
                                       &                                            .                                                                                                                                            Tt        7
=                                  Se                                                           =                                                                                                                                          »
                                 6)                          | uae                              Loar                                             ad         ie
                                                                                                                                                             .                            Cer:wad                    f           o +r

                         ong.                        a   i                 :                 “J caving                             a cA

                             a             lvrekche                                           ng evel                                            pe @                 =                    Ske                                    Sync              Nad
    SerdhirGe ew                                                                                               ii                        epi                     oa? il                i.                      ‘oth ad ipa                          are
                                 DVtw                                          0 kd)                           (Per                dys         LenGrr                 Opener                                   fps               \eagiia eae
                 ve                            ot!                   Sol                            ening,                                    ete Rial,                                    0th 5 enlace                                                   e
               UVa. tit Ghat                                                            bone 299 rehgretin:                                                  IESE                          ee            “alt enlenen ie
    Prag!                         Nerheltle                                    Ay                          7O                      Gabe”              = 14th                              ol)Petruchio                                     OF

     a=                           “2b                                          rp htty                                         eee                                            - Myre ahold —
                             i                                   7                                                                                          _
                                           ~                     ,                                                                                           -                                   ®

              ried                         Fra ae                                                                                                      gh             \\sow        poor          Le periien te                                 Sea            J
       he                                                    =                                                                                             ire                    ‘v             ry           aor                     ist             a
                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a        tape

     ay                                                                                 in             i                                 oN      spe                  aru                  eo                 9 :            ?        a    a) *.

                     i           he |                                                         ‘ien at                                     ae     ei"                          J                      5               var              dy@ |e

                 a                             om?                                            ~*~                                         AP          ga.                                   sgl                          ~ 09 tobe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                to Sau
                                                                                                ~ Ye                                                                     on                                                               oy oe
                         fh                                                                                                                                 SR                                                  Tt
     a                   SS                                  i                 @         Wu

                 i                  yy
                                 tipper                                   <A                                =a
                                                                                                           ay                 'h                at,                           “38           OC           ad

          —                  7.                          an                                  2va>                     ie                                    ks                i


      =                      Yh                              GS                                        deb                                            ge         Oy                04] Saal,
                             and                             feild: Pe)                                        ip                        Soe Ocag pre ® 99!                               pier                tert           Uap?
                                           (A                    emtey                        (SL                         :                 7               pre                            Ava? a                    ye Wad                     —
                                                                                                                                                      ng dhe @ once ole ahhati
                                                                                    er                                                                            |                                                                       aed       Pe
                                  y:) che Dine                                                                                      iia                               Serban


                             wilt 'ost emery                                                                                                                                  ae
                                                                               , CmROA hy Fo ap
                                                                                             7,oie! bles Mas
              -                                              BV,                             “1            3

          hs                                                          ;                                s pase

                                                                                                  ain)                        Sais

     (Sa                               creed                              Me             Pei>      |                  ~


fae                                                          dayton                                Cn anda alii
     Hitt ined amg7 aes                                                                                                       ix                jieaee, ¢
