6
                      The Semiotic Niche




                                 Zoosemiotics

“Images on the retina are not eatable or dangerous. What the eye of a higher
animal provides is a tool by which, aided by a memory, the animal can learn the
symbolic significance of events” (Sebeok 1979, 266). This observation, one that
Thomas A. Sebeok ascribes to the ethologist John Z. Young, hits the nerve of
the zoosemiotic conception that Sebeok launched as early as 1963 (see Sebeok
1963; 1972; Sebeok, Ed. 1977). Sebeok goes on to say that “Cephalopod brains
may not be able to elaborate complex programs — i.e., strings of signs, or what
Young calls 7znemons — such as guide our future feelings, thoughts, and actions,
but they can symbolize at least simple operations crucial for their survival, such
as appropriate increase or decrease in distance between them and environmen-
tal stimulus sources” (Sebeok 1979, 43).
  That beauty is in the eye of the beholder is a truth that cannot be repeated too
often. Actually, as we now know, it is the brain rather than the eye that does the
seeing for us. Don Favareau (2002, 10-11) has stated it this way:
  Significantly, recent research in the neurobiology ofvision, especially the ground-
  breaking work of Semir Zeki (1993, 1999) demonstrate conclusively that sensory
  percepts such as visual images are not so much “received” from incoming pho-
  ton impulses as they are semiotically and co-constructively “built” across hetero-
  geneous and massively intercommunicating brain areas. Thus we find that sensory
  signification per se is intimately bound up with motoric processes of bodily and
  environmental interaction in an ongoing process of semiosis that cuts across the
  sub-systemic distinctions of brain, body and world.

  What beauty exactly a cephalopod is seeing is of course unknowable, but
whatever it may be, it hardly bears much resemblance to anything we would
see in the same situation. However, the cephalopod certainly sees some-
thing and this something very probably is precisely the thing it needs to see.
Conceivably, one might object that the cephalopod doesn’t really know what
it sees, and that it just reacts to what appears in its field of vision, not hav-
ing the faintest idea of what it is about to do. But since our knowledge of
what it means to know, neurobiologically speaking, is rather limited, such an
170           THE   SEMIOTICS     OF NATURE




objection likewise carries limited weight. Conscious knowledge is, for all we
know, the privilege of a few big-brained animals, but most knowledge is prob-
ably unconscious, like the many routines one performs without paying atten-
tion to them.
   The phenomenon of blindsight, for example, offers some surprising insights
into the hidden reserves of knowledge that we all apparently carry around in our
minded bodies. Blindsight may be observed in patients that have damaged their
primary visual center so that they have lost access to a part of their visual field.
Ifthey are asked whether or not they can see an object placed in the blind area,
their answer is, of course, no. And yet, if such patients are asked to guess where
an object that they report they cannot see is placed, they may often point very
accurately to its position. The explanation for this phenomenon is thought to
be that visual impulses are divided into several parallel pathways on their way
from retina to the brain, and some of these do not lead to the visual cortex but
end up elsewhere in the brain. Here they obviously cannot produce conscious
visual experiences, but the codified information is nevertheless still accessible to
the analytic machinery of the brain. So, the patients see without seeing. Their
vision is not accompanied by an experience of seeing — nevertheless they do, to
some extent, know what their eyes tell them.’
      Furthermore, many kinds of knowledge are purely embodied, such as, for
instance, the immune system's knowledge of past infections, or the propriocep-
tive calibrations in the motoric system that explain why you are still able to
successfully bike or swim, even though you haven't practiced any of these skills
for years.
   If you remove the brain from an earthworm (and this “brain” is nothing
to write home about, as many readers may remember from this evil deed of
childhood), the worm may still move forward as if nothing had happened.
But when the worm comes to an obstacle, it is no longer able to pass beyond
it: it continues again and again to push into the obstacle. It seems that it
is no longer able to let the obstacle become knowledge in the sense that it
uses the obstacle as a cause for changing its course. Compared to worms,
the cephalopods have impressively well-developed brains. The octopus may
have as many as 168 million nerve cells, half of them in the visual cortex,
and is capable of at least limited associative forms of learning. Judged on
this background, it may perhaps be permissible to say that the octopus does
indeed see.

1 One might be tempted to call such people clairvoyant. And while literally this is of course rub-
bish, it may hit quite well into the heart of the superstition. For blindsight illustrates what clever
people have always known — i.e., that undreamt of resources may be found outside of conscious-
ness’ little enlightened room. Or, as Pascal usually gets the honor of saying, the heart has its rea-
sons that reason doesn’t know.
                                                         THE   SEMIOTIC    NICHE            177




                                   Umwelt Theory
Early in the twentieth century, the Estonian-born German biologist Jakob
von Uexkiill saw, long before anybody else, that a biology that would be true
to its subject matter would have to direct its searchlight explicitly on the per-
ceptual worlds of organisms, their Umwelts as he called them.” The Umwelt, as
Uexkiill used the term, is the subjective or phenomenal worldofthe animal.
The way Uexkill saw it, animals spend their lives locked up, sO to speak, inside

ogy employs the objective term ecological niche (that is to say, the set of con-
ditions — in the form of living space, food, temperature, etc. — under which a
given species lives), one might say that the Umwelt is the
                                                       ecological niche as the
  itself apprehends it.
animal                                                                                            |
   One of Uexkiill’s prime examples was the tick, known to crawl up in branches a
only to wait, nearly lifelessly, for a warm-blooded animal eventually to pass by
below. Only when this happens will the tick let go of the branch and land itself
upon the animal, where it quickly burrows itself into a fixed position on the
animal’s skin. The one signal that awakens the tick is butyric acid, a compound
secreted by all mammals, and thus the Umwelt of the tick consists mainly in the ,
presence or absence of butyric acid.                                       a
   In Bedeutungslehre (The Theory of Meaning), published in 1940, Uexkiill
writes, “If we stand before a meadow covered with flowers, full of buzzing bees,
fluttering butterflies, darting dragonflies, grasshoppers jumping over blades of
grass, mice scurrying and snails crawling about, we would instinctively tend to
ask ourselves the question: Does the meadow present the same prospect to the
eyes of all those different creatures as it does to ours?” (Uexkiill 1982 (1940),
45). And to illustrate why the answer to this question is no, he uses the example
of a meadow flower:
1.) A little girl picks the flower and turns it into a decorative object in her
      Umwelt;
PR
     Se   An ant climbs up its stalk to reach the petals and turns the flower into a
          natural ladder in its Umwelt;
3.)       A larva of the spittlebug bores its way into the stalk to obtain the material
          for building its “frothy home,” thus turning the flower into building mate-
          rial in its Umwelt; and
4.)       Acow simply chews up the flower and turns it into fodder in its Umwelt.


2    Theterm Umwelt can be traced back toa Danish poet, Jens Baggesen, who lived in Kiel (which
is now part of Germany, but still belonged to Denmark in Baggesen’s time). Baggesen wrote in
German and translated the Danish term omverden (surroundings) to German as Umwelt around
the year 1800 (Albertsen 1990).
 172           THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




 Each of these acts, he says, “imprints its meaning on the meaningless object,
 thereby turning it into a conveyor of meaning in each respective Umwelt”
 (ibid., 131).
    The species-specific Umwelt of the animal, the model it makes of its imme-
 diate surroundings, is for Uexkiill the very point of departure for a biological
 analysis. As the two parts in a duet must be composed in harmony (tone for
 tone, bar for bar), thus, he says, the organism and its Umwelt must also be com-
 posed in a contrapuntal harmony with those objects that enter the animals life
 as meaning-carriers (ibid., 68). It is this idea of contrapuntal harmony that lets
 Uexkiill call the ower beelike and the bee flowerlike, or the spider flylike, and
 the tick mammallike.
    Yet, poetic formulations like these probably are much responsible for the
 rejection of Uexkiill’s ideas among most biologists and philosophers as being
 suspiciously vitalistic. For as we saw in Chapter 1, the term vitalism may cover a
  range of different conceptions, which makes it a difficult accusation to refute,
  once levelled. Uexkiill, however, never defined himselfas a vitalist, and whereas
  Driesch, in his attempt to capture the essence of the life-world, returned to the
  Aristotelian concept of entelechy, Uexkill used the much more commonsensi-
- cal word plan (Kull 1999d). Now, there can be no doubt that the Uexkillian
 conception of evolution as a sort of overarching regularity (Planmassigkeit) or
 composition of a big symphony, goes against the ontological intuitions of most
 modern biologists, who see chance mutations as the ultimate source creativity
 in the organic world.
    And true enough, the more nature is seen as a “perfect symphony” the more
 difficult it becomes to connect von Uexkill’s Umwelt theory with the evolu-
 tionistic conceptions that hold that either (if everything is perfect now) the
 world wasn’t perfect earlier (when it was different) or conversely, if everything
 was perfect in earlier times, it cannot be so now. If, however, one tries to fit
 the Umwelt theory into an evolutionary framework, there emerges, as Frederik
 Stjernfelt (2001, 88) has observed, an important finding: “There remains,
 namely, a gestaltist and hence non-irrational account of the organization of the
 life of an organism.” For in describing the behavior of animals as being arranged
 according to distinctive qualitative categories, (that he termed stones), Uexkiill is
 on the track of a phenomenon that was later in phonetics and psychology to be
 christened categorial perception. Stjernfelt says,
       The melody — arch-example for the Gestalt theorists from yon Ehrenfels,
       Stumpf, and the early Husserl onwards to the Berlin and Graz school — artic-
       ulates an organized structure disconnected from the here and now of phys-
       ics and implying a teleological circle foreseeing the last note already by ;
       the intonation of the first. Thus — as Merleau-Ponty (1995 (1968), 233)
       remarks — this metaphor makes it possible to see the life of the individual as
                                                            THE SEMIOTIC NICHE                     173


    a realization, a variation of the theme, requiring no outside vitalist goal               —a
    variation, we may add, which constitutes the condition of possibility of mod-
    ification of the animal’s system of functional circles and hence the acquiring
    of new habits, possibly to govern evolutionary selection in Baldwinian evo-
    lution, ... Music maybe perfect but it is far from always the case (Stjernfelt
    2001, 87-88; italics added).

    Interpreting Uexkiill’s work in this way, we can see that Planmdssigkeit does
 not imply a deterministic unfolding of a preordained order. And although the
 telos involved in Planmassigkeit is of course very different from Peirce’s vision
 of evolutionary cosmology, it is not necessarily antagonistic either to Peirce or
 to the modern-day biosemiotic understanding (see Sebeok 1979, chapter 10).
 Rather, Uexkiill’s Planmassigkeit may be understood in its purely local and situ-
 ated context:
    The semiotics of corporeal life in any creature — ourselves included — does take
    part in the dance of ecosemiotic motifs, the local Planmassigkeit, which has been
    framing the evolutionary processes and has formed the particular form of the
    Umwelt of each species. The Umwelt must serve to guide the animal’s activity in the
    semiotic niche, i.e., the world of cues around the animal (or species) which the ani-
    mal must necessarily interpret wisely in order to enjoy life. The semiosphere, as I
    use the term, ie. the totality of actual or potential cues in the world, is thus to be
    understood as an externalistic counterpart to the the totality of Umwelts. Together
    they form, in the term of Jakob von Uexkiill, an unending set of “contrapuntal
    duets” (Hoffmeyer 2006, 94).

 I shall not delve further into the details of Uexkiill’s ontological positions but
 simply conclude that, whether the deeper presuppositions that nourished the
 work of Uexkiill’ are deemed acceptable to a modern scientific sensitivity or
 not, hisDeUmwelt theory
               LEER      was, ineR
                     CEE Was     any case,
                                     Cast aamilestone
                                            TA RestORe on the way
                                                       Cine       to the establish-
                                                              wey OEIC      sstan
               %      haat                 .                4
 ment of a biosemiotic understanding of nature.
    For a characteristic concept in the work of Uexkiill is the word hinausverle-
 gen —a word that I, in agreement with Thure von Uexkiill (Jakob’s son), will
“translate as “projected to the outside” (Uexkiill 1982). What is projected to the
                     the
 outside is precisel y         Umwelt:                        Viatiest           =.
    No matter what kind of quality it may be, all perceptual signs have always the form
    of acommand or impulse. .. . If Iclaim that the sky is blue, I am doing so because
    the perceptual signs projected by myself give the command to the farthest level:


 3 Stjernfelt has recently returned to an in-depth analysis of these questions, with particular
 emphasis on the connection between Uexkiill’s, Husserl’s, and Peirce’s positions (Stjernfelt 2007:
 see also Bains 2001).
 4 In this computer age of ours, the term virtual reality may perhaps express Uexkiill’s funda-
 mental idea better than the slightly awkward term Umwelt.
174            THE   SEMIOTICS     OF NATURE



      Be blue! ... The sensations of the mind become, during the construction of our
      worlds, the qualities of the objects, or, as we can put it in other words, the subjective
      qualities are building up the objective world. If we, instead ofsensation or subjec-
      tive quality, say perceptual sign, we can also say: the perceptual signs of our atten-
      tion become the perceptual cues (properties) of the world (Uexkiill, 1973; quoted in
      Uexkiill 1982 (1940), 14-15).

Animals unconditionally and throughout their lifetimes conjure up internal
models of the outer reality that they have to cope with. And these virtual reali-
ties apparently may sometimes entail an interactive aspect, too, since it is known
that almost all vertebrate animals do on occasion dream. The Umwelt theory of
Jakob von Uexkiill is presumably the first serious effort ever made to subject vir-
tual reality to scientific investigation (Hoffmeyer 2001C¢).”
   The idea that animals possess internally experienced or phenomenal worlds
that they then project back upon the outside world, however, has never been
well received by mainstream twentieth-century biology. Rather, as John Collier
has observed, the “modern synthesis” of the 1930s and 1940s signified a per-
vasive turn towards behaviorism in biology (Collier 2000): Organisms began
being treated as black boxes, operated upon by the external forces of mutation
and environmental selection. What went on inside the black box (morphologi-
cally, physiologically, or psychologically) was no longer seen as part of the gen-
erative dynamics ofnature, since only the consequences of such processes — i.e.,
the actual survival patterns and population differentials — needed to be taken
into consideration, it was thought, in order to understand and explain the great
scheme of natural selection. In this scheme, the eventual possession by animals
of phenomenological worlds was at best considered to be an unnecessary com-
plication — much in the same way that human consciousness for most of the
twentieth century was a nonexistent subject in mainstream                            psychology, and
for many of the same reasons. And worse yet, the idea of Umwelt was thought
to signal a dangerous return of anthropomorphic or even animistic atavisms in
a biological science priding itself on its potential to approach the scientific sta-
tus of physics.
   The automatic rejection by modern science ofall theories carrying even the
faintest trace of anthropomorphism (a rejection reminding one of the horror


5     And while animals are absorbed in their virtual realities, it is human fate to see through the
illusion. The “gift” of speech implied that humans could not escape comparing their individual
experiences with those of each other, and thus drawing the logical conclusion: there exists a shared
world, a reality, which is neither wholly another’s, nor mine. Thus, whereas the Umwelt comes to
us forfree (in that experientially, we start from there), the notion of a mind-independent reality per
se, was from the beginning an intellectual achievement. That we now, finally, have come to under-
stand that this reality, too, is itself (at least partially) a construction, does not make it any less real.
(This discussion is found in detail in Hoffmeyer 1996b, chapter 8.)
                                                   THE SEMIOTIC    NICHE          175



vacui of an earlier epoch) is itself deserving of critical study (see Favareau
2006). As Karl Popper once remarked, if we are talking about the nose of a
dog, we are also anthropomorphizing the dog, but we are doing so for good
reasons, because the nose of the dog and the nose of the human individual
are homologous organs, ie., their structural and functional similarities are
accounted for by the well-established fact of common ancestry. Likewise,
claimed Popper, we are well-justified in speaking about knowledge in animals
to the extent that homology implies that animal brains and human brains
are evolutionarily related organs performing related functions (Popper 1990,
30). In fact, any claim that human beings are the only animals to possess
Umwelts (or perceptually experienced subjective states) would require addi-
tional theories to explain why other mammals should be so fundamentally
different from us. No satisfactory theories pertaining to such an effect is
known to this author.
  Umwelt theory does not, of course, represent an atavistic revival of animism
in biology. Quite to the contrary, one might say that modern science, in its
obsessional rejection of animism has itself maintained a strange trace of that
which it rejects, in that in its very fear of spiritualism, science has closed itself
off from vast areas of the world which most of us would take to be very real even
if objectively immaterial in some modest sense of this term. Or to state this dif-
ferently (and using these terms as science understands them), materialist science
spirit-ualizes and, consequently, denies that area of lived experience that is the
virtual reality of all animal perception.
   The realization that the human experience of reality is always a virtual real-
ity (though not one to be confused with any supposed supra-reality existing
independently of our human knowledge) has, of course, been known to philos-
ophers for centuries. But in general, the scientific community has been little
influenced by the obvious consequences of this insight, namely that scientific
              :                                       Reda                 :            i
reality itself is a human, and therefore humanly limited, construction. Or, to
put it in the famous quote from Einstein, “Scientific concepts are free creations
of the human mind, and are not, however it may seem, uniquely determined by
the external world” (Einstein and Infeld 1938).
   Yet considering the heated debates — the so-called science wars — arising in
the wake of the Sokal affair (Robbins and Ross 1996, see Brown 2001) it may
be necessary to emphasize that the social construction of reality which we label
as scientific is not, in my view, indepesndent of the genuinely mind-indepen-
denerealiey whichit     purports
                        purpor to investigate.In fact, I believe that the particular
Sriategy annderlying
             thiesetentific endeavor assures a probably unequaled depen:
dence of knowledge on reality. And yet, in some sense this project stillmust be
a construction, and the virtuality ofhuman understanding cannot be escaped as
Jakob von Uexkiill clearlysaw. Moreover, the epistemological consequences of
      176          THE   SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE




      this fact must be confronted as Uexkiill certainly did in his Theory ofMeaning
      (Uexkiill 1982 (1940)).°
         Yet the widespread resistance of the scientific community towards an
      acceptance of this fact explains why scientists in general feel justified to
  neglect the whole idea of virtuality as anything real in the world. But this
  willful epistemological innocence may now have become challenged in a way
  which mainstream biology may find difficult to ignore. This challenge comes
  from research in what is called artificial life as envisioned by, among oth-
  ers, Christopher Langton (1989). For if organisms are not understood in the
  Uexkiillian way as living systems which are inherently and irreducibly sus-
  pended in their own phenomenal worlds or Umwelts, then one might easily
  imagine that the algorithmic kinds of dynamic systems exhibited by com-
  puter simulations do, in fact, mirror the abstract fundamental principles of
  life — whereas, life as we know it (i.e., organic life) would then be just one
  particular instantiation of this abstract “life form.” And this is, in fact, the
  idea implicit in Christopher Langton’s distinction between 4-/ife (for arti-
I
| ficial life) and B-life (for biological life). What this approach presupposes is

i|
     that A-life theory and biology are equally valid ways to study life, because
     _ both are just new kinds ofsimulacra of some evanescing general life form (see
     | Emmeche 1994). Both are equally virtual realities, and biology cannot claim
      ‘privileged access to the reality oflife.
          If biology maintains its rejection of virtuality as a real constituent of life, it
      is hard to see how one can escape the logic of Langton’s approach. If, however,
      biology adopted a more Uexkiillian and thus semiotic approach to the study
      of life, then virtuality would be seen as built into life from the very beginning,
      and one might easily dismiss artificial life as it is presently conceived as fun-
      damentally nonliving (regardless of its physical biology, or lack thereof). This
      would not, however, necessarily exclude the possibility that computers might
      some day in the future be constructed to host semiotic kinds of trve artificial life.
      But in our opinion, this would most likely presuppose that ways were devised
      to solve what is called the qualia problem (Searle 1992; Emmeche 2004 — dis-
      cussed below).



      6 Unfortunately, as Stjernfelt (2007, 228) observes, Uexkiill has a tendency to fall prey to “a
      widespread German temptation to naturalize this constitutive subjectivism” with the conse-
      quence that “physical laws of nature, for instance, become mere extrapolations and abstractions
      in the specific human Umwelt.” However, as Stjernfelt himself, points out, the acceptance of a
      naturalized subjectivism, as Uexkiill develops it, is not reconcilable with constitutive subjectiv-
      ism at any rate. (Nor need we follow Uexkiill — or any other thinker — in all of his conclusions,
      in order to use the conceptual tools that he developed. Were such a rule required, science could
      hardly progress at all!)
                                                       THE SEMIOTIC     NICHE           177




           Self-Organization, Semiosis, and Experience. x
In her fine analysis of the concept of intentional behavior as a property of com-
plex systems, the American philosopher Alicia Juarrero reminds us that the
modern idea of self-organizing systems runs counter to a philosophical tradi-
tion leading back to Aristotle and that, all the way through, is based on the
assumption that causes are external to their effects (Juarrero 1999, 2). Aristotle
claimed, writes Juarrero, that nothing can move, cause, or act on itself in the
same respect—and this principle has remained unchallenged throughout
the history of philosophy. That a chicken develops from an egg is not, in the
Aristotelian conception, due to immanent causes in the egg as a substantial
thing; it is due rather to formative determinations that characterize hens in gen-
eral (see Giordano Bruno’s critique of Aristotle in Chapter 3).
   Likewise, Kant inherited and expanded on this idea of causes as being exter-
nal to their effects. He certainly seems to have intuited the self-organizing
properties of organisms as a characteristic trait of life, but for him this prop-
erty became a reason for wot counting life as a field for scientific understanding.
Juarrero puts it this way:
   Organisms’ purposive behavior resists explanation in terms of Newtonian mechan-
   ics and is likewise a major impediment to unifying science under one set ofprin-
   ciples. These considerations convinced Kant that natural organisms cannot be
   understood according to mechanism in general or its version of causality in partic-
   ular. Since only external forces can cause bodies to change, and since no “external
   forces” are involved in the self-organization of organisms, Kant reasoned that the
   self-organization of nature “has nothing analogous to any causality known to us.”
   Kant thus upheld Aristotle: causes are external to their effects; self-cause, and there-
   fore, self-organization, are phenomenally impossible (ibid; 47):

In this elegant but, as seen from the point of view of rationality, strangely pow-
erless way, Kant escapes the obvious antinomy between a Newtonian under-
standing of nature and life’s self-organizing finality (see also Stjernfelt 1999).
   For better or worse, natural scientists rarely let themselves be impeded by
such philosophical reflections on the permissibility or nonpermissibility of this
or that theoretical construction. And by the end of the twentieth century, the
idea of self-organization little by little begins to take hold in science, thanks to
developments in a range of advanced studies inside physics, biology, cognitive
science, economics, and elsewhere. Too, a relative consensus seems to have been
reached in viewing complex systems as having dynamic properties that allow
for self-organization to occur (Haken 1984; Yates 1987; Kauffman 1993; Kelso
1995; Port and van Gelder 1995). Self-organization is seen here as a process by
which energetically open systems of many components “tend to reach a partic-
ular state, a set of cycling states, or a small volume of their state space (attractor
        178           THE   SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE



        basins), with no external interference. This attractor behavior is often recog-
        nized at a different level of observation as the spontaneous formation of well-
        organized structures, patterns, or behaviors, from random initial conditions
        (emergent behavior, order, etc.)” (Rocha 2001, 96).
          Juarrero’s book is a scientifically well-informed attempt to use the conceptual
        ‘structure offered by the theory of complex adaptive systems as a resource for the
        ‘establishment of a “different logic of explanation — one more suitable to all his-
        torical, contextually embedded processes, including action” (Juarrero 1999, 5).
i             complex adaptive systems, there occur such kinds of positive feedback loops
        whose products are themselves necessary for the process to continue and com-
        plete itself, thereby producing a circular cause or a self-cause (ibid.).” Such sys-
        tems, furthermore, form dynamic wholes that are not just, as science so often
        assume, epiphenomena, but are capable, as systems, of exerting causal power over
        their own
               0     components, ¢and of exhibiting both formal as well as final Kinds of

   ent ee in the hierarchical structure of these systems are best described as con-
   straints — in the sense of restrictions in the space of possibilities for processes to
\_beablable to manifest or realize at any given particular level.
           Juarrero’s scenario for the formation of complex adaptive systems capable of
        intentional and meaningful action is an impressive tour de force and is, in any
        case, a decisive contribution to the understanding of the philosophy of self-
        organization. Nonetheless, her analyses omit the semiotic aspect of selfhood as
        one of iits concerns. Ic thereforeremains unexplained how the element of first-
        person perspective that necessarily clings to intentionality —i.e., the fact that
        intentionality always presupposes an intentional subject—might possibly have
        appeared out of sheer complexity. How, in other words, could a self-organiz-
        ing system that — in principle at least — might be described algorithmically in
        terms of sequences of ones and zeroes ends up with intentionality in the first-
        person sense of this term?
              Traditionally the argument has been that the reason why evolution — though
        based on a continuous stream of chance events—can                        nevertheless create
        strange phenomena such as people, is that we, in the words of Eugene Yates
        (1998, 447),
              are the result of a random variation blocked at the statistical “left wall” of sim-
              ple organisms, by the fact of their minimal complexity. The thus-constrained drift
   |          through chance must be toward the right (increased complexity), but it has no
    |         special outcome or elaboration. By a concatenation of accidents encountered and


        7 See the bladderwort system — analyzed by Ulanowicz (Chapter 3) — that exhibits this same
        type of causality. Kant already, with some alarm, noted this kind of causality (Stjenrfelt 1999,
        2007).
                                                       THE   SEMIOTIC    NICHE           179



    avoided, we are here, along with Venus flytraps, humming birds, and crocodiles. But
    the modal (most frequent, widely distributed, and most totally massive) forms of
    life are the bacteria.                                                             —JI
                                                                                           \




I concur with this argument as far as the appearance of complex organisms is
concerned. But this kind of explanation fails to take seriously th
                                                                the fact thatwe
are not ese complex materia       aggregates, burt a!
                                                   also0 subjects. Every person. is genu-

inely an “I” plenomencn, whereas complexity in principle can be exhaustively x
described as an ‘it’
                  ” phenomenon. How"itit’s can
                                            an possibly become’
                                                        t       ‘T’s is the puz-

offer a solution tothis puzzle. What is missing, I would argue, istheadmission
of a semiotic dimension of explanation.
    When we are often bothered (or offended in our scientific taste) by the badly;
hidden anthropomorphisms in Uexkiill’s writings, it is because it is maintained
through his whole work that animals are much more like us than science has
so far been willing to accept. And this is exactly because the animals have an
Umwelt, an internal model of the relevant parts of their environment (i.e., those
parts of the environment that are relevant for them), and that this model has to
be included in any fully explanatory analysis of their life.
   We need to take care to express things correctly here, and it may be a prob-
lem that language simply does not readily provide us with the appropriately sub-
tle words. A tick waiting for butyric acid to reach itsense organs hardly has
any experiences (as this term is normally understood). In fact, my guess would
be that it is about as interactive as a computer in standby position. But in the
moment its receptors catch the signal butyric acid in intensities that exceed the
lower threshold value, a reflex-like movement occurs in it, immediately causing
it to drop down upon (what turns out to be) its prey below. Now, even in this
very split second, the state of the tick probably does not rise to the level of what
we might call an experience, but here one might perhaps imagine the presence
of some glimpse-like state of feeling— a /et go impulse. On one level, of course,
it is pointless to discuss unanswerable questions such as this. I do mention it
here, however, because the question of the evolutionary history of experiential \
existence has huge theoretical implications, and raises the natural-science ques-
tion: What might be the function of an experiental world? In other words, what
good is the having of experiences in a biological sense?®
   We shall suggest that experiences quite generally serve as holistic markers,
causingheBrinmachinery ro
                        Toes fourenon upononesgl ack
of experiences, as for instance, a cephalopod (presuming it actually does expe-

8   shall return to the philosopher David Chalmer’s discussion of these problems in Chapter 8
(Chalmers 1996).
     180          THE   SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE




    ‘rience its demonstrated seeing), the sensoric aparatus continuously processes
      the changing production of an astronomical number of impulses being sent to
    _ different parts of the brain that — equally continuously and in parallel — acti-
    |vate a number of physiological and/or motoric mechanism         s,ofthis might
                                                                    All
     presumably proceed quite efficiently in the absence of any experiential dimen-
     sion — withoyt qualia,asthe philosophers might say. But there is a reason why
     a holistic controtmust interfere, and this reason is that the organism is a uni-
     tary agent in its own life.Holistic control, then, is needed in order to track the
     finality of brain processes in accordance with an organism's ever shifting cur-
      ‘rent needs and intentions.” Thus it is through our experiences that the brain
    “becomes a tool for the survival project of the bodily unity. As a tool for such
      holistic control, the body has at its disposal first its emotional equipment — as
    _ when young birds duck their heads at the sight of big-winged objects moving
    \ above the nest. Such emotional reactions are accompanied by measurable alter-
       ations in the physiological and biochemical preparedness of the body.
           Secondly, there must minimally be an ability to build up a favorable correla-
     tion (or ontogenetic optimization) between the patterns of emotional reactions
     on the one hand, and the brain’s sensoro-motoric coordination schemas on the
     other. Here we are talking about a kind of correlation — or calibration — that is
|| unique to the individual's life history and cannot, for that reason, be encoded in
   the “innate manual” of the genome. And this is precisely where and why expe-
\    rience enters the picture. Experiences serve to focus brain processes according to
     bodily finality by the creation ofan approximated isomorph or analog virtual real-
    | ity, a single dominating “lead track” that, as in a computer simulation, extracts an
     —
     iconic surface out ofits deep cerebral  ty.
        That experiences appear to us(as analog todingsof meaningful parts of our
     surroundings,    sothat  we can, to som   nt, justly project them out as Umwelt,
     isprobably due to the fact that such codings establish the simplest possible func-
     tional mechanism. Since we are bodily creatures bound to operate by and in a
     world of space and time, the simplest— or safest — way to organize
     tory imagination, also is also in time and space, or in other word iconica
     muscles are not preprogrammed to their functions, but are cal              d in the
     course of our ongoing interactive life processes, and our muscles and our experi-
     enced worlds are tightly reciprocally calibrated. For these reasons, it would not

     9 The bizarre finding that in Siamese twin salamanders — i.e., salamanders that have developed
     two independent bodies apart from a shared stomach         —each head competes for food intake,
     although the food will end, anyway, in the shared stomach, illustrates the necessity for such a
     holistic marker, the absence of which, of course, is the reason why this pointless competition
     takes place in the poor creature (Hoffmeyer 2006). The German embryologist Hans Spemann has
     told that the wonder he once felt toward this little creature was the reason why he was originally
     spurred into a lifelong career in embryology (mentioned in Hamburger 1988)
                                                      THE SEMIOTIC     NICHE           181



be unlikely that experiences are iconically coded in all animals that have experi- }
ences at all. The holistic control function is an emotionally anchored focusing
of our brain processes. It has nothing to do with directly controlling the process-
ing of the infinite multiplicity of input that the brain receives, but only deals
with establishing an overarching directional. perspective. ee          ST at
moment tthe superior, immediate, and unconditional          j#ferpretant in the ongo-
ing biosemiosis of the organism.
   Then what about an animal whose nervous system is not sophisticated enough \
to produce such higher-order interpretants in the form of analog-coded mod- |
els? The need for some primitive version of a holistic marker is probably pres-
ent in all forms of life, and I imagine a graded series of such markers that in the |
lowest end consisits in the patterns of attraction and repulsion characteristic to
 chemotactic behavior in bacteria. In other words, I suggest that the phenom-
 enon of experience has primitive parallels all over the life world.Uexkill dis-
‘tinguished sharply between plants and animals. Only the former had nervous
systems and, therefore, Umwelts. Plants instead possessed what he called a wohn-
hiille — a cover of live cells by which they select their stimuli. Like Anderson et
al. (1984), I shall prefer to use Umwelt as a common concept for the phenom-
enal worlds*of organisms, of whatever kind these   se mighttbe
                                                             be.Although plants,
fungi, and protists do not possess nervous systems, they do have receptors to,
guide their activities, and they all, in our view, possess some kind of semiotic
freedom, however limited it might be.
—The experiential component oflife, gualia, is thus seen as an integral aspect
of life as such —an aspect that has had its own evolutionary history from its
most primitive forms in prokaryotic life to the sophisticated kinds of Umwelts
that we find in big-brained animals. In this respect, our view is in line with the
American philosopher Maxine Sheets-Johnstone, who has sketched a natural
history of consciousness where especially proprioceptive senses play a central
role for what she calls a somatic consciousness. The capacity for proprioception
seems itself to have evolved in the metazoans, Sheets-Johnston (1998) claims, |
via an internalization of the simple receptors that were originally localized at |
the surfaces of our protistan ancestors (discussed below).
   Additionally, it turns out that our holistic marker hypothesis is also in agree-
ment with the American philosopher John Dewey (1948, 91):

   The true stuff of experience is recognized to be adaptive courses of action, hab-
   its, active functions, connections of doing and undergoing sensory-motor coordi-        \
   nations. Ex,xperience carries principles ofconnection and organization within itself... |
   These principles are none the worse because they are vital and practical rather than
   epistemological. Some degree of organization is indispensable to even the lowest
   grade oflife. Even an amoeba must have some continuity in time in its activity and |
   some adaptation to its environment in space. Its life and experience cannot possibl
            182           THE   SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE



                  consist in momentary, atomic, and self-enclosed sensations. Its activity has reference
                  to its surroundings and to what goes before and what comes after. This organization
                  intrinsic to life renders unnecessary a super-natural and super-empirical synthesis. It
                  affords the basis and material for a positive evolution of intelligence as an organiz-
                  ing factor within experience (italics added).



                                             The Semiotic Niche
            The claim that there is an internal or subjective aspect to biological phenom-
            ena, and that this aspect must be taken into account in our theoretical under-
            standings, has been called internalism and has lately been advanced in boundary
            explorations of evolutionary systems (Matsuno 1989; Matsuno and Salthe 1995;
            Van de Vijver 1996; Van de Vijver, Salthe, and Delpos 1998; Chandler and Van
            de Vijver 2000). While traditional neo-Darwinism clearly is externalistic in this
            sense, the Uexkillian Umwelt theory potentially takes usdirectly intothe area
            of internalism.’° As the Japanese biophysicist Koichiro Matsuno has explained,
            intemalism   is concerned with situations where a system finds itself in a state
            that might be grammatically characterized as its present progressive tense: the
Ww
 IN Om
    4 state of being indthe midpoint of action — - going towards, changing, recogniz-
   » fc ng,etc. Science never dab ‘with such states but only with states that belong
ovye’       to the present or past tense.’ According to Matsuno (1996), this omission by
            science of considering the unique properties of states in their present progres-
            sive tense — states of becoming,
                                           rather than being — springs from the universal-
        \   ist and externalist nae        science.        Sa         ae
        h\    Honoring  such  an  ambition   presupposes   the synchronization of all parts
           under one single measure of time. Since, however, nothing can move faster than
            the speed of light, synchronization — and thus universalism — can, in principle,
            never be realized in the midpoint of acting, for no matter how small an entity
            might be, there are always, even inside the atom, distances between parts that
            must be overcome in shared action. The synchronized perspective only applies
            after the fact, i.e, not while something happens but when it happens.” This
            understanding seems to be in deep agreement with Peirce’s thinking on conti-
            nuity,as this is for instance expressed in “The Law of Mind” from The Monist
            1892 (CP 6:102-63).


            10 Uexkiill did not himself say anything about the subjective and experiential aspect. In this
            regard he is, as Stjernfelt (in personal communication) has said, a “methodological behaviorist.”
            11 As Don Favareau (in a personal communication) comments, this leaves the scientists in the
            same position as Zeno of Elea (of the fifth century BC) who could not understand how an arrow
            can ever be in motion, since at each discrete time interval it must be located in a single place!
            12 Zeno again! Here, the well-known Achilles paradox.
                                                   THE   SEMIOTIC   NICHE         183



   Now, I should point out very clearly here that I do not wish to contest the
view that the inner side of subjectivity per se is beyond the reach of the objective
methods of science. The qualitative differences between the pleasure of looking :
at paintings of Rembrandt and the pleasure of being on the receiving end of a
baby’s first smile, is rightly considered a topic for the humanities, and definitely
not for science. But even though science might not need to concern itself with
examining the inner side of subjectivity, it may and should be concerned with
examining the external side of subjectivity, such as the question of how the pos-
session of subjectivity affects the living systems under study. It is not the task of
biology to say what animal experiences are like (considered as experiences), but it
is the task of biology to deal with the fact that at least some animals have expe-
riences, and to study how this affects their livelihood.
   The most obvious way biology could do this is by directing more attention to
what I have previously referred to as the semiotic niche (Hoftmeyer 1996b). For
the niche concept has along ancestryinecology. In 1917, Joseph Grinnell defined
the niche as the totality of places where organisms of a given species might live.
Ten years later, Charles Elton gave the concept a functional turn — seeing the
niche as a description of the ecological role of the species, its way of life, so to
say. The resulting duplicity in the understanding of the concept of niche has
clung to it to this day: On the one side, the niche is a kind ofaddress (Grinnell)
on the other hand it is a profession (Elton).                                 ;
   In 1957, G. Evelyn Hutchinson gave the niche concept its modern definition, |
namely as an imaginary ”-dimensional hypervolume, whose axes would indi- |
cate the multiple ecological factors of significance for the welfare of the species_|
(Hutchinson 1957). Thus, the niche of a plant might include the range of tem-
peratures that it can tolerate, the intensity of light required for its photosynthe-
sis, its specific humidity regimes, and the minimum quantities of essential soil
nutrients needed for its survival. Hutchinson also in this context introduced the
distinction between an organism's fundamental niche and its realized niche. The |
fundamental niche of a species includes the total range of environmental condi- |
tions that are suitable for existence without the influence of interspecific com-
petition or predation from other species. The realized niche describes that part
of the fundamental niche actually occupied by the species.
   In the Oxford Companion to Animal Behavior, the following more down-to-
earth explanation is offered: “Animals are commonly referred to in terms of their
feeding habits; terms such as carnivore, herbivore, and insectivore being widely
used. The concept of niche is simply an extension of this idea. For instance, there
is the niche which is filled by birds of prey which eat small mammals, such as
shrews (Soricidea) and wood and field mice (Apodemus). In an oak wood this
niche is filled by tawny owls (Strix aluco), while in the open grassland it is occu-
pied by the Old-World kestrel (Falco tinnunculus)” (McFarland 1987, 411-12).
 184          THE     SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE



 This latter conception of what constitutes a niche has the advantage that with it
 it becomes possible to pose a series of interesting questions — ¢.g., How many
 ecological niches are there in the world? Are there more niches in warm cli-
 mates than in cold? Were there more (or fewer) ecological niches a hundred
 million years ago than there are today?
     Yet the concept of the ecological niche has framed a controversy about whether
 it is possible for two species with identical ecological niches to coexist, or whether
 one of the species will always, in the end, outdo the other via competitive exclu-
 sion. The question is difficult to decide because the n-dimensional character of
 the ecological niche makes it impossible to definitively clarify whether the eco-
 logical niches of the two species are indeed identical in all respects. This problem,
 of course, will only become so much more insolvable, if one includes the semiotic
 dimensions of the niche concept, as we are going to do in a moment.
i Traditionally, it has been assumed that natural selection would favor those
 individuals inside the competing populations that evade competition by enter-
 ing into a partnership of reciprocal specialization in the choice of resources,
Sa

 what is called the strategy of resource partitioning. The result of resource parti-
 tioning is that niche overlap between different species is minimized. In tropical
 forests in South and Central America, for example, several hundreds of spe-
 cies of birds, monkeys, and bats all eat fruit as their primary food source — but
 the enormous diversity of available fruits there has allowed all of these species
 to specialize such that the overlap between their diets has become very slight.
 Similarly, in a now classic study, Robert MacArthur found that five species of
 singer birds with nearly identical niches self-segregated in a surprising way. Not
 only did they each seek food in different zones of the fir, they also ate insects in
 different combinations and timed their nest building differently.
       Since Hutchinson's niche concept is n-dimensional, it is in principle wide
 enough to also embrace the semiotic dimensions of an organism’s need for a liv-
 ing place."* It is plain, nevertheless, that the niche concept — as currently used
 in ecology —is grounded in a de-semiotized understanding of the interplay
 between organisms in nature. Behavioral ecology may well have become a fash-
 ionable part of ecology, but the methodology of this approach is based upon
 a selectionist frame of understanding that leaves no space open for a semiotic
 perspective. It is therefore necessary to introduce a special concept to cover the
 semiotic dimension of the niche concept, and my suggestion of the term semi-
 otic niche was intended to do precisely this.

 13    Myrdene Anderson hints that Hutchinson may have been acquainted with Uexkull’s work
 and tells us that when Hutchinson was once asked, late in his life in 1991, to indicate “the singu-
 lar puzzle left us at the end of the twentieth century, he spontaneously replied, “Insides and out-
 sides” (Anderson 1998). And this is of course a basic semiotic theme (see Chapter 2: “Surfaces
 Within Surfaces”).
                                                           THE SEMIOTIC NICHE                 185



     The idea behind the concept of the semioticc niche was to construct a term
that would embrace the totality ofsigns «or cues inthe surroundings of an organ-
ism — signs that itmust be able to meaningfully interpret to ensure its survival
and welfare. The semiotic niche includes all of the traditional ecological niche
factors, but now the semiotic dimension of these factors is also strongly empha-
sized. The organism must distinguish relevant from irrelevant food items and
threats, Teeaopie
                ple, and
                      and it
                           imer
                             must sdenzify
                                   lean    the necessary markers of‘the biotic and
abiotic resources it needs: water, shelter, nest-building materials, matingpart-
ners, etc. The sem
               semiotic niche thus comprisesall llthedarerpretive challenges that
the ecological niche forces upon a species. Here are the words I originally used
when introducing this concept: In sorder to)occupy semiotic
                                                     a          niche, an organ-
ism or species “has to master a set ofsigns of a visual, acoustic, , olfactorry,tactile,
and chemical nature, by means of which it can control its survival in the semi-
osphere”
       e” (Hoffmeyer 1996b, 59). To these means ofsemiosisone ought to add,
as I have now learned, ultraviolet, ultrasonic, magnetic, electrical, solar, lunar,
and presumably a host of other communicative media (Hediger 1974, cited in
Sebeok 2001b, 24).
     The semiotic niche in this way may be
                                         be s
                                            seen as an externalisticiccounterpart to
                                                                                                    a
theRe
    Umwelt concept.
           I      PE Itmakes
                         SS the
                             Ee Umwelt
                                 ENED concept easier toyhandle in an “evo-
lutionary context,
           context, since
                    sin now one may pose the question of whether the Umwelt
of-a species is up to the challenges posed by the available semiotic-niche con-
ditions.Magnetotactic bacteria, for instance, are anaerobic organisms that find
their livelihood in the border zone between water and sediments. Because these
bacteria do not tolerate oxygen, they must by all means avoid surface water, and
evolution solved this problem in an inventive way. Their cytoplasm contains a
smart protein-based compass, a magnetosome that tells them, what is up and
what is down. However, if by accident these bacteria shifted hemispheres from
north to south (or vice versa), they would soon perish, because the magneto-
some would lead them to swim to the surface where the oxygen would kill them.
In this (admittedly speculative) case, their Umwelt would not fit the semiotic
 5          :                 4
niche available to them.'


                                  Semiotic Freedom

The so-called Cambrian explosion that took place in the Cambrian era, half a
billion years ago, refers to fossil findings that were interpreted to show a dramat-
ically rapid appearance of new types of animals at this point in life’s history. It
has been suggested that all (contemporary as well as extinct) major phyla (main

14 This example, by the way, also illustrates the danger or insufficiency of the Uexkiillian con-
cept oflife as a perfect symphony!
186          THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE



groups) of animals were established in one big “moment” of creativity at that
time — with not a single basic architectural form (bauplan) having been added
since (Gould 1989). (Much controversy has ensued around these ideas, and for
our purposes we do not need to take aside in this battle.)
   One theory— just for illustration — has it that the explosion was caused by
rising oxygen content. Before the Cambrian era, oxygen concentrations were sup-
posedly too low to support life of anything but the smallest animals. Algae in the
oceans in these distant times may have produced more oxygen than bacteria and
other primitive marine animals could consume. Accordingly, the oxygen content
on the whole began increasing, in spite of much turbulence. At the start of the
Cambrian era, a critical threshold might have been attained, however, allowing
bigger (more oxygen-using) animals to survive. At that point in time, therefore,
a whole new competitive parameter was introduced — ie., that of being big, and
this then gave birth to radical evolutionary experiments involving how to make
the most of bigness. The Cambrian explosion, in this view, reflects the fact that it
took evolution less than seventy million years to invent the approximately thirty-
five fundamentally different ways (i-e., basic body plans) to be an efficient big ani-
mal (with big here meaning more than a few centimeters).””
      Be this as it may, what interests us here is the question of whether the space
of morphological possibilities for constructing animals (which apparently filled
up at this time) would have simultaneously caused a filling up of the possibil-
ity space at the level of ecological niches. Were the fundamental ecological roles
already established several hundred million years ago, and has evolution since
then mostly been concerned merely with the finer adjustments of these basic
settings? (As, for instance, when marsupials spread into many of the niches left
open by the extinction of the dinosaurs only to find themselves replaced later,
for the most part, by placental mammals.)
   The answer that I propose to this question is 70. And the reason I feel con-
fident in saying so is because the property that we have called semiotic freedom
(Hoftmeyer 1992) has an inherent tendency to grow, as we shall see. Over time,
this has occasioned the formation of a range of new semiotic niches — thereby
also, according to Hutchinson’s niche concept, a corresponding range of new
ecological niches.
      Semiotic freedom was defined as “the depth of meaning that an individ-
‘ual or species is capable of communicating” (ibid., 109). The use of the word
 depth in this connection is related to Charles Bennet’s concept of logical
depth —his attempt to supply the concept of information with a measure for


15 An alternative and perhaps equally likely explanation might be that these thirty-five basic
animal architectures simply were the “lucky ones” that came in for the share before all others,
effectively blocking the way for newcomers (Gould 1989).
                                                           THE SEMIOTIC NICHE                  187



the meaningfulness or complexity of the information, quantified as the number
of calculatory steps spent upon producing it. I have no illusions as to the possi-
bility of transferring this kind of calculation from the world of computers to the
reality of nature, but intuitively it seems clear that the meaning of different mes-
sages may indeed have different depths.
   Thus, the saturation degree of nutrient molecules upon bacterial receptors
would be a message with a low depth of meaning, whereas the bird that pretends
to have a broken wing in an attempt to lure the predator away from its nest might
be said to have considerably more depth of meaning. In talking about semiotic
freedom rather than semiotic depth, then, I try to avoid being misunderstood to
be claiming that semiotic freedom should possess a quantitative measurability;
it does not. But it should also be noted that the term refers to an activity that is
indeed free in the sense of being underdetermined by the constraints of natural
lawfulness. Human speech, for instance, has a very high semiotic freedom in this
respect, while the semiotic freedom of a bacterium that chooses to swim away
from other bacteria of the same species is of course extremely small.’ The middle
ground between these two extremes is the main arena of biosemiotics.
   In biology it has been widely discussed whether evolution might be seen as
having optimized certain specific parameters for organisms. A range of param-
eters have been suggested as candidates for such a role, but none of them have
been generally accepted. Probably the most common assumption has been
that evolution exhibits a trend towards the increased complexity of organ-
isms. The problem is, however, that it is not exactly clear just what this com-
plexity amounts to. According to the evolutionary biologist Daniel McShea, it
is more or less agreed that the morphological complexity of a system is deter-
mined by the number of different parts of which it is comprised and the greater
or lesser irregularity of their arrangement. A complex system is therefore “het-
erogeneous, detailed and lacking in any particular patterns” (McShea 1991;
Hoffmeyer 1996b, 60-61). Accordingly, McShea (1991) concludes that despite
what common knowledge would have us believe, there is hardly any empirical
evidence to support the theory that complexity, in the above-mentioned sense,
has grown greater in the course of evolution. And apropos of this, he quotes the
distinguished paleontologist George Gaylord Simpson (1949, 252): “It would
be a brave anatomist who would attempt to prove that Recent Man is more
complicated than a Devonian ostracoderm” (the ostracoderm is a species ofish,
to which the trunkfish belongs, that was in existence between three and four
hundred million years ago).


16   Butevena     bacterium is a very complex physico-chemical system that is underdetermined by
its internal parameters in the sense that its contextual situatedness cannot fully account for cel-
lular controls.
  188          THE SEMIOTICS     OF NATURE



        From a biosemiotic point of view, however, the focus of this analysis is mis-
 directed. I have nothing against the idea that the
                                                 purely morphological com-
 plexityofF organisms reached iits upper limit already in the Devonian period, or
 even earlier for that matter. But it seems obvious that as evolution little by lit-
 tle created animals with central nervous systemst  to be players “ in the ecolog-
 ical theater” (to borrow Hutchinson's famous phrase), the play itself changed
                   increasingly, evolutionary gains would turn upon the develop-
 character so thatir
  ment of eflicient mechanisms for social interaction and cooperation — as well
 as upon such misinformative practices as cheating and faking — and, in short,
~that evolutionary games would be expected to ‘increasingly concern the acquir-
 ing ofsemiotic‘competence.
                co          Therefore, as I[ originally suggested, “the most pro-
 aounced feature of organic evolution was... not the creation ofa multiplicity
  of amazing morse                 structures, but thegeneral expansion of ‘sem iotic



pees   a pua anatomical side of eee             was ern         7 by semi-
otic development andwas thus forced to obey the boundary conditions placed
  on it by thesemiosphere” (Hoffmeyer 1996b, 61-62). And indeed, as soon as
 ,one puts on one’s semiotic glasses, the evolutionary trend towards the creation
  of species with more and more semiotic freedom becomes so obvious that one
  may wonder how it can be that it was never suggested.’” The main reason for
 this may well be that anthropomorphism is generally considered such a deadly
 sin of the first magnitude, that in setting up semiotic freedom, as I do here, as
 thepivotal point of evolution —at least in its later phases — we almost by def-
 inition must accord to human beings the status of being the foremost creatures
 in the natural history of the Earth. Perhaps this is also the reason why science in
 caeris suspicious of the semiotization of nature implied by the biosemiotic
   pproach. It is time to stop this farce’®



                                Semethic Interaction

 The growth in semiotic freedom through evolution
                                             is caused by the possession
 ‘in living systems of an extreme semiogenic capacity, a capacity
                                                                based on their
 ability to read omens in the broadestt possible sense of this expression — in other

 17 We do not claim complete knowledge of the literature, of course, but the Nobel laureate and
 French molecular Bislogse Francois Jacob's statement that “evolution depends on setting up new
 systems of communication” (Jacob 1974, 308) is the closest case known to us.
 18 In the original Danish edition of this book, I said this more succinctly, I suppose, by using
                      —                          _
 the old expressiongIt is time to caltaspadtaspade. Put apparently this, in the US. context, might
 be read with racist-connotations that are ae in the Danish context and were, of course, not
 intended.
                                                   THE   SEMIOTIC   NICHE        189



words, to takeceadvantage of
                          0 any regularities they might come upon as signify-
ing’
  xvehicles, or signs. And indeed,;although the word isnot often any longer
used this way these days, I must stress at the outset that by the word omen I
mean nothing at all mysterious or supernatural. Anything is an omen until we
understand its true significance. Thus, whether this reading of omensoccurs Via
genetic adjustmentsdown through generations or occurs as an effect «of the cog-
nitive system of an individual organism, is, in this connection, virtually irrele-
vant. What happens in both cases is the same
                                          — seen from the standpoint of
semiotics — although    the time:scales of events are, of course, widely different
in the two cases.   I have called this pattern ofinteraction semethic interaction
(from   the Greek, semeion = sign + ethos= habit) (Hoffineyer 1994a; 1994b).
Whenever a regular |behavior orhabitof an individual or species isinterpreted
as a| sign by so:
              some other
                       1erindividuals (conspecific or alter-specific) and is reacted
upon through the release of yet other regular behaviors ot habits, we have a case
of semethic interaction.
   The bird that lures the predator away from the nest by pretending it has a bro-
ken wing— and then flies away as soon as the predator has been misled a suf-
ficiently long way— is an obvious example of a partner in a game of semethic
interaction. And, in fact, at least two cases of semethic interaction are involved
here: first, the predator has perceived (genetically or by experience) that clumsy
behavior signifies an easy catch. The bird’s behavior is therefore (mis)interpreted
as a sign for an easy catch. Here.we have a very simple semiotic process, where a
nearly lawlike (and clearly nonsemiotic) relation (of one certain physical state to
another — ie., clumsiness with vulnerability) serves as a signifying regularity, or
sign for the predator (Hoftmeyer 2008a).
  The bird, however, takes advantage of a much less safe relation, the relation
between asign anditsinterpretant. Bypretending tohave abroken wing, the
bird can “count on” (and again, this may or may not be a gentically fixed inter-
pretant) the predator to misjudge the situation. In other words, the success of
this strategy counts on a false interpretive act in the predator. That the preda-
tor will misinterpret the bird’s behavior may be a safe assumption — seen from
our view— but it is hardly a lawlike necessity. Clearly the act of pretending in
this case has to be well executed. In this way then, semethic-interaction patterns
are built upon other semethic-interaction patterns in chains or webs of increas-
ing sophistication.
   Among biochemists, there is a rule of thumb saying that whenever nature
keeps a store of energy (e.g., food) there will also always be a species that makes
a living on consuming it. I shall suggest a quite similar rule of thumb by saying
that there never occurs a regularity or a habit in nature that has not become a        4
sign for some other organism or species. Admittedly, this rule may be less well
investigated (so far!) than the biochemical rule, but it does catch an important
      190              THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




      that these semiotic relations, more than anything else, are responsible for the
           SS                 eS   RT Gite   SE   OS   I Se      -                       "4   fi



      ongo ing stability ofEarth’s ecological and biogeographical patterns.
         Semethic interactions have been at play from the earliest steps of evolution.
      An example on this is the invention of light sensitivity in early heterotroph
      organisms.’ Swenson and Turvey (1991, 340) give the following description:
            Photopigments were first used in photosynthesis, and in locating or moving toward
            or away from places where the wavelength of light was suitable or not suitable for
            photochemistry. ... At some point, when (photosynthesising) cyanobacteria are
            presumed to have constituted a major portion of the biomass on earth, they them-
            selves represented a field potential on which heterotrophs . .. began to feed. The
            heterotrophs used the same photopigments for detecting light, but not to photo-
            synthesise; instead the pigments were used to detect light that was specific to where
            the autotrophs (photosynthezising cyanobacteria) were feeding (on the light).
            Light distributions specifying not light as food itself, but information about the
            location of food, was evolutionarily instantiated in its modern sense.

      These heterothroph organisms evolved light-sensitive receptors, not because
      they needed light, but because their prey needed it.
         Some amusing examples of semethic interaction have already been given
      earlier in this book. For instance the squid that survives through a mutualis-
     | tic interaction with light emitting spirochetes, or the fungus that profits from
     | the regularities inherent to the sexual schemata of the male fly. Semethic inter-
       actions are probably involved in most —if not all— interspecific relations.
       Both predator and prey must in their opposing projects necessarilybeaware of
     “those signs that tell them about the habits of the opponent. A funny case in this
    “respect is the hare-fox interaction as described by Anthony Holley (1993). A
     brown hare can run almost 50 percent faster than a fox, but when it spots a fox
 A
     approaching, it stands bolt upright and signals its presence (with ears erect and
     the ventral white fur clearly visible), instead of fleeing. After ten years and five
( \! thousand hours of observation, Holley concluded that this behavior is energy
      saving: if a fox knows it has been seen, it will not bother to give chase, so saving
 .) the hare the effort of running. Holley rejects the alternative explanation — that
      the hares just want to better monitor the movements of their predators — partly
      because the behavior does in fact not help them to see the fox more clearly, and


      19        Heterotroph organisms, like animals, cannot make organic compounds from inorganic com-
      pounds and therefore have to procure such organic compounds by eating them. This is contrary,
      of course, to the ways of autotroph organisms, such as plants that survive by photosynthesis — or
      bacteria that get energy by taking in and degrading energy-rich inorganic compounds.
                                                  THE   SEMIOTIC   NICHE        I9I




partly because they do not react the same way to dogs. While a fox depends on
stealth or ambush to catch a hare, the dog can run faster and it would therefore
be counterproductive for a hare to signal its presence... The hare “knows” that
thefox has the   habit of not chasingit if spotted. ire
                                                    Thus it develops the
                                                                      habitof
showing the fox it has become spotted, Whetherher this
                                                  this habit hasbecome fixe:
                                                                        fixed
in the genomic setup ofthe hare or whether it isbased mostly on experience is
probably not known, but doesn’t matter (Hoffmeyer 19974).
   The amazing semiogenic competence of many animals was perhaps most
famously brought to the attention of the scientific community in 1907, when
the German psychologist Oskar Pfungst disclosed the trick behind Clever
Hans— the horse that surprised audiences all over Europe with its ability to
do simple calculations. Recall this famous story: Hans’s trainer would pose to
it a simple arithmetic problem, such as 3 x 4, by writing with chalk on a black-
board, and Hans would then reply by tapping one foreleg twelve times. In spite
of many attempts, nobody was able to disclose any cheating until Pfungst began
his studies,
   The horse, of course, did not possess any capacity to do mathematics or under-
stand writings ona table, but it did an eminent job of reading the wishes of indi-
viduals from a foreign species. If the horse could not see the person posing the
question, it could not then perform, and the explanation for its artful tapping
was shown to reside in the horse’s ability to notice an ever so slight — and obvi-
ously unconscious — body movement by the trainer, when the correct number
of tappings was reached. At the point when the cue showed up, all Clever Hans
needed to do was to stop tapping. Now, unfortunately, this famous story has
probably contributed more to bring ethology into ridicule than anything else.
And, indeed, a series of other clever-animal stories have appeared since then,
perhaps the most notorious being the many experiments purporting to show
that great apes had been taught to talk (Sebeok and Umiker-Sebeok 1980). Yet
in a comment on the Clever Hans phenomenon, the Swiss pioneer in nonverbal
communication studies, Hans Hediger (1974, 27-28) writes, “The apparent per-
formance of these ‘code-tapping’ animals is only explainable by the continually
repressed fact, that the animal —be it horse, monkey or planarian — is gener-
ally more capable ofinterpreting the signals emanating from humans than is con-
verse the case. In other words, the animal is frequently the considerably better
observer of the two, or is more sensitive than man; it can evaluate signals that
remain hidden to man” (cited in Sebeok 2001b, 23). Hediger quotes Pfungst for
the observation that horses are capable of perceiving movements “less than one-
fifth of a millimeter” in the human face (Hediger 1974, 32).                    a
   Similarly, a fascinating example of semethic interaction between humans and [
birds concerns the African Boran people and a bird known as the black throated
honey guide, Indicator indicator (Sebeok 1979, 14- 18). Collecting honey iis an
   192        THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




   ancient human practice as witnessed by 20,000-year-old cave paintings. The
   honey guide often accompanies the Boran people when they go out to collect
   honey. Indicator indicator guides them from tree to tree by characteristic call-
   outs. Thanks to this assistance, the time Borans expend finding the bees’ nests
   (which is otherwise approximately three hours) is shortened by one third. The
   bees are smoked out, the hives are opened, and the honey collected. And while
   the honey guide birds cannot themselves open the hives, after the Borans have
   taken their honey, much valuable larvae and wax still remain in the hives for the
   birds to eat. The species designation Indicator bears witness to the spontaneous
{ ‘semuetc intuition that many biologists have upon discovering such interactions.
  - Too, semethic interactions may, in some cases, be very complex and involve
 'several species. ‘This is, for instance, often the case inplant signaling, where
   plantss that have been damaged by insect attacks. emit signals that are received
   by
    y undamaged conspecifics. Undamaged fava beans (Vicia fabea), for instance,
   immediately started attracting aphid parasites ee ervi) after having been
   grown in a sterilized nutrient medium in which aphid-infected fava beans had
   previously grown (Bruin and Dicke 2001). The damaged beans thus had man-
   aged to signal their predicament through the medium to the undamaged beans,
   which then immediately started to attract aphid parasites, although no aphids
 |_were, of course, available for parasites to find.
      Perhaps the best studied examples of this mechanism in plants concern cases
   where the sign vehicle is a volatile airborne compound (but soluble waterborne
   compounds thar spread to neighboring plants through the earth also often func-
   tion as messengers). The complexity of these relationships is further increased
   by the intervention of nonconspecific plants that may gain advantage from the
   density of freely available parasitoids (insects whose larvae lives as parasites that
   eventually kill their hosts)) and it is therefore conceivable that these nonconspe-
   cific plants themselves may develop sensitivity to the volatile signal molecules.
   Bruin and Dicke, reviewing a series of examples on this kind of communication,
   also advance the speculation that signals might be transferred by direct contact
   between the roots of neighboring plants, or even through the fungal bridges
   (ectomycorrhiza) between them.
      Parasitic wasps (Cotesia marginiventris) that lay their eggs in caterpillars
   offer another intriguing example of semethic interaction. When a caterpillar
   munches on the leaves of a corn seedling, a component present in the oral saliva
   of the larva induces the formation of a signal that spreads to the whole plant.
   This signal causes the corn seedling to emit a volatile compound, a terpenoid,
   which is carried off with the wind. Eventually, the terpenoid arrives at the anten-
   nae of female wasps and is interpreted as a sign for oviposition, prompting the
   wasps to fly upstream towards the source of the terpenoid. Upon detecting the
   caterpillars, the wasps lay their eggs in the young larvae, one egg in each, and a
                                                  THE   SEMIOTIC   NICHE         193




couple of days later the eggs hatch and the parasitoid starts eating up the inte-
rior of the caterpillar. Ten days after oviposition, the parasitoid emerges from
the caterpillar and spins itself a silky cocoon, leaving the host larva to die.
   Seen from outside, what happens here is that the wasp and the corn plant
have common, if opposite, interests in the caterpillar and have each worked out
a cooperative way of satisfying those interests by actively sharing a small part of
the semiosphere. Or, more concretely, a habit (the emission of a terpenoid by
the corn plant when leaves are munched upon by caterpillars) has become a sign
for the wasp, leading it to a suitable opportunity for oviposition. But should
this wasp have any natural enemies, this very same successful oviposition mech-
anism might yet serve as a perfect habit for that enemy to exploit, building up
even more layers of semethic interaction upon semethic interaction.
   And in fact, parasitic and mutualistic symbioses are more or less unthink-
able without a subtly developed pattern of semethic interaction between the
involved organisms — as we have already seen in the case of the squid and light-
emitting bacteria, where a multiplicity of signals and signal receptors interact
back and forth across the species barrier. In Chapter 4, we discussed several other
kinds of symbiotic relations such as lichens, mycorrhiza, and the cultivation of
fungi by ants. Further examples include cellulose-degrading microorganisms in
the intestinal tract of ruminants, pollination relations between flowering plants
and insects, and the close cooperation between coral polyps and algae (usually
dinoflagellates). The scheme is nearly inexhaustible, and if sufficiently broadly
defined, every organism on Earth does, in some sense or other, enter into mutu-
alistic symbiotic community with other species.
   Semethic interaction is often involved in intraspecific ritualization —        i.e.,
the development oof stereotypic displays with communicative content that are
intended for conspecific  individuals. An interesting theme in this context is the
iconic use of typically feeding--related items for mating purpose. For example,
during courtship the water mite (Newmannia papillator) male will make a vibrat-
ing movement with its front four legs while wandering around the female —a
behavior called courtship trembling. This trembling behavior is iconically indis-
tinguishable from the vibration in the water surface that discloses the presence
of the small animals that the mites feed upon. The water mite strikes a specific
attitude while watching the vibrations in the water surface ready to seize the
prey with its forelegs, and this is precisely the way the female seizes the male in
the initial step in mating. It is, of course, particularly intriguing for the imagi-
nation that the hungrier females are more likely to gravitate towards the male
and clutch him (Johnstone 1997, 161). Seen from the standpoint of semiotics,
                                                                                          AK
what goes on that
             is     the male takes advantageof the f
the
 he purpose of communicating his mating wish. Students of behavioral ecology
aptlyy ¢call thisphenomenon sensory exploitation or even sensory trap.
             194          THE   SEMIOTICS      OF NATURE



                   And again, the same theme is repeated with many different variants in many
             different animals. For instance, it is well known that female birds will often, in
             a late phase of the mating ritual, strike an attitude that is otherwise only seen in
             very young birds when they are begging for food. This exclusively happens in a
             late state of the ritual, and the birds are not especially hungry. Wish for feed-
             ing has thus developed to become an icon for wish for mating. Sebeok discusses
             a more cruel case of courtship ritual in that of the balloon flies of the genus
             Empididae, where swarming males bring with them insects caught as “wedding
             gifts.” “The male offers his gift to a female,” writes Sebeok, (1979, 18), “which sits
             peaceably sucking it out while the male inseminates her. As soon as copulation
             is completed, the female drops her present, but if the empidid bride is still hun-
             gry, she may consume her amorous groom next.””°
E       _.         The normal case of semethic interaction concerns the interplay between two
¢            or more organisms, but abiotic regularities may also be used as a substrate for
    o        the semiogenic inventiveness of living systems, as we saw in the case of magne-
5            totactic bacteria. Similar cases are found among the migratory birds that find
S|           their way across continents — or between them — by interpreting stellar con-
$  ‘|        figurations by night.”
3                  Too, semethic interaction is by no means exclusive just to the organismic level
             but may also take place at levels other than the organismic. Thus, in the case of
             the eyeless mutant in salamanders, we saw that this very same principle of seme-
             thic interaction is also an important principle during embryonic development.
             The presence of a developing eye at a distinct stage of cerebral development is
             used as a semethic trigger for those tissues from whence the hypothalamus is sup-
             posed to develop — so that, in the absence of the eye, the hypothalamus and the
             gonadotropic hormones go missing as well. The example of female nest cooing
             in the ring dove (see Chapter 5, the section “The Semiotics of Reproduction”)
             shows that semethic interaction is used by evolution to connect habits and


             20 Sebeok’s point in presenting this example is a little more sophisticated than we have felt nec-
             essary to show here. For, interestingly enough, this “wedding gift” varies quite a lot from species to
             species, so that in some species of empididae there are no such gifts at all (and there is thus a corre-
             sponding risk for the male of succumbing to the cannibalistic propensity of the female), whereas
             rituals amongst other species form a graded series wherein the insect steadily decreases in size
             (and hence in food value) while the balloon that the flies construct around the gift increases com-
             mensurably in complexity. Finally a stage is reached in evolution where the female receives only
             the empty balloon. Sebeok (1979, 19) says that at this stage, “from a strictly synchronic point of
             view, the link between a representamen and the object for which it stands has now become ‘arbi-
             trary, and... thus (as well as in other familiar ways) the sign meets every viable definition of a
             symbol.” This succession of evolutionary steps is, in itself, a splendid illustration of evolution’s ten-
             dency to develop higher and yet still higher levels of semiotic freedom.
             21 Alternately, there are dung beetles that forage by reading the polarization patterns of moon-
             light (Nature 424, 33).
                                                              THE   SEMIOTIC     NICHE             195



signs across the traditional levels in the biological hierarchy. In this case, we
saw that the physiological timing of ovulation had become scaffolded by hab-
its of vocalization during courtship, since the brain of the dove apparently had
evolved to interpret the body’s own cooing behavior as a sign for the initiation
of ovulation.


                           The Ecosemiotic Perspective
Traditionally, ecology has had a hard job in trying to map the multiple phys-
ical and chemical interactions between organismic populations, as these are
reflected through such things as trophic structure and nutrient cycles, But the
task of unraveling |the semethic-interaction patterns between such populations
is, ofcourse,, magnitudes more complex. Probably we have only seen the begin-
ning of such studies, and my guess would be that our present knowledge gives
us only a small glimpse of a nearly inexhaustible stock of intelligent semiotic
interaction patterns taking place at all levels of complexity from cells and tissues
inside the bodies up to the level of ecosystems.
   The situation, in other words, has a matrix-like structure with multiple inter-_
dependent relationships
                   populations
                        binding of many differentspecies into
a shared interpretive universe or motif. _Against this background, it would be
reasonable to suggest that evolution may be as much constrained by the exis-
tence of these ecosemiotic interaction structures, as it is by developmental con-
straints     (Alberch 1982).°” In an earlier paper (Hoffmeyer 19974), suggested the
term ecosemiotic discourse structures with reference to Michel Foucault’s expo-
sition upon the discourse concept, which, very briefly stated, refers to the sym-
bolic order relating human subjects to a common world (Foucault 1970, Cooper
1981). However, the term ecosemiotic interactions may be preferable to that of
discourse, since there is no reason to associate this activity to the human sphere
of symbolic minds here.
   Thus, while most biologists suppose that symbiotic mutualism is an excep-
tional case of no general importance for evolutionary theory,Ibelieve that
semiotic mutualism involving a delicate balance of interactions between many
species is widespread (see Margulis and Sagan 2003). And if this is indeed the

22 Developmental constraints refer to the limitations that the developmental process puts on the
evolutionary construction of phenotypes. One might, for instance, think that it would be simpler
for horses to develop hoofs directly, but instead the horse embryo develops through a stage where
the embryonic limbs have five digits. The likely explanation for this is that the internal logic of the
developmental schemes in tetrapods makes it impossible to skip the five-digit stage. Evolution is
thus constrained by structural bindings caused by the historical process whereby the developmen-
tal schemes were first established. It is probably for the same reason that no tetrapods have wings
although such a feature might well be advantageous in some species.
                196        THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE



                case, it has significant consequences for our thinking about evolution, for it
                                                     changed morphological otbehavioral.traits
                                                  ofchang
                                          fitness of
                implies that the relative fitness
                become dependent on the whole system of existing semiotic relations that the
                species finds itself a part of.- Accordingly, the firm o rganism-versus-environ-
                ment borderline will be dissolved, and and_a new integrative level intermediate
                between the‘species aiand
                                      and the
                                          the  ecosystem  would Ihave to be considered — i.e., the
                level of the ecosemiotic interaction structure. Clearly, this possibility becomes
               .| Most interesting in cases where experience and learning enters the interaction
                  pattern, as will often be the case in mammals and birds. Such learning might
                  on occasion even subsume the evolutionary process, as is the case in human
                  culture. Conversely, one might wonder if a relatively autonomous ecosemiotic
                  interaction structureis preciselywhat is needed for learning to evolve in the
                  first place. In“this way, eventual increases in semiotic freedom will be prone
                to feed back into the evolutionary process by strengthening the advantages of
            possessing semiotic freedom.
               Thus, semiotic freedom is an emergent property and should always be ana-
       (Wu “une relation to its proper level. For example, the semiotic freedom of the
Ue
 “4 free-living individual cell must have been severely diminished in the process
x iN
          , that transformed unicellular organisms to multicellular
                                                         Uticellular organisms. The neces-
yee T Garon single cells to obey tthe somatic ecology of the body,
                                                             body, asBuss (1987) termed
  ao      NI
\vXo:           it,must have constrained the freedom of-each individual cell,but these con-
x
                straints
                    ints at the level of the cel
                                             cell made possit
                                                       possible the eno1
                                                                    enormous gain in semiotic free-
           dom acquired atthehigherlevel of the organism. Through the differentiation
          | ofits tissues, the multicellular organism obtained a much greater capacity for
          ¢ processing and communicating knowledge, in the sense that it could deal with
            larger parts of its environment both in space and
                                                          ;   time.
                   We shall thus suggest the term |interpretance as a measure ofcapacity
                                                                                 the       of
               “a system to respond to signs through the formation“of meaningful interpre-
                rants. Figh interpretance allows a system to “read” many sorts of cues in the
                surroundings; such high-level interpretance means that the system will form
                interpretants in response to complex cues that might not be noticed, or even
                be noticeable, by low-level agents. Thus, a unicellular organism cannot interpret
                complex patterns such as animal tracks, and in this sense it has a low-level inter-
                pretance. Mammalian organisms, on the other hand, are capable of interpreting
                extremly complex cues — such as the individual behavioral patterns of conspe-
                cifics — accordingly, they may be said to have high-level interpretance.
                   All this indicates that there is an aspect of play in the evolutionary process,
                an aspect which has been more or less overshadowed (virtually to the point of
                invisibility) by the Cyclopsian focus on selection. For play, it is often said, is
                an activity which carries its purpose initself. “What is characteristic of ‘play;”
                writes Gregory I
                               Bateson (1979, 139) “is that this is a name for contexts in which
                                                      THE SEMIOTIC NICHE              197


 the constituent acts have a different sort of relevance or organization from
 that which they would have had in non-play.’ Bateson 1(1979, 151) also suggests                  od
 the definition of play as “the establishment and exp     ion of relationship”
 opposed to ritual— “the affirmation of relationship.” Thus, to the extent that
 the living world is engaged in an open-ended and nonsettled exploration of rela-
 tionships between systems at many levels of complexity, it can truly besaidthat            | \
                                                                                            \
 nature does, in fact, exhibit play-like behavior. It therefore will be as legitimate        © Ww
 to talkmn            ae centtheevolution oflife forms, as it is to
 Zk abou naturaleleoon,Seletuonraces es
                                      Serethinpe-=1&-cois bebavinvs,
 morphologies, orgenetic setups —thereby putting an end tosome element of                         4
 ongoing play in the system while simultaneously  providi           ginning of
 whole new kinds of play.
   Thus itwas, for example, that more than fifty million years ago a particular
 ant species began interacting with a particular kind of fungus and the processes }
 of natural selection eventually settled this as a new ant habit for farming fungi |
 (as discussed above). The counter-processes of natural play, however, continued
 exploring this newly created semethic-interaction pattern (or ecosemiotic inter-
 action structure), since now all two hundred of the existing fungus-growing spe-
 cies have evolved from this single ant species, And with few exceptions they all
 grow fungi from the same family, Lepiotaceae. In fact, the higher forms of ants
 have now become so specialized that they cannot survive without exactly the
 right variety of fungus (New Scientist 17/12 1994, 15). So here, the long, slow,           .\°
                                                                                            wil
                                                                                                      Vv
 interactive processes of natural selection may finally|
  a     aan
                                                              have resulted in the total \       r
 érystallization
   Sere    Te
                   of the relations from the  open   form  of play to the closed form of     *   i
               a, Croke               =
ritual
 /      (or as it has sometimesnes been called, instinct).                               \
                                                                                           \ io
                                                                                             “atat
  ~ Obviously, an increase in semiotic freedom will tend to push the influence(\ ‘
 of selective forces to higher levels. Thus, the more there is of inter-species semi-
 otic interaction, the more will the selective aspect of evolution be loosened at that
 level, and the more dominating will become the play aspect. This is because a
 rich semiotic interaction pattern produces fitness ambiguity — for when organ-
 isms are bound up in a web of complex semiotic relations, virtually any newly
 developed property or behavior can potentially be counteracted or integrated |
 in many different ways. Thus, the number of possible solutions for selection to |
 scrutinize — and the subtlety of the communicational interactions — will tend
 to produce a no-win situation. As a result, selection cannot really measure the
 stakes of single players (individuals, demes, or species) in the game, though it
 could still influence the choice ofthe game itself. Because ultimately, it is plays,
 not players, that are selected for. Accordingly, I have suggested that instead of the’
 evolutionarily derivative concept of genetic fitness, evolutionary biology should
 try to develop a concept of the evolutionarily prior phenomenon of semiotic fit- |
 ness (see Chapter 4, section on life cycles, and Hoffmeyer 1997a).
                                                                                     f   f    U
 198           THE SEMIOTICS OF NATURE                                              t” Sl         w)



                      The Biosemiotic Core of Evolution                                  yw
 If a morphological or behavioral trait has a relatively unambiguous genetic
 anchoring, and if, on the average, it conveys an increased advantage, in survival
or reproduction, to the organisms carrying it, then one would expect this trait to
spread in the population, thanks to natural selection. And, indeed, we have no
problems in ascribing such authority to natural selection. What I do question,
however, is that this principle can be said to, even approximately, suffice as a com-
prehenisve explanation for evolution. For the problem is that this principle does
not itself explain the establishment of the conditions under which it applies, ice.,
under which it both operates and became possible in the first place.
       Whether a trait conveys an advantage to its carrier or not depends on a com-
plex, seleoreanizine
          organizing context
                      conte: of semiotic Geations that were gradually established
Loa massively combinatorial trial and errorevents at the lived ecosystemic
level
   el a
      and is
           1S therefore      beyond the reach      of genetic   prespecification. This espe-

 cially
 ‘ially applies’to later stages of evolution, where        the Semitic     competences of spe-
  ace
 cies are more unambiguously pronounced. Our ir             ion is not, of course,
that selection is noolonger very important in later stages of evolution, but only
 that selectioncannot be:said to explain the€VOllutionary process
                                                          proc     as such — since
 this process toa great extent has been played out on premises given solely by the
force of organisms’ semiotic context.
"The Scottish geneticist Conrad Waddington (1957; 1968-72) fought strongly
to get recognition for the idea of embryogenesis as an autonomous factor in evo-
lution. His idea of developmental canalization is still an important resource for
our understanding of the developmental process. According to Waddington, —
the ontogenetic process may be seen as analogous to a ball running downhill
through a branching system of valleys in an epigenetic landscape, the contours
 of which are determined as the effect of interplay between multiple individual
 genes (Figure 6.1).
    This illustrative idea conveys an immediate understanding of why genes do
 not usually determine distinct traits, but rather, in a cooperative fashion, main-
 tain the structuring of a developmental course. Even slight changes in the height
 of the floor of a valley in the epigenetic landscape might force the ball into a
 deviating route, and if this happened in early stages, it might have dramatic final
 effects. By
          By supposing, furthermore, that the contextual situation in which devel-
opmentttakes place influences the structure  of the landscape, we get a picture
of a true interactive dynamics involving|both ge
 ————___
                                              genetic and environmental influ-
ences upon thi
             the embr yological process. By adding the epigenetic landscape as
aninteractive layer between genotype and phenotype, _ Waddington attempted

 23     Meaning here, measured over a wide range of genetic backgrounds.
                                                          THE SEMIOTIC NICHE             199




                              \                  |HH Hi
Figure 6.1 The epigenetic landscape. See text (Waddington 1957, hr               Contest
                                                                                 GAD    ara
                                                                                 VF  {[w2nce

to transcend the behaviorist black-box conception ofthe role
                                                           of the organism_
(i.e., as an evolutionary dead    end; see Chapter 4) and to gain some space within
which to explore his own new ideas about genetic assimilation.
   The crux of this latter idea proceeds from the well-known occurrence of exog-
enous adaptation (e.g., muscles that become thicker and stronger when contin-
ually and intensely used). Most organisms are, to some extent, ontogenetically
adaptable to changing environmental conditions, which in Waddington’s ter-
minology means that the canalization  of the respective property or trait is only
partial, leaving open a range
                            of optional phenotypic end products. There must
however be limits to such flexibility: “If for instance, there was no canalization
of the growth habit of a plant ecotype, every cold spring would convert the low-
land forms into alpine types unable to take advantage of a succeeding warm sum-
mer” (Waddington 1957, 168). Natural selection would therefore be expected to
tend towards some kind of balance between flexibility and genetic fixation of
adaptable traits. Thus came the idea of genetic assimilation:

  It looks as though it must be too difficult for natural selection to produce organisms
  which always respond in a perfectly adjusted adaptive manner to fluctuating envi-
  ronmental circumstances, and that faute de mieux it tends to fix, by canalization, a
  type which is reasonably well adapted to the situation it wil] most frequently encoun-
  ter. When this occurs in a population in an environment that remains relatively
  unchanged for considerable periods, it is the process that I have called canalizing selec-
  tion. When it happens to a subpopulation which is carrying out exogenous adapta-
  tion to a zew environment, it converts this into a pseudo-exogenous adaptation, and
  the “acquired character” becomes genetically assimilated (Waddington 1957, 68).

  Thus, the overall effect of this mechanism is to create genotypes that reflect
the conditions of life of the organisms concerned,In other words, the actual
life of a population influences its evolutionary future. Waddington was even
200           THE   SEMIOTICS      OF NATURE



capable of showing that such a mechanism was, in fact, at work in Drosophila
melanogaster, as he for many generations subjected the flies to straining condi-
tions such as ether vapor (Waddington 1956).
   Like the Baldwin effect that we are going to discuss later in this chapter,
Waddinton’s theory of genetic assimilation was not well received at the time by
leading figures of what was called the new synthesis (between Darwinism and
genetics) (see Depew 2003).”* What is important about Waddington’ idea for
our biosemiotic understanding is his insistence, via the image of the epigenetic
landscape, upon the autonomy of an intermediate zone between the genotype
and phenotype — for this is a zone where not only embryological but also semi-
otic influences are of the essence.
      And in fact, perhaps the most crucial single aspect of the embryological process
(after the attainment of brute viability) is the development of the Umwelt of an
organism. The role of the Umwelt is to regulate behavior (or, in general, organis-
mic activities), for ifit happens that the Umwelt of an organism is not well tuned
to the semiotic niche, the chances of this organism surviving, much less leaving
healthy offspring,will be diminished. Thus, it follows that the establishment of a
  ood fit between the Umwelt of an organism and the semiotic-niche conditions
it must cope with, stands as a central theater for natural selection.
   But this immediately raises the question of the genetic anchoring of the
   ee                                ;   ;         eee
Umwelt —a             1       ce again brings us to the question of canalization.
There must be species-specific determinants behind the selection of a potential
sign in the surroundings of an organism that the organism can become capa-
ble of interpreting with some success. A moth, for instance, is equipped with a
totally silent Umwelt, apart from the narrow chink that is kept open for regis-
tering the bat’s fateful frequencies of approximately 20,000 Hz. When the bat is
far away, the moth naturally veers away from the sound, but when the bat comes
up close, the moth instead makes sudden and unpredictable movements. The
moth, in other words, displays Umwelt-controlled behavior.
      Now, it is true that individual variations in moths regarding these senso-
motoric couplings are, of course, extremely limited, and Waddington’s land-
scape probably does not reveal to us its true value at this level. But as soon as we
move on to more advanced behavioral schemata — involving, for example asso-
ciative learning, as in the octopus — it becomes necessary to explain the occur-
rence of individual calibrations
                          to th€ semiotic surround.

 24 As pointed out by Terrence Deacon (lecture at Copenhagen University May 29, 2002), genetic
assimilation and the Baldwin effect are in fact describing opposite events. The Baldwin effect con-
sists, as we shall see, in the masking of genetic weaknesses by the help of social adaptations that com-
pensate for the potentially lowered fitness these weaknesses have caused. Genetic assimilation, on
the contrary, depends on a de-masking whereby a “weak” gene suddenly becomes “visible” to selec-
tion through the creation of an extreme situation (see further in Wiles et al. 2005).
                                                         THE   SEMIOTIC    NICHE            201




   The concrete shaping of the nervous system of an individual is, as we have 2
seen, dependent on the sensory inputs that the individual receives, as well as on
the brain’s own interpretive activities. As a consequence of this, it might clarify
matters to provide an extra — largely independent — layer of interpretive pro-
cessing, that we have called the Umwelt landscape (Hoffmeyer 2001¢). The canal-
ization process then consists of a ball at the same time tracing a route through
both of these landscapes. One might, of course, depict this as an n-dimensional
landscape, and the combinatorial output of these two under-determined canal-
ization processes thus creates the individual as a morphological-physiological
system (odus Waddington) with an Umwelt calibrated to the de facto chal-
lenges of the semiotic niche it is supposed to encounter. Taken together, these
two coupled canalizations
              canalizations effectively                                   ippased }
                            effectively break the determinism_geneerally suppos
to rule
   rule over
        over the genotype-phenotypetype transformation. —
   In creating big-brained animals, natural selection managed to take advan-
tage of the adaptive capacity of brains, but in doing so, it also partiallly sub-
sumed itself under the semiotic determinations that this new kind of adaptive
talent opened up the way for. An octopus quickly adapts to changing condi-
tions — and if these changed conditions persist through many generations, it is
hard to see how it could be avoided that other new adaptations would not also
occur, so that an eventual return to the original conditions would now lead not
to a loss of the original adaptations, but rather, to yet other adaptations.” This
idea comes close to genetic assimilation as Waddington conceived it. The point
is that it is the semiotic competence of animals that seriously puts (or should put)
this intermediate embryological zone (the combined epigenetic-Umwelt land-
scape) at the forefront of the agenda in evolutionary thinking. Genes are assim-
ilated assupport mechanisms for changes of behavior that arenecessitated by
changes intheeco-semiotic interactions of organisms.
   If we put such genetic assimilations of the semiotic niche into the context of
the interspecific semiotic patterns described in the preceeding section (and in
general with the widespread occurrence of semethic interaction and niche con-
struction described in Chapter 4), it seems amply substantiated that selection is
a tool for the increasing semiotic¢ refinement rathe
                                                rather than the
                                                              he converse.e.
                                                                          Selection
surely does occur, but it flows     down semiotically constructed pathways.


25 Parts of the genome that are not functional under prevailing conditions undergo much
faster changes than do functional parts of the genome. As observed by Kalevi Kull, temporary
adaptations lead to a changed use of the genomic resources so that formerly functional areas
of the genome, under the new adaptation, may become nonfunctional and thus experience a
fast accumulation of mutations. This might, in turn, contribute to a blockage for an eventual
return to the earlier adaptive strategy. This model, that Kull called “evolution via the forget-
ting of the unused” is, in fact, a model for nonselective adaptation (Kull 2000; Hoffmeyer and
Kull 2003).
  202           THE   SEMIOTICS     OF NATURE




  ‘ Louis Pasteur has           ited for coining the saying that “chance favors
 otal prepared mind.” In essence, this captures the idea being expressed here.
/-Chance mutations are not selected because they are beneficial; they are bene-
  ficial becausee they happen tto appear in a relational system which was already
well prepared for them. That blind selection should be the sole cause of evolu-
  tion is one of the mightiest fictions of our time. Selection is never blind; it is
_ always guided  by the prior formation of developmental -and semiotic integra-
  tion.Semiotic integration isnot exclusive to the level of species, but instead
\eES place on many levels —e.g., as symbiosis and as more diffuse ecosemiotic
  interaction structures.
                                                                                     Ut                  4



                                  Semiotic Partitioning                      aay          Cutie

  One particular aspect of the biosemiotic approach that should be mentioned
  in connection with this discussion is that of semiotic partitioning (Hoffmeyer
  2oo01c). Semiotic partitioning consists in the sympatric isolation of particu-
  lar segments of a population that happen to share a particular kind of Umwelt
  (whether by common conditioning, learning, or heritage). By sharing a particu-
  lar deviation from the prevailing dominant Umwelt, organisms are lead to share
  in certain aspects of behavior as well, and this in itself might tend to bring them
  closer together in sub-niches. Such semiotic partitioning has a built-in positive
  feedback mechanism in that individuals that share in similar behavior will also
  tend to share in similar conditioning or learning outcomes, thereby reinforcing
  or accentuating the shared deviation. If further reinforced by genetic assimila-
  tion, semiotic partitioning might eventually lead to genetically based isolation
  mechanisms and sympatric speciation.”*


                                    The Baldwin Effect
  As already mentioned, Waddington’s theory of genetic assimilation did not res-
  onate well with his contemporary neo-Darwinians. The leading figure in pale-
  ontology at that time, G. Gaylord Simpson, identified it with a theory that had
  been advanced half a century earlier by the American child psychologist James
  Mark Baldwin —a theory that, according to most neo-Darwinists was consid-
  ered as Lamarckism through the backdoor (Depew 2003).”” As David Depew

  26    A special, but by no means exhaustive, case of semiotic partitioning is the specific mate-rec-
  ognition system as studied by Hugh Paterson (Kull 1992; 1999b; Paterson 1993).
  27 A largely identical theory was suggested the very same year by the British psychologist
  Conwy Lloyd Morgan, but to his historical disadvantage this fact was overlooked by Simpson,
  who ascribed the mechanism, or effect, to Baldwin alone.
                                                  THE SEMIOTIC    NICHE          203



has shown, Simpson’s evaluation of the theory was heavily colored by a kind
of paradigmatic blindness towards both theories: Waddington’s and Badwin’s
ideas were in some respects related, but they were definitely not identical (Wiles
et al. 2005; Longa 2006).
   Through the last two decades, however, a change of view has happened in
evolutionary thinking that has led to a revival of Baldwinism. It is perhaps note-
worthy that this change was not inspired by biological findings, but by com-
puter simulation studies (Hinton and Nowlan 1996 (1987)). Among others,
Daniel Dennett was enthusiastic but also — and in a very different sense — was
Terrence Deacon (Dennet 1995; Deacon 1997; 2003). Baldwin’s theory, quite
generally, assumes that learned behavior may feed back on both the direction
and  the rate
  oes Re  a
              of the continued evolutionary process.
              eee                                ——
                                                     Superficially seen, this does
indeed look like Lamarckism in disguise — but, in fact, Baldwin believed that
this effect might be caused through wholly Darwinian processes of evolution.
As a child psychologist, he was particularly attentive to the phenomenon that
we today would call social inheritance: “In the child’s personal development, his
ontogenesis, his life history, he works out a faithful reproduction of his social
conditions. He is, from childhood up, excessively receptive to social suggestions;
his entire learning is a process of conforming to social patterns. ‘The essential to
this, in his heredity, is very great plasticity, cerebral balance and equilibrium, a
readiness to overflow into the new channels which his social environment dic-
tates” (Baldwin 1902, 53).
  Baldwin was also a anhimed Darwinian and, in essence, what he suggested
was that social inheritance was operational notonly in children, but inthe ani-
mal world at
          at large, ifonly toa lesser extent. In
                                              inthis way, he could synthesize what
hecouldnot deny as the results of his studies in child psychology with his belief
in Darwinism. He saw the intellectual plasticity of the child — or, in general, the}
young— as a fait for natural selection to work upon. And since social trans-
mission is itself enough to explain the behavioral likenesses bewteen father and |
his son, there is no need for a Lamarckian theory of acquired mental character-)
istics (Hoffmeyer and Kull 2003). In fact, quite to the contrary, “the only appar-
ent hindrance to the child’s learning everything that his life in society requires
would be just the thing that the advocates of Lamarckism argue for — the inher-
itance of acquired characters. For such inheritance would tend so to bind up the
child’s nervous substance in fixed forms that he would have less or possibly no
plastic substance left to learn anything with” (ibid., 55).
   The decisive point here, of course, is that Baldwin thought social heredity
might fascilitate the formation of genetic heredity — for this is where the mod-
ern Darwinist has been trained to suspect a Lamarckian “catch.” Yet Baldwin
explained this phenomenon through a mechanism he called organic selection
that implied the appearance of developmental adaptations in the lifetime of
204          THE   SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE




individual organisms.” These adaptations were caused by “the great series of
adaptations secured byconscious agency, which are all classed broadly under the
term ‘intelligent; such as imitation, gregarious influences, maternal instruction,
the lessons of pleasure and pain, and of experience generally, and reasoning of
means to ends” (Baldwin 1996,442-43; italics added).
  Taken together, these adaptations would mean that individuals might survive
even under odd conditions and “thus kept alive, the species has all the time nec-
essary to perfect the variations required by a complete instinct” (Baldwin 1902,
97). Organic selection and natural selection were thus, as Baldwin saw it, oppos-
ing mechanisms, and what organic selection achieved was to give stressed indi-
viduals a place where they could breathe freely as a safeguard against the sharp
knife of selection. This, he thought, might permit them to survive until genetic
adjustments appeared and were fixed through natural selection, offering more
permanent support for the new adaptation.
   Baldwin thought that his theory on organic selection showed “that the ordi-
nary antithesis between ‘nature and nurture, endowment and education, is
largely artificial, since the two are in the main concurrent in direction” (Baldwin
1902, 106). He illustrated this by reference to complex instincts where phys-
ical heredity and social transmission are inextricably combined. Thus, in cer-
tain instincts, “we find only partial coordinations given ready-made by heredity
and the creature actually depending upon some conscious resource (imitation,
instruction, etc.) to bring the instinct inco actual operation. .. . [In animals,]
social heredity serves physical heredity, while in man we find the reverse” (ibid.,
107).
   Probably the most serious conflict between the Baldwin effect and classical
neo-Darwinism concerns the question of the primary causal role of the genes.
It is close to dogma to claim, as Simpson (1953) did, that “the ability to acquire
a character has, in itself, a genetical base” (Simpson 1953, 116; Depew 2003).
According to neo-Darwinian dogma, any population therefore always carries a
large reserve of hidden genetic variation, and by implication, variants will nearly
always by necessity appear to take advantage of eventual changed conditions.
   The Russian-born American geneticist, and one of the great figures behind
the Modern Synthesis, Theodosius Dobzhansky, proposed a theory of balanc-
ing selection that reflects this very conception. The disease of sickle cell anemia
is the prototypical example of balancing selection at work. In areas of Africa
with severe occurrences of malaria, there is also a high frequency of sickle cell
anemia— a disease caused by a point mutation in the gene for the beta-chain


28 The use of the word adaptation here (instead of adaptive behavior) is nearly incomprehensi-
ble from a neo-Darwinian perspective, where an adaptation is, by definition? the result of selec-
tion” (Depew 2003).
                                                     THE   SEMIOTIC   NICHE           205



of hemoglobin that seriously impairs the health of persons that are homozy-
gous for the mutation.” Only few homozygotes survive to adulthood, whereas
heterozygote carriers of the disease gene normally have no problems as long as
they are not exposed to low oxygen pressures.
    The reason why selection has not eliminated this serious monogenetic disease
is that the heterozygote carriers of the disease are much more tolerant to malaria
than are the healthy people. In malaria-threatened areas, a balance therefore
will often obtain, causing the disease gene to be maintained in the population
through its being rewarded by the increased number of healthy offspring left by
heterozygous carriers. How, precisely, this balance will be set, is wholly depen-
dent on how serious is the malaria threat.
   Terrence Deacon (1997, 323), however, has given a Baldwinistic explanation
for the incidence of sickle cell anemia:
   The sickle cell trait spread quite rapidly in Africa in recent prehistory because of
   human activity. ... Probably the critical historical event that catapulted malaria to
   an epidemic disease was the introduction of agriculture and animal husbandry into
   Africa between five and ten thousand years ago. This culturally transmitted prac-
   tice modified the tropical environment to create the perfect breeding ground for
   mosquitoes. ... The human population was thrust into a context in which power-
   ful selection favored reproduction of any mutation that conferred some resistance
   to malaria.

As Depew explains in his analysis of the modern revival of Baldwinism, one
need not see any strict opposition between Deacon’s position and that of
Dobzhansky. Rather, what has happened is that genes are now to a lesser extent
seen as deterministically coding for a trait but rather as tools recruited to sup-
port already established practices— such as, for example, making it attractive
for people to eat vitamin-C-rich citrus fruits rather than reestablishing the
gene that was lost, by mutation in our distant ancestry, thereby eliminating the
human capacity for synthesizing ascorbic acid (vitamin C) (Depew 2003).
   From a biosemiotic standpoint, Baldwinism in its modern version is quite
unproblematic. Organisms, and the cells and tissues of which they are built, are
not just objects but also subjects — in the sense that they are semiotic agents
capable of interacting with their surroundings in “intelligent” ways. And the
history of how these semiotic interaction patterns have been scaffolded into
the myriads of ontogenetically consistent dynamics of this world — ice., the life
cycles of organisms — is what evolution is all about. Genetic fixation, of course,
plays a crucial role in such scaffolding—but I believe that there are countless


29 Homozygote persons in this case have a mutant gene for the beta-chain on both of their
chromosomes, contrary to heterozygotes that carry a mutation on only one of the two homo-
logue chromosomes.
    206            THE   SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE



    semiotic ways of obtaining a relatively secure scaffolding of intra- and inter-
    specific interaction patterns (semethic interactions) (see Hoffmeyer 199s). I
    see no reason to believe that all—or even most— of these semiotic scaffold-
    ing mechanisms are unambiguously “coded for in the genomic setup.” On the
    contrary, I think that there are serious reasons to believe they are vot, since flex-
    ibility is at the core of such semiotic scaffolding (Bateson 1963; Hoffmeyer and
    Kull 2003).


                                 Intelligence and Semiosis
    The extent to which different animals possess intelligence has been highly dis-
    puted. It has often been overlooked, however, that intelligence is not just some-
    thing one has between the ears, but is very much a social skill, an ability to use
    physical marks as well as social relations to scaffold and organize one’s knowl-
    edge and behavior.
          From the very beginning, nerves were developed as tools for movement.
    Their task was to facilitate long-distance communication between cells in dif-
    ferent parts ofa moving animal. But the presence of fast moving animals implied
    the creation of fast moving environments (e.g., the co-presence of fast moving
    prey  — or predators!) and brains developed to allow certain animals to cope
    with this situation in new ways. The combinatorial possibilities of moving in
    a moving world are enormous of course, and from the beginning, the task of
    brains was to help the animal make proximal decisions which might be assisted
    by learning, but which could not possibly be deterministically based on genetic
    anticipation. Brains were means for nurturing nature.
          One aspect of brain action which may deserve special emphasis is propriocep-
    tion —i.e., the awareness of one’s own movement and position. Even the sim-
    plest movement presupposes a continous feedback from proprioceptive organs
    in the body measuring muscle tensions and displacements of cell layers includ-
    ing the sense of gravitational orientation. The American philosopher Maxine
4
    Sheets-Johnstone (1998, 284) has recently suggested that the proprioceptive
    sense serves as a corporeal consciousness: “Any creature that moves itself, i.e., that
    is not sessile, senses itself moving.*® By the same token, it likewise senses itself
    when it is still. Distinguishing movement from stillness, motion from rest, is
    indeed a fundamental natural discrimination of living creatures that is vital
    to survival.”


    30     Unicellular organisms who can move themselves (e.g., using flagella) may not always be able
    to distinguish between the moving of their own bodies and the changes or movements in their
    surrounding. In that respect, Sheets-Johnston’s case may be just slightly overstated. However, the
    principal meaning of her statement is clearly correct.
                                                    THE   SEMIOTIC   NICHE         207

                                                                                   ~


   It was the French philosopher Maurice Merlaeu-Ponty (2002 (1945), 160)
who observed that “originally, consciousness is not an ‘I think that’ but an ‘I
_can.” Sheets-Johnstone (1998, 285) echoes this insight when she writes that “a
 creature's initiation of movement is coincident with its kinesthetic motivation,
 its dispositions to do this or that — turn, pause, crouch, freeze, run, or constrict;
 its kinestethic motivations fall within the range of its species-specific movement
 possibilities... [which] are the basis of its particular repertoire of ‘I can’s . .
 [and thus] any item within its repertoire of ‘I can’s is undergirded propriocep-
 tively (kinesthetically) by a sense of agency.”
    It is a well-known fact that animals can and do dream. This implies that men-
 tal states may sometimes be uncoupled from bodily action. But the extreme
 extent of uncoupling between behavior and mental activity that characterizes the
 human mind is probably unique among animals. The uncoupling has made phi-
 losophers wonder how it can be that mental states are always about something.
 But seen from the perspective of biology, this is no surprise at all, since mental
 aboutness, (human intentionality) grew out of a bodily aboutness (Hoffmeyer
 1996 a). Whatever an organism senses also mean something to it —e.g., food,
 escape, sexual reproduction. This is one of the major insights brought to light
 through the work ofJakob von Uexkiill (1982 (1940), 31): “Every action, there-
 fore, that consists of perception and operation imprints its meaning on the mean-
 ingless object and thereby makes it into a subject-related meaning-carrier in the
 respective Umwelt.”
    Seeing “I can” as the center around which mental processes are organized by
 evolution implies a blurring of the mind-body dichotomy. The acts of thought
 and the acts of body are not totally separate categories, but are essentialy con-
 nected via the intentionality of the animal that instantiated them — and there-
 fore mental activity is just a particularly sophisticated extension of traditional
 animal behavior. It follows from this understanding that we do not have to oper-
 ate with two quite different categories such as phenotypic flexibility and learning.
 Learning is just an especially smart ‘OEE of phenotypic flexibility.          aN
         oon       ed 11 nok th.              ABS ~3B3                                   XAXV


                         The Ghost *Lamarckism
 The French naturalist Jean Baptiste Lamarck — who in 1809 (fifty years before
 Darwin) suggested the first scientific theory of evolution in the history of the
 world — is a sad figure in the history of biology, outmaneuvered and overruled
 by his contemporaries, scorned and misunderstood by posterity (Burkhardt
 1977). Lamarck's misdemeanor, seen with modern eyes, was that he believed
 that properties acquiredbyplants or
                                  or animals in the course of their life-
 times could-become     inherited by their offspring. It is this, to the best of our
      208          THE SEMIOTICS       OF NATURE



     knowledge, false conception that nowadays is called Lamarckism. For instance,
      as the wading bird delicately set out to feed at still deeper water, Lamarck pos-
      ited that its stilted legs would become incrementally prolonged in the process,
      and this, he claimed, would prove of use to the offspring as manifested in an
      ever so little prolongation in the length of the legs already from birth. Lamarck
      felt that through many generations, this process might lead to the substantial
      kinds of change that we can observe when comparing present species with fos-
      silized specimens. By suggesting this (intuitively quite reasonable) connection,
      Lamarckinone bold ser    stroke brokee down the millennia-old wall inherited from
      both the Bible and1 from Platoyand Aristotle that guarded the static image of the
     ‘composition of the natural world. And yet, this world-changing figure is now-
      adays remembered|     ‘mostly <as the defender of a wrong theory that was success-
    “fully replaced by!Darwin's.
         The idea of acquired properties as inheritable was, in fact, common sense in
      Lamarck’s own time and to identify his theory with this simplistic idea is to blind
      oneself to his real achievement.** Nobody at the time had the faintest idea about
      the existence of genes, and there was therefore no good reason to distinguish
      so sharply between biologically znnate and biologically acquired properties. For
      Lamarck it was, in fact, something very different that seemed central — namely,
a    that habits create forms. When circumstances change, organisms will have to
    “change their patterns of activity accordingly — or, in other words, they must
     take up new habits. But new habits will usually make anatomical, physiological,
     or behavioral innovations desirable, and Lamarck thought that the “inner feel-
    _ ing” (da sentiment interieur) of the species imperceptibly guided the appearance
      of innovations that satisfied just these needs. This, of course, required a huge
      number of generations, and it was therefore necessary that the small improve-
      ments acquired in each generation were heritable, so that they would be added
    / to the accumulated result of the efforts of the preceding generations.
         The idea that a species could possess an inner feeling is of course a stumbling
      block for the modern scientific mind. Lamarck himself speculated that this
      inner feeling was caused by so-called subtle fluids (an expression that is not likely,
      either, to meet acceptance by the sharp scientific minds of of the twenry-first
      century). But these immeasurable subtle fluids were, in fact, the only explana-
      tory tool eighteenth-century science had at its disposal for explaining strange
      phenomena such as electricity, magnetism, or even wickedness.” Lamarck’s

      31 One might just as rightly (and wrongly) conflate alchemy with Newtonism, for Newton
      spent the last thirty years of his life doing alchemical studies in his search for the deeper causes
      behind the mathematical connections he had discovered.
      32, Our modern parallel to “subtle fluids” would be the (still far too common) misconceptions
      of “gay genes” or “genes for morally decent behavior.” Here too, we are concerned with speculative
      entities that none has ever seen nor measured directly, and yet the existence of which is accepted
                                                        THE      SEMIOTIC   NICHE       209



own time, of course, lies right at the border of the nineteenth century where
subtle fluids were no longer looked upon with much sympathy. But perhaps for
the same reason, nineteenth-century science no longer pondered the kind of
“big” questions that were the focus for Lamarck’s work.
   Lamarck, however, further had the sad misfortune, long after his death
in 1829, to have his name drawn into the heated controversies surrounding
Darwinism. This would last for three quarters of a century until, in the 19305,
the neo-Darwinian synthesis finally seemed to extinguish the last hopes for a
Lamarckian kind of evolution. And, although many neo-Lamarckian biologists
could and did adduce quite weighty arguments in defense of their opposition
toward Darwinism, Lamarck’s thinking unavoidably became vanquished by the
thinking of the more victorious theory.
   It didn’t help either, of course, that neo-Lamarckism had increasingly become
an asylum for religious, antiquated, or nostalgic elements in the debates. That
the inheritance of acquired characteristics should be misunderstood as the cen-
tral core of Lamarckism is precisely what might be concluded when the the-
ory is evaluated through Darwinian glasses. For Darwinism sees evolution as a
product of the differential reproduction between individuals — and in this light
it becomes fatal, of course, that Lamarck’s theory poses an instructivistic con-
cept of change.
   Offspring (in Lamarckism) are instructed to perform better; they do not (as
in Darwinism) perform better because they happened to have inherited win-
ning properties.
   Yet the linking of change exclusively to the hereditary mechanisms is a
Darwinian bias — and seen from this bias, the essence of Lamarckism dwindles
away to be caricaturistically replaced with Lamarck’s (admittedly poor) under-
standing of how inter-generational heredity works. Seen with a Lamarckian |
bias, on the other hand, Darwinism is a narrow-minded exegesis of an absurdly
mechanical philosophy, and it never achieves an explanation for what it ought to
explain, i.e., how it is that the perfectly adapted decends from the less perfectly
adapted. With our twenty-first-century eyes, Lamarck’s error is not difficult to
see, but do we yet see Darwin's?                                                          as.
   In this book I have pointed to a diversity of epigenetic-heredity forms with |
inherently instructivist potentials — and yet, I basically agree with Darwinism
that evolution can not be explained through instructivist heredity. The core of
the Lamarckian theory, however, does not so much depend on his theory of
heredity, for evolution, in his eyes, was a process that operated on species, not
on individuals. Not mystical, but rather, biological “inner propensities” at work

by many researchers because they might explain human personality traits without any need for
psychosocial theories (which are looked upon with skepticism).
   210           THE   SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE




   in a species was the real causal agent in Lamarck’s scheme. I am inclined to think
   that Lamarck in this respect had discovered an important point, and that the
    Darwinian focus on hereditary mechanisms has tended to distort our under-
\__ standing of evolution.
       It is interesting in this connection that Baldwinian ideas are Lamarckian
    in the broad sense that “something learned” influences evolution, but they are
    not Lamarckian in the narrow sense that Darwinists have attributed to his
    name. Neither Baldwin, nor Waddington, believed in the direct inheritance of
    acquired properties in a genetic sense. But it seems that the justified rejection of
    Lamarckism in its narrow sense is confused with a never-justified rejection of
    Lamarckism in its broad sense. The implication of this blatant ambiguity is that
  _a highly legitimate discussion of the eventual influence ofthe organism upon evo-
    lution is relegated to a dim no-man’s-land. Susan Oyama (2003, 172) observed,
         Once Lamarck was firmly identified with the inheritance of acquired charac-
         ters, and once the inheritance of acquired characters was set in place as the defin-
         ing contrast to Darwinian natural selection, all sorts of other things followed.
         Whether Lamarck’s heresy was ruled out of bounds altogether... or safely confined
         to the “transmission of culture,’ anyone wishing to explore the evolutionary roles
         of organismic activity, phenotypic plasticity in general, or learning in particular
         was obliged to engage in some theoretical acrobatics to do so. These might involve
         opening up a separate informational “channel” relying on hidden genetic variation,
         or hoping for fortunate mutations, but there seemed to be a need for fancy foot-
         work to avoid the dreaded charge of Lamarckism.

         Lamarck believed that evolution was not just a process of change, but also
   a process of progression. He even suggested a new term, biology, as a designa-
   tion for the study of this phenomenon of perfection that characterized the two
   kingdoms of animals and plants in contrast with the kingdom of minerals. And
   thus his idea of the inner feeling was needed as a means to justify /a marche de la
   nature in this sense — i.e., as a progression (Burkhardt 1977).
         The twentieth century's landmark discoveries in thermodynamics and com-
   plexity research imply that we no longer need explanations 4 /a mysterious subtle
   fluids in order to explain evolution as a directional process. The modern scien-
   tific version of subile fluids is called sel-organization and is generally considered
   quite legitimate (although, as we saw earlier in this chapter, the notion of self-
   organization implies some rather heavy philosophical or ontological problems).
   If in place of inner feelings we put the processes ofself-organization at work in a
   species, the Lamarckian scheme does, in fact, approach the most modern con-
   ceptions of the ways of nature.
      Compared to this, Darwinians generally are obstinately opposed to the con-
   ception of organic evolution as obeying a deeper “directedness”of any sort. For
   modern Darwinists, the flow of chance mutations coupled to competition among
                                                     THE   SEMIOTIC   NICHE        211




conspecific organisms is all we need to explain not only the multiple forms of
life on Earth, but also the superordinate ecological and behavioral patterns that
have appeared among these entities. And one may be allowed to suspect that the
popularity of Darwinian explanations does not suffer damage by being so close
an analogue to the dominating “economic realities” of Western societies. The
idea that an “invisible hand” behind the back of the endlessly competing crea-
tures has — all by itself — assured a healthy evolution of nature, has shown itself
to possess an overwhelming appeal to the modern mind.
       In this chapter, I have suggested that the agency of
                                                          of organisms has an experi-
ence--like component, and I have sketc hed evolution as a perpetual increase in
semiotic freedomn producedthroughthe semiogenic interactions of organisms.
To call this perfectioning (modus Lamarck) iis, of course, to apply a very anthro-
pocentric perspective. But it feels hard — and this is no superficial feeling — not
to think that the string quartets of Beethoven or the songs of John Lennon sur-
pass the cries of macaque monkeys, or that the songs of birds are more exciting
than courtship trembling in the water mite. The fact that creatures and interac-
tive patternsexpressing high levels ofsemiotic freedom make stronger appeal to
our sensitivities than do the more law-based activities of simpler animals may, as
we shallseqhave an anchoring in the natural history of human origins. We shall
return to this question in Chapter 9, but here it will be adequate to note that
this propensity apparently brings us into harmony with the internal dynamic
course of the universe — which should not surprise us too much, since the uni-)
verse has itself created us.




            Alwo       ME a           | amperely           no     lf. es
Pap)
         $4 aD)
epee        ey        re                      Ve)     Kaw wu      due CAVNWL2O
                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                             ’   eo ee
                                                                                                                                 aaa      a




                                                                                       :                 1                       ad   =
-~        with                                                           rity bra boneTa a



                                                                     :                                               re
     a                   7                                      4                          owt          a        7


     <<                      eiy                               tye                 a                i

          Ang                aies                      a                    [TS            eet                       tye,
                                              *                     »                           4                       wi


                                            +                        ?                                           J
                    7                                                ite.                  May
                             ad                                             ay                      s
              lie                                                                  a
                     :                                                                              —
              '                                            ,                                        a,

                             by,                                                   ;                    iy

                                                                     ff                    i


                    ray.                    ‘We                         ~          Pe

              —
          -                   oo                                                            4                    S
                                                                              a

                                                                              ~.
          7

                f                       7              Ti“
                                    :                                \

                                                  *f                                                         7
                                                 v.
