Endosemiotics




                                          Innenwelt

Endosemiotics is a term for “sign processes within the body” that Thomas A.
Sebeok* introduced in about 1976 (Sebeok
                                   (Se      1985 (1976), 3). Its use has become
customary, although in denoting this within, the term couldbesaidtobe some-
what paradoxical.
               Forthe processes
                            oflifeare, as we saw in Chapter 2, played out
across multiple surfaces, oneenveloping. another — and therefore no single sur-
face or location can reasonably be appointed chee
                                              he
                                              essentialone. In Chapter 2, the
example of the Norwegian physician who suffered an attack of Guillan-Barrés
syndrome showed that although the skin is indeed a borderline serving to keep
the world away from us in a rough physical sense, at the same time it opens us up
to the world in a psychological sense, allowing us to belong to it and vice versa.
   The skin, then, mediates
   —
                       liaves co
                              contact with thesurrounding world via its manifold

these, let us just mention fe invisible surface that sie (1979, 45) referred
to as the Hediger bubble:* “a variably shaped zone of personal space that admits
no trespass bystrangers and is defended when penetrated without permission.”
By this very definition alone, we can draw the more general conclusion that the
prefix endo in endosemiotics has no obvious or clearly-demarcated physical ref-
erent. Moreover, a sign process is itself necessarily always a border-crossing pro-
cess
  in Which
        an interpretantiscalled forth by something else.
                                                                                                    %
     In habitual usage, however, it is the body individuating an organism that most
conveniently defines an endo-exo asymmetry of causal relations — and con-
sequently, endosemiotics has become the pragmatic designation for sign pro-
cesses taking place in the interior of an organism. Yet since the concept of the
individual organism is not always as clear and unambiguous as it appears in the
order of vertebrates (see Chapter 4), endosemiotics sometimes also deals with

1    Sebeok, himself, writes that he used the expression “cavalierly” (Sebeok 1979, 22).
2 The designation is in reference to the Swiss animal psychologist Heini Hediger, whose life-
long interest in the training of animals in the context of circus performances made clear to him
that the animal trainer must always attempt to determine, and to respect, such invisible physical
    Seana eae SERINE enemas
“borderlines” around the animal.
    pea
214            THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE



semiotic relations across the limits of the individual — as in cases of mutualistic
symbiosis such as between squid and light emitting spirochetes. Such endose-
miotic processes in damaged corn seedlings, for example, cause the excretion
of a terpenoid that eventually becomes integrated into the semiotic activity of
parasitic wasps (as mentioned in Chapter 6) illustrating that the endo versus
exo distinction is primarily an analytical tool. At the same time, such examples
point to the impossibility of upholding any sharp dividing line between bio-
chemical and semiotic activity, however reasonable such a borderline may once
have appeared.
   For example, even we rational humans emit pheromones that uncon-
sciously influence our emotional responses towards one another — and in so
doing, become indelibly embedded in the complicated web of human sign
use, or anthroposemiotics (see e.g., Russell 1971; Schleidt, Hold, and Attili
1981).’ Nowhere in this web of semiotic processes is there any sharp border
to be found that might justify the distinction between an area of Peircean
Secondness and an area of Thirdness (i.e., an ontological distinction between
the body —as traditionally conceived as distinct from the mind —and the
mind). And while it could be reasonably argued that endosemiotic sign sys-
tems are much more tightly anchored in the determinism of natural lawful-
ness (i.e., they have less semiotic freedom) than the kind of human mental
sign systems traditionally studied in anthroposemiotics, still no absolute dis-
tinction between a semiotic, nonbiological domain and a nonsemiotic, bio-
chemical domain can be justified.
   Analyzing animal endosemiotics, Thure von Uexkiill, Werner Geigges, and
Jorg Hermann (1993) drew a parallel between endosemiotics and Jakob von
Uexkiill’s concepts of Gegenwelt and Innenwelt. These two concepts are consti-
tutively connected with the Umwelt concept because they refer to the internal
layer of processes that brings forth a common inner world in the animal. In the
words of Uexkiill, Geigges, and Hermann (1993, 41) — in a section that focuses
primarily on the human psyche, but which may be broadened to include nonhu-
man semiosis simply by substituting the more general Umwelt for the species-
specific human consciousness,

      Paradoxically, we are “outsiders” to all “inner” (i.e., endosemiotic) sign processes,
      whether they occur in the nervous system or in the immune system. We can illu-
      minate them only by complicated methods, and “understand” their messages only
      through biosemiotic interpretation. Whereas we are “insiders” of all sign processes
      by which the outside world and our body are presented to us as conscious realities.
      The “inner” sign processes of the brain are, like all “inner” or endosemiotic events,



3 Anthroposemiotics, as the name suggests, is the study of human uses of signs, whether verbal
or nonverbal.
                                                             ENDOSEMIOTICS            215




Figure 7.1 Uexkill’s functional circle (from Sebeok 1979, 10).



  inaccessible to our conscious experience; but, unlike all other endosemiosis, they
  participate directly in its formation. That is, all consciously experienced “outside”
  realities are translations of “inner” sign processes which occur in our brain and are
  inaccessible to our experience and understanding. Here it should be recalled that
  originally “inside” and “outside” are semiotic concepts which take on spatial conno-
  tations only when we look at our motoricity.

These formulations may be understood as a modern interpretation ofJakob von
Uexkiill’s famous functional circle (Figure 7.1) where the Umwelt-Innenwelt
pairing closes together, so to speak, around the animal's immediate object of
attention.
   Thure Uexkiill and his co-authors introduce a distinction between Gegenwelt
and Innenwelt in that Gegenwelt is the designation for endosemiotic systems
that  — like the nervous system or the immune system — each have their own
internal logic (or programs) for representing states of the world. Innenwelt,
on the other hand, designates a superordinate level of integration where such
counter-worlds have become woven together to function as one unitary entity
via circular processes: “Such an ‘inner world’ contains templates, as it were, of
the sectors of the environment that are significant to the living being. These
templates are recorded in signs exchanged between cells and between organs.
Therefore, although they are closely related to the organism's environment, we
have to call them endosemiotic” (Uexkill, Geigges, and Hermann (1993, 6).
 216          THE SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE



                              The Metabolic Code

 The first modern endosemiotic analysis was proposed by the biochemist and bio-
 physician Gordon M. Tomkins, who in 1975 published a paper in Sczence entitled
 “The Metabolic Code” (Tomkins 1975). This paper focused on a group of signal
 compounds in bacteria that seem to function as warning signals for stress, and
 thus go by the name of alarmones. One of these compounds is a substance that
 we have already met in Chapter 5: cyclic AMP (cAMP) —a molecule that accu-
 mulates in cells lacking glucose (which for many bacterial species is the preferred
 nutrient sugar). A high concentration of cAMP causes the cell to start producing
 enzymes that are specialized for metabolizing nonglucose sugars.
    Another alarmone, Guanosine tetraphosphate (ppGpp), accumulates in cells
 lacking amino acids and will cause a radical decline in the rate that the cell
 makes mRNA. This is biologically appropriate, since amino acids are substrates
 for the synthesis of proteins. A lack of amino acids means that proteins cannot
 be made anymore, and that therefore further transcription of genes to mRNA




|
~ would be useless — or worse, a waste of metabolic energy. The interesting thing
 about these regulatory mechanisms is that there is no necessary physical molec-
 ular relationship between the signal (alarmone) and the process that the signal
 controls — which is why Tomkins called the alarmones symbols, defining a sym-
 bol as “a specific intracellular effector molecule which accumulates when a cell
 is exposed to a particular environment” (Tomkins 1975, 761).
       Tomkins emphasized that alarmones are metabolically unstable, meaning that
 they will quickly disappear if or when prevailing conditions become better, and
 he also defined a domain ofaction as comprising all the metabolic processes that
  are controlled by a given alarmone (or symbol).



|
    As such, alarmones probably constitute the most primitive example of a dig-
 itization of analog coded processes (e.g., cAMP concentration as an indexical
 code for glucose starvation), as discussed in Chapter 4 in the section on the use
 and nature of analog codes. Tomkins even suggested a possible scenario for the
 evolutionary digitizing of the alarmone concentration, starting with the enzyme
 glucose kinase that catalyzes the first reaction in a chain of processes whereby glu-
 cose is normally metabolized in cells. This first reaction consists in the attach-
 ment of a phosphate group to the glucose molecule, rendering the molecule
 prone for further degradative processes. This phosphate group is furnished by
 the compound that cells normally use for carrying around energy in the cell.
 This compound is called adenosine triphosphate (ATP), so named because it
 consists of adenosine plus three phosphate groups. In the process of glucose
 phosphorylation, one of these phosphate groups is transferred from the ATP to
 the sugar, leaving behind a partly dephosphorylated ATP molecule called ADP
 (adenosine with two phosphate groups attached).
                                                           ENDOSEMIOTICS                 207,



   Tomkins now suggests that glucose starvation originally may have led to the
accumulation of cAMP, due to a chance side reaction that would not under
normal conditions play a significant role. For example, a primitive version of
the enzyme glucose kinase might have catalyzed a minor side reaction consisting
in the conversion of ATP to cAMP (by splitting off two phosphate molecules,
as pyrophosphate, from the ATP), If the cell was starved for glucose, the main
reaction of the glucose kinase would then lack its substrate (glucose), and catal-
ysis would quickly be brought to a stop. Conversely, the side reaction would
make available a lot more of its substrate, ATP. Glucose starvation would thus
lead to an accumulation of the product of the side reaction, cAMP.
   But since the shape of the cAMP molecule has many traits in common with
the shape of the ATP molecule (after all, each consists mainly of adenosine),
cAMP might easily bind to a range of enzymes at the exact same positions
where ATP would normally bind. A high concentration of cAMP would there-
fore cause a displacement of ATP from those enzymes (47Pases) that normally
degrade it. In this way, cAMP serves to block the cell’s energy consumption (ice.,
the degradation of phosphate bonds in ATP) whenever the supply of energy is
diminished, as for example, by glucose starvation.
  Seen from above, what has happened is that the cAMP-concentration has
become a “switch” locating the cell in one of two possible situations: either
energy metabolism goes on at full speed (low cAMP), or it is blocked (high
cAMP). In the course of evolution, bacteria have developed means to uti-
lize cAMP in a way that is even more different from the original biochemical
function ofthis molecule — i.e., as a release mechanism for specific transcrip-
tion processes whereby mRNA is formed from the genes of precisely those
enzymes that are necessary for the cell to switch to other energy sources (for
example, to switch on the synthesis of enzymes that specialize in the burn-
ing of lactose).
   Corresponding scenarios may be suggested for the other alarmones (Kilstrup
1998). This case shows that cAMP in bacteria at one and the same time may/ >
function as an iconfor ATP (i.e. as a specific conformation that came         eS)
take to be ATP), as anindex forincreased ATP concentrations, and as a sym-
bol for- glucose starvation Danish molecular biologist Mogens Kilstrup (2000)
writes thar, i
             in post-genomic    science,


  the quantity of information about regulatory pathways will be both enormous
  and unstructured, and new ways of extracting information will become necessary.
  “Regulation” is information transmission per se and a [purely] biochemical descrip-
  tion of regulatory networks is both too complex and too unfocused. By focusing
  on the representation ofinformation rather than on biochemical reactions, inter-
  esting questions will appear, such as (1) How is the particular stress factor repre-
  sented? (2) How can the system be fooled (e.g., cross-talk, alternative pathways)?
 218           THE   SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE



       and (3) Are there alternative representations of the same stress factor? And if so, are
       the signs synonymous, or do they convey different information?

    Attempting to work out a sign-model that might fit the needs of a formaliza-
 tion of the semiotic character of intracellular biochemical networks better than
 the traditional two-dimensional Peircean graphic of a tripod, Kilstrup devel-
 oped a new form of notation for sign relations. An important concern behind
 the development of this new notation system was that it should be applicable
 to a chain of representations: A is represented by B, which is represented by C,
 and so on, where Kilstrup uses the symbol :-- to represent the relation “is rep-
 resented by” and notes that “the sigh chain must be a one-dimensional path
 through a multidimensional network in such a way that all sign elements may
 be allowed to represent, and be represented by, many different sign elements,”
 writes Kilstrup (1998, 107). In its basic form, this notation has the following
 structure:


                       Object :-- Representamen :-- Interpretant —

 Here the Object is represented by a Representamen that again is represented
 by the Interpretant, but iin such a way that the Interpretant refers to both the
 Representamen and the Object and also to the relation between them (ibid.).
 With   adeep-drawn sigh, Kilstrup notes that this one- -dimensional notation, of
 course, does not immediately convey the true triadic nature of the relations. But
 this loss of direct appeal is, in the eyes of Kilstrup, the necessary payment for a
 notation that   is capableof specifying allthe elements of the sign. For compar-
 ison, he says, the equation of H,O as equivalent to water does not bring forth
  “the same associations, to a beautiful lake in a forest or a cool glass of water that
  we might get by hearing the word water. But few are those that would doubt
  water to be water, just because its formula consists of two hydrogen atoms and
| one oxygen atom. One should not, therefore, by the mere change of notational
| technique, think that the linear atomized account of the sign would indicate
ay the sign consists of only two dyadic representations in a row” (ibid.).
       Kilstrup offers an immunological example of how the new notation may be
 applied in the case of a physician examining the blood sample containing HIV
 antibodies:

       [HIV virus] :-- [HIV antibodies] :-- Mental representation!
                                                             !V bodies): [HIV virus
 This should be read to indicate that an antibody towards HIV is a sign (most
 properly, a sign vehicle) for the presence of the HIV virus. The functional sign,
 the representamen, is not the antibody as such. Rather, it is the concentration
 of that antibody that in chemical notation is indicated by placing the chemical
 compound in angular parentheses, so that the concentration of a compound,
                                                        ENDOSEMIOTICS             219



X, is written [X]. The (immediate) object of the sign, as given in the notation
above, is one or several distinctive traits pertaining to the real object of the sign
(the dynamic object, in Peircean terms), which in this case would be a distinctive
trait of the HIV virus itself, namely its concentration — or, more accurately, the
concentration of an epitope on the surface of the virus (see below). The interpre-
tant consists of “an induced/
                            change
                                of the interpretin        em      that thus appears

Ae.                       eo
          virus in his blood” (ibid., 108). The two Links (:-/-:) afe icon’ for the
relationships that
               tt taken together:are
                                  are responsible
                                        sponsibic for
                                                  for theeestablishment of the rep-
                                                      the €                    re
resentation. The reference link, or the?interlink ({HIV anapedics|: [HIV virus]
LSS


refers to                                               es
body cor                d virus concentration. The reference function thus always
presupposes_learning and memory, either-as mental learningin the traditional
sense orin the form ofevolutionary     (or gene-based) adaptations.
   An important point in Kilstrup’s notation isthat it makes it possible to dis-
tinguish between the Peircean sign-categories simply by assigning to each of
them a distinct notation: (:-/-:) for recognition links, (:-:) for causal links, and
(:->) for law-based or habitual links, respectively. Kilstrup’s notational system is
a promising point of departure for explorative endosemiotic analysis, but unfor-
tunately we are still awaiting his publication of a fully worked-through version
of the system.


                        Dictyostelium discoideum
The problem of multicellularity  —i.e., the difficulty of establishing a stable
reproductive coexistence between, on the one hand, mobile cell lines lacking
reproductive potential and, on the other hand, cell lines with reproductive
potential —has, as already mentioned, been solved only a few times in evolu-
tion. However, there are a number of intermediate forms between unicellu-
lar and multicellular organisms, and examining these may help us get a better
grasp of the role that semiosis plays in organizing unicellular life into multicel-
lular life. The best studied among such intermediate forms is the slime mold
Dictyostelium discoideum. D. discoideum alternates between a phase of free uni-
cellular life and a phase wherein hundreds or thousands of single cells crowd
together and come to work in concert as one, as they form a superorganism
called a plasmodium —a slug-like structure that is capable of moving around
and searching out the suitable conditions whereby the plasmodium may form
a stalk with fruiting bodies from which spores bearing the next generations of
unicellulars eventually burst forth.
220          THE   SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE




   Here once again, cAMP is at center stage for semiotic control — and whether
we choose to call it endosemiotic or exosemiotic becomes a matter of concern
only to the analyst — the life cycle of Dictyostelium discoideum itself, as we shall
see, makes no such distinctions. There, just as in the bacterial system, cAMP
functions as a stress code. So long as there is plenty of food and moisture, the
amoeboid cells move freely around eating bacteria, living independent of one
another and largely indifferent to each other's presence. But as soon as a few
cells start experiencing a deficit in one or both of these two life essentials, they
start producing cAMP and excreting it into the shared medium. The presence
of this cAMP then attracts neighboring amoeboid cells and induces them to
excrete cAMP, too.
    At the same time, however, the cells also excrete an enzyme, a phosphodi-
esterase, that degrades cAMP — and in doing so, creates a pulse of cAMP/non-
cAMP waves spreading through the population. Experiments have shown that
it is this pulse that attracts cells, whereas a fixed concentration of cAMP has no
effect. Yet in order for this wave to work, an additional refinement is needed to
stop the wave from running backwards (Goodwin 1995, 48). For when cAMP
is excreted from a cell, it will normally diffuse away equally well in all direc-
tions  — but this would spoil the wave structure. This does not happen in the
case of D. discoideum because the amoeba can produce cAMP only in short
bursts, each of which is followed by a refractional period, where it is insensitive
to the signal while it reconstitutes itself. In this way, the possibility of the wave
traveling backwards is avoided.
      As the cAMP pulse moves forward, cells increasingly begin to stream up
against the biochemical tide. A differentiation and asymmetric distribution of
the formerly homogenous cell population now sets in, leading to the forma-
tion of a series of definite architectures, where the destiny of cells depend on
their position relative to the pattern of the gradient — some cells ending up as
the stalk, others as the fruiting bodies (see Figure 7. 2). Yates (1992, 478) has
described it in the following way: “The same signal molecule, cAMP, accord-
ing to the ambient context, can be interpreted as a command to aggregate, to
differentiate, or to disaggregate. .. . This single signal molecule can induce dif-
ferent sets of genes (informational structures) at different times through differ-
ent receptors. Here is chemistry in a very functional guise, giving commands:
‘Aggregate’; ‘Migrate’; ‘Differentiate.””*
   All in all, this chemical exchange of commands between cells entails a col-
laborative effort aimed at the plasmodium’s reaching up just a few centimeters


4 As we saw in Chapter s, in eukaryotic organisms, cAMP has been accorded far more com-
plex and inarguably biosemiotic tasks, including that of “second messenger” in intracellular sig-
nal-transduction processes.
                                                            ENDOSEMIOTICS               221




Figure 7.2 The life cycle of the slime mold, Dictyostelium discoideum (Goodwin 1995, 46).



above the ground to a position where the wind may get hold of its spores and
spread them to more favorable locations, where unicellular life can begin again.


                            The Multicellular Self
As mentioned in Chapter 5, evolution has succeeded only three times in crossing
the threshold from unicellular to multicellular life with any real success (if by
this commonly misused expression, we refer to the capacity of a species to leave
offspring in the sense of a large quantity of taxonomic groups that include many
species). In these three cases — offungi, plants, and animals, respectively — the
problem of multicellularity was solved by the use of three very different princi-
ples. Most fundamentally, the differences turn upon how to establish a multicel-
lular self. The unicellular self was said to be due to the establishment of a stable
integration of a system for other-reference into a system of self-reference in the
earliest prokaryotes (see Chapter 2). But how, the Darwinian must ask, could
222          THE     SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE



clones of cells descending from one and the same zygote find ways to collaborate
on the task of creating a communal self, where single cells work for the common
good, rather than for their own best interests?
      The difficulty of maintaining slime mold cultures in the laboratory offers an
interesting illustration of just this very problem. Routinely, such cultures are
maintained by the collecting of spores (for example, by flooding the petri dish).
But cultures that are propagated in this way have a tendency to grow shorter
and shorter stalks, says Buss (1987, 127). This is presumably because the wash-
ing technique does not select against eventual mutations that increase the prob-
ability of cells to end up as spores, rather than carrying out help functions such
as the forming of the stalk. Over the course of successive generations, one will
therefore witness a falling ability of the progeny to form high stalks, for there
will remain fewer cells available to carry out such necessary supportive func-
tions. In the wild, this condition is prevented by sexual reproduction, whereby a
recombination of the genetic material will take place so that individuals without
the degenerated mutations will appear among the recombinants. These geneti-
cally healthy individuals may then found new cultures where a sort of multicel-
lular self can be maintained — at least long enough for the relevant purposes.
   The task of protecting such a multicellular self against mutational deteriora-
tion has manifested in widely different strategies in animals, plants, and fungi,
respectively — and these differences apparently go all the way back to the three
very different types of protists from which these three kingdoms were origi-
nally derived. Two essential traits are of special importance here: (1) possession
of rigid cell walls and (2) possession of a cell-based structure. Plants have both,
whereas animals and fungi must do with only one of them. Fungi have rigid cell
walls but no unambiguous separation of cells; animals consist of cells lacking
rigid cell walls. As we shall see, these fundamental differences each pose a very
different set of challenges.
   The most vulnerable point of departure seems to have been that of the ani-
mals — because the free mobility of animal cells (due to their lack of rigid cell
walls) means that the animal multicellular self is in imminent danger of becom-
ing deranged by anarchistic mutant cells. These are cells that are supposed to give
rise to important somatic functions but instead —due to mutation— migrate
to positions in the embryo reserved for the sex cell lines.” Our remote Metazoan
ancestors solved this problem hundreds of millions of years ago by instituting very
early differentiation of the embryonic cells. This implies a loss of totipotentiality


s The reader should not misunderstand the apparent anthropocentric way of thinking here.
Through the spans of millions of years, all kinds of chance mutations are statistically bound to
appear—among them, some that threaten the multicellular self through inappropriate migra-
tory propensities.
                                                         ENDOSEMIOTICS             223



(the ability to become any cell in the body) for all cells except those few cell lines
destined to become sex cells. This does not prevent the possibility that variant
cells might appear and migrate to more favorable positions in the embryo, but it
does prevent any asexual reproduction of such an odd individual — and therefore
it protects the multicellular self against mutational degeneration.
    And here we find the root of Weismann’s cut, ie., the strict separation of
the germ cell lines from the somatic tissues. The result is that an animal’s devel-
opment is differentiated at the cellular level long before the differentiation is
unfolded spatially as the adult form becomes established through a complex
pattern of relative growth rates in different tissue areas combined with cellu-
lar migrations. One may say that an animal's self is bound to have a high degree
of predictability as far as its basic form (bauplan) is concerned — but that this
rigidity is richly compensated for by a very low degree of predictability as to the
actual location of the animal, since animals are mobile creatures.
   In plants, there is no corresponding separation of the temporal and the spa-
tial aspects of differentiation, simply because plant cells cannot move. The plant
cannot start differentiating its cells at an early time in anticipation of events to
occur in later stages, for it is bound to leave the cells behind at the exact location
where they were first formed. Plants therefore do vot have the kind of prefor-
mationistic (using this word in its modern, non-naive sense) scheme of devel-
opment that is characteristic of animals, but are free to develop as the wind and
the weather invites them to. For contrary to the animal cell method of develop-
ment, plants maintain throughout life a mitotically totipotent cell line that takes
care of somatic functions (as stem cell lines) as well as the formation of gametes.
If regressive cell lines should appear, they will not normally pose a serious threat
to the multicellular self of the plant, due to the lack of motility in the regres-
sive cells. This difference between plants and animals is the reason why tumors
in plants are relatively benign and clearly localized, whereas in animals they are
often malignant and metastatic. Considered as a disease, cancer is precisely an
attack on the coherent biological self by a subset of its constituents — one might
even call it a cellular insurrection of sorts.
   The vegetative, multicellular self of a plant is thus well protected against dis-
solving routations solely through the rigidity of its cells. The load of endose-
miotic controls in the plant kingdom is therefore considerably smaller than in
the animal kingdom, where the more rigidly determined developmental scheme
requires accuracy in terms of temporal and spatial coordination through semi-
otic exchanges between cells, tissues, and organs. Conversely, plants — unable to
move away from their place of origin — have had to rely on flexibility in growth
and structure and the development of a whole battery of exosemiotic tools for
influencing surrounding life forms and patterns of interaction in order to sur-
vive in the living world.
224          THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




   In the kingdom of fungi, the problem of rigid cell walls, consisting here of
chitin rather than cellulose — chitin exhibits far more resistance to attacks by
microorganisms — was solved by compensating for the lack of external mobil-
ity through increased internal mobility. The fungi have achieved this by dis-
mantling the automatic coupling of cellular division and division of the nucleus.
Instead, most fungi consist of long branching threads called hyphae that form a
tangled mass called the mycelium. The weblike structure that one may occasion-
ally find on the surface of old bread may be the outer part of such a mycelium
(though most of it grows invisibly inside the bread). In many cases, these fun-
gal hyphae are coenocytic— meaning that they form lengthy, gigantic cells with
multiple nuclei that are formed by division of the nuclei unaccompanied by any
division of the cell. This method prevents nuclei from being locked up within
the prison of the rigid cell walls.
   Morphologically, fungi are considerably more underdetermined than even
plants. Hyphae spread away from each other when there is plenty of food, and
then re-assemble to form fruiting bodies (e.g., mushrooms) when such stores
of nutrients are exhausted. Because of their “open contextual borders” (as the
British fungal expert Alan Rayner has called it), fungi are involved in numer-
ous symbiotic interactions. In many natural environments, fungi provide the hid-
den energy-distributing infrastructure — like the communication pipelines and
cables beneath a city — that connects the lives of plants and animals in countless
and often surprising ways (Rayner 1997). And because of these flexible borders,
fungi may continue to live fora very long time. Thus, in a Canadian forest an indi-
vidual rhizomorphic fungus has been observed to have a mycelium that extends
through an area of fifteen hectare and has an estimated weight of one hundred
tons. This individual is supposed to be fifteen hundred years old (ibid.).
   In a dynamical biological system of such age, many somatic mutations are
bound to have accumulated— and if we consider it to be one individual (as
indeed, there is no biological reason why we shouldn't) we must accept that
individuals may possess significant suborganismic variation, even at the genetic
level. Adding to the suborganismic variation in fungi, mycelia often fuse with
other mycelia, and often even with mycelia that exhibit difference markers. Such
chimeric mycelias may sometimes prosper under conditions where none of the
two components from which the chimera was derived would have been able to
survive on their own. This is because different nuclei move to different locali-
ties inside the mycelium, depending on where their particular synthetic compe-
tences (as concerns enzymatic resources) could be of use.
      This surprising openness, however, is also a major risk factor. Variant cell
nuclei that might further their own rate of division at the expense of their con-
tribution to the somatic tasks of the fungus will threaten to spoil the fungal
self. That this is indeed a threat, writes Buss (1987, 134), is illustrated by the
                                                             ENDOSEMIOTICS        225



observation that “naturally occurring mycelia of the devastating rice patho-
gen, Fusarium fujikurot, harbor a substantial proportion of nuclei which lack
the capacity to invade rice.” In order to defend themselves against this threat,
these fungi have developed a host of endosemiotic control mechanisms, such
as distinct markers, that must be accepted before mycelia can fuse with each
other, and have established synchronization controls for the division of nuclei.
Certain fungi have developed septa — partial partition walls that subdivide the
hyphae into semi-cells — and these septa can be capable of distinguishing nor-
mal nuclei from parasitic nuclei, allowing only the former nuclei to pass.
    We can conclude, then, that in all three taxonomic kingdoms where mulkti-
cellularity has been established, the emergence of a coherent multicellular indi-
vidual (or se/f) has required the development of numerous endosemiotic control
mechanisms to safeguard the multicellular (or holistic) self against the ever-
present risk of mutant anarchistic cell lines that would catastrophically multi-
ply themselves at the expense of the multicellular individual's life. But only in
the animal kingdom do we find that peculiar individualization of the self as a
preformationistically designed entity, the animal, with well-defined borderlines
in the physical, ecological, and social space.
   Compared to animals, plants and fungi have much more freedom to profit
from the vicissitudes of life — either through their own growth processes or
through asexual forms of reproduction. But because the early segregation of the
sex cell lines makes such possibilities virtually unavailable as a life-resource for
animals, the animal kingdom has had to invent compensating mechanisms. The
solution was the construction of sophisticated senso-motoric systems coupled
to a corresponding finely tuned regulation of a milieu interieur® that could safe-
guard the stability necessary for reliable performance. The task of integration
that this has required is truly impressive, and I will spend the rest of this chapter
in illuminating the most biosemiotically relevant aspects of it.


                  Cognition and Semiotic Emergence

That life and cognition maybe
                           be seenasrelated pesepamens has been observed

and this conception gains in ne                 with the decreasing deen in thie
idea of thought as a purelylogical-rational activity and the understanding of its
irreducible bodily. embeddedness (see Sheets-Johnstone 1990; Damasio 1994;
Kelso 1995; Port and van Gelder 1999; van Gelder and Port 1995; Deacon 1997;
Lakoff and Johnson 1999, just to name a few). Thought seems to swarm out ofthe
body:“

6   The term was coined by nineteenth-century physiologist Claude Bernard.
 226        THE SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE



 morass of physicality, and the cognitive scientists’ search for the brain’s supreme
 center —or ‘central processor’ — has proved futile. There do not appear to be
 any such centers or processors. Rather than the brain being pre-programmed |
 to. produce intelligence, intelligence seems to swarm out of it” (Hoffmeyer
 1996 b, 114).         —
    The             swarm out of the body implies their entanglement in
        idea that hts
    thoug
 human life processes. Although children are often thought to beable to spon-
 taneous    thinklyboth rationally and logically, such claims often underplay the
 rich world of rationalistic social interaction into which most such children have
 been plunged since birth, and as any parent can attest, the development of truly
 rational thinking in children requires much practice and incitement to develop.
 Conversely, narrative thinking, it has been claimed, comes to us for free and
 usually feels much more natural to us. The psychologist Jerome Bruner (1990,
 43) has characterized such narrative thinking as fundamentally temporally
 organized: “Perhaps its principal property is its inherent sequentiality: A nar-
 rative is composed of a unique sequence of events, mental states, and happen-
 ings involving human beings as characters or actors. These are its constituents.
 But these constituents do not, as it were, have a life or meaning of their own.

|Their meaning is given by their place in the overall configuration ofthe sequence as
 a whole — its plot or fabula.”
  _The predilection of the human brain for narrative thinking agrees well with
 the discussion we have had in the preceding chapter that argued that mental
“ife isorganized around a central series of “I can”s (Merleau-Ponty
                                                                 2002 (1945);
 Sheets-Johnstone 1998). Bruner refers tothe French philosopher Paul Ricceur’s
 demonstration of a
                  reciprocal interdependence between “being in history”
 and “telling about history” (Bruner 1990, 45) —and in this connection, one
 might also recall Merlin Donald's elegant theory of the origin of language in
 ,the mimetic culture of our quite smart but clearly nonlinguistic Homo erectus
{ancestors (Donald 1991). If human speech was indeed a further development of
' mimed communication, it would be understandable that our linguistic think-
|ing from the very beginning has been inscribed in the senso-motoric field.
    And yet when one comes to think about it, it is nearly unbelievable that for so
 long we have been able to maintain this basic confidence in the ability of thought
 to put itself beyond time and place — in spite of the fact that it all occurs in just
 a few cubic centimeters of nerve tissue at the inner side of the skull. Anyone hay-
 ing witnessed the effect of a cerebral hemorrhage at close range will recognize
 that this bit of brain tissue is all we have to connect us with the world.
_ And yet, we automatically project our thoughts upon the outside world. Or,
 as Carol Feldman has suggested, we tend to endow the conclusions of our cog-
 nitive reckonings with a special external ontological status. Our thoughts are
 in here, but the conclusions are out there — ontic dumping, as Feldman called
                                                                  ENDOSEMIOTICS                 227



this human naiveté (cited in Bruner 1990, 24). However, it only deserves to be
called naive if one also believes that our conclusions are themselves beyond time
and place.
     For in reality, the brain is there to give us a track to act upon, it is not there
to     ive us the truth (as this concept hastraditionally       been understood). In



motoric activity is evident most obviously at the level of our senses, as for
instance, in the case of vision. For contrary to the way that we finally experience
it, the human eye does not see a full picture  of the visible field in the sense that
sll paneorne Felare represented at the retina. The full picture is, rather, the
work ofthe brainalone.
~The eye focuses at each one-third of a second on less than 0.01 percent of the
total visual field— but this small fragment, in turn, is perceived in very high
resolution. Unconsciously, the muscles connected to our eyeballs make small
movements, micronystagmus or saccades, whereby the focus is shifted some
three times per second. As far back as in 1967, cognitive scientist Alfred Yarbus
showed that these saccades areintelligent inthe:
                                               sense that they reflect the
                                                                         con-
text ofthe visual field as it relates to the immediate goals of the perceiver —as
opposed to how the field: is in itself(Yarbus 1967). | Be
  “Tn one of Yarbus’s experiments, subjects were shown a picture of a room with
some people in it and were asked to guess either the age of the persons, or the
kind of activity they were engaged in. The experiments showed that eye move-
ments exhibited different patterns depending on which of the two tasks that the
subjects were asked to do. People use saccades to attend to the positions in space
that are ofinterestothem, and it is a big question if they have any picture of the
rest, whatsoever. And indeed, of what use would it be to have such a picture?
Indoubrful situations, one might just take another look — and as far as mem-
ory is concerned, we likewise tend to record exactly those things most relevant
to our goals in any given situation, and there is no use for the rest to be encoded
into memory. Most likely, claim many cognitive scientists, our brains fill in the
gaps according to prior experience and expectations — an everyday phenome-
non called visual closure (see Ramachandran and Blakeslee 1998).

7    Our desire for knowing the truth is, of course, both useful and commendable. But it risks
becoming exaggerated beyond our natural limits — as one may sometimes see in those philoso-
phers of
       the analytical school who maintain a confidence in the scope of reason that may itselfbe
somewhat unreasonable.
8 Recent studies in the widespread phenomena of change blindness — the inability to perceive
otherwise obvious changes in a visual field if such changes are not being actively looked for — also
lends support to this hypothesis (Grimes 1996).
228          THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE



      The philosopher Andy Clark, working in the field of robotics that is devoted
to the creation of intelligent autonomous agents, has suggested that a gen-
eral principle for cognition in humans —as well as in modern mobile robots
(called mobots) — is one that he calls the 007-principle, wherein the mobots (or
the human mind), like the famous British movie hero, use whatever resource
they might first come upon to advance their performance. According to this
principle, an evolving system always proceeds by using the world as its own best
model: “In general, evolved creatures will neither store nor process information
in costly ways when they can use the structure ofthe environment and their opera-
tions upon it as a convenient stand-in for the information-processing operations
concerned. [The operative principle seems to be this:] Know only as much as
you need to know to get the job done” (ibid., 46; italics added).
    The 007-principle is derived from work in new robotics or situated robot-
ics — the attempt to construct robots that can cope with the messy and unpre-
dictable environments of the real world. One of the main lessons from this work
is the dethronement of the central planner model:
    The New Robotics revolution rejects a fundamental part of the classical image of
    mind. It rejects the image of a central planner that is privy to all the information
    available anywhere in the system and dedicated to the discovery of possible behav-
   ‘ioral sequences that will satisfy particular goals. The trouble with the central plan-
    ner is that it is profoundly impractical. It introduces what Rodney Brooks aptly
  | termed a “representational bottleneck” blocking fast real-time response [in (Brooks
  |1991)]. The reason is that the incoming sensory information must be converted into
  | a single symbolic code so that such a planner can deal with it. And the planners’
   output will itself have to be converted from its propriety code into the various for-
  mats needed to control various types of motor response. These steps of translation
     re time-consuming and expensive (Clark 2002, 21).

      Instead of being based on the central planner model, mobots are built accord-
ing to a principle that robot researcher Horst Hendriks-Jansen has called inter-
active emergence —but which might as well, or better, be termed semiotic
peleciais   (Hoftmeyer 1997b).    By semiotic emergence, I mean  the establish-
 ment
   higher-level
      of              patterns scaffolded ya situated exchange of signs between
 components.
~ For illustration, let me borrow an example from computer scientist Martin
Resnick (1994). Resnick tells us, with barely concealed delight, how his com-
puter simulations of traffic jams evoked head-shaking distrust in some of his
colleagues because the simulation showed that a traffic jam moved backwards
relative to the driving direction of the cars. This result was easily confirmed from
the air, and the reason is simple: the traffic jam does not consist of cars, which
of course move forward; it consists of a relation between cars. The traffic jam is
a pattern that appears because of the semiotic interactions between the drivers
                                                                     ENDOSEMIOTICS                   229



of the individual cars who, moment for moment, must observe (interpret) the
movements of other cars —as well as such constraints on driving that might
stem from other factors, e.g., the borders of the lanes, roadwork, a nearby acci-
dent, or harsh weather conditions. We have here a kind of self-organization that
cannot be explained through any generative causal law but instead demands a
historical explanation of the phenomenon as an effect of the conjunction of cir-
cumstances that produced it.’ This is the kind of interactive pattern that I call
semiotically situated interaction.
    The theoretical necessity for respecting the reality of historical idiosyncra-
sies forms a central theme in situated robotics, for such occurrences can not be
escaped during the learning processes of animals (or of intelligent robots). A key
concept in this connection is what Clark calls soft assembly. Soft assembly must
be understood as opposite to hard assembly, as we know this latter, for example,
from a traditional robot arm with a preprogrammed repertoire of movements,
whose functionality requires accurate pre-design, manufacture, and installa-
tion. As an example of soft assembly, Clark mentions, by contrast, the phenome-
non of human walking —a recursively adaptive feedback process that gracefully
compensates for nearly all kinds of irregularities. Slippery sidewalks, high heels,
blisters, or any of a number of various and unpredictable factors may well influ-
ence the gait, as well as the pattern of muscle contractions, during human walk-
ing— but the overall movement toward the goal usually continues unaffected.
   Clark illustrates these ideas with reference to studies of how small children
concretely learn simple “reaching-out towards” movements (Thelen and Smith
1994). Although the end result of the efforts of the children to master such
movements is quite universal, children exhibit very different styles in how they
arrive at the desired result. It behooves us to follow Clark’s (1997, 45) descrip-
tion of this process carefully, because the key to the phenomenon in question
resides in the details:
   One infant, Gabriel, was very active by nature, generating fast flapping motions
   with his arms. For him the task was to convert the flapping motions into directed
   reaching. To do so, he needed to learn to contract muscles once the arm was in the
   vicinity of a target so as to dampen the flapping and allow proper contact. Hannah,
   in contrast, was motorically quiescent. Such movements as she did produce


9 Alternatively, one might enumerate a set of conditions whereby potential traffic jams are most
statistically likely to occur. But every single case of an actual traffic jam will exhibit its own unique
pattern and demand its own separate explanation to be genuinely informative.
10 As Clark (1997, 45) notes, this conception fits into a long tradition in developmental psychol-
ogy: “Theorists such as Jean Piaget, James Gibson, Lev Vygotsky, and Jerome Bruner, although
differing widely in their approaches, actively anticipated many of the more radical-sounding ideas
now being pursued in situated robotics (Piaget 1952; 1976; Bruner 1968; Gibson 1979; Vygotsky
1986).
230             THE   SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE



      exhibited low hand speeds and low torque. Her problem was not to control flap-
      ping, but to generate enough lift to overcome gravity.


   Other infants present other mixtures of intrinsic dynamics, but in all cases, the basic
   problem is one oflearning to control some intrinsic dynamics (whose nature, as we
   have seen, can vary quite considerably) so as to achieve a goal. To do so, the central
   nervous system must assemble a solution that takes into account a wide variety of
       factors, including energy, temperament, and muscle tone. One promising proposal
       is that in doing so the CNS is treating the overall system as something like a set of
       springs and masses.” It is thus concerned, not with generating inner models of reach-
       ing trajectories and the like, but with learning how to modulate such factors as limb
       stiffness so that imparted energy will combine with intrinsic spring-like dynamics
       to yield an oscillation whose resting point is some desired target. That is, the CNS
       is treated as a control system for a body whose intrinsic dynamics plays a crucial role in
       determining behavior (italics added).

       Here, I want to suggest, is where we find the sources for psychosomatic inte-
§ ration.        The central
                      entfa” nervous
                             herve: system Deeb
                                           is not engaged
                                                        cein             producing1g solutions to
abstract problems but is, on the contrary, from the earliest moments of child-
      :     CK hee           ;                        sea       ee            -
hood incessantly occupied with            the modulation of bodily parameters that show
up for usinour attempts to overcome the obstacles posed by the body and the
environment, By the expressionSe   show up for us |am referring not only to the
external registration of success or failure in solving concrete tasks, but also to
the internal feeling of the movements (e.g.,
                                         (e.g., th
                                                the mechanical resistance that we
experie                 xtion as well   as the muscle fatigue that we likewise label stiff-
NES.        roprioceptive sense receptors
                                    are distributed over the muscles, sinews,
                                                                                     —S


 oO edness
tration ofmovemen
bolicreflection — in fact, these two aspects of cognition cannot exist apart.
    As observed by Uexkiill, Geigges, and Hermann, this is dramatically illus-
trated by the symmetrical set of illnesses called phantom pains and scotoma
limbs.” In phantom pains, the brain is stimulated by proprioceptive signals
from nerves once connected to a limb that is no longer there, while the pro-
prioceptive signals emerging from a present but undetected scotoma limb are


11 Clark (1997, 45) refers to Polit and Bizzi (1978), Hogan et al. (1987), Jordan (1994), and
Thelen and Smith (1994).
12 Scotoma is the medical designation for the visual blind spot that each of us has at the point
where the optic nerve occupies the region where photoreceptors would otherwise be on the optic
disc, Like the scotoma-limb patients, what is most curious is not that there is an ever-present hole
in our perceptual field, but that we do not defect it! This is another example of the kind of sensory
closure discussed above.
                                                               ENDOSEMIOTICS                    231



never perceived as such, since they do not reach the brain. In the first case, one
experiences the presence of a limb one doesn’t have, while in the second case
one is convinced of missing a limb that one actually does have (see overview in
Ramachandran and Blakeslee 1998).
  The neurologist Oliver Sacks experienced this phenomenon first-hand, after
having suffered a grave accident and a subsequent operation, and has described
the disconcerting experience of utter confusion that seized him after the ban-
dages were removed and he could once again see — but not fee/ — his own leg:
  Yes, it was there. Indisputably there! ... A leg— and yet, not a leg: there was some-
  thing all wrong. . . . It was indeed “there” in a sort of formal, factual sense: visually
  there, but not livingly, substantially, or “really” there. It wasn’t a real leg, not a real
  thing at all, but a mere semblance which lay there before me. ... It was clear that I
  had a leg which looked anatomically perfect, and which had been expertly repaired,
  and healed without complications, but it looked and felt uncannily alien — a lifeless
  replica attached to my body (Sacks 1986, 91).

  Uexkiill, Geigges, and Hermann (1993, 43-44) have these comments:

  This impressively illustrates that our living body, which we experience as the center
  of our reality, is the product of a “neural counterbody” (Gegenwelt) which is con-
  tinually shaped and reshaped by the ceaseless flow of proprioceptive signs from the
  muscles, joints, and tendons ofour limbs to the brain, This “neural counterbody” is
  the center of a “neural counterworld” which our brain constructs and reconstructs
  from the likewise permanent flow of signs from the sense organs. Counterbody and
  counterworld are amalgamated to form an indissoluble unity because all the events
  we perceive in the environment are counteraffordances — that is, they are related
  to actual or potential affordances of our motor system and combine with these to
  form the spatial grid by which we orient ourselves.

  As we have
   OSU
     ese!ANE. seen,
              SEEM active movement
                               = ae
                                    has been
                                          eee
                                              the key to animal life from the x
oe                                         integration hi
                                                       has subsequently |been a major
                                                                "   =   os                            \

theme in the evolution of the animal kingdom. Step by step, animal species have
managed to optimize internal and external coordination tasks, as such coordi- \
nation was called forth by the imperative to move. And, given the way that evo- |
lution works, the achievement of such coordination (and the development of |
coordinative controls) must have been reminiscent of problem-solving strate-
gies proposed by the research coming out of the work on autonomous agents. |
   In short, thesemiotic interaction between ¢1
                                             embryonic cells, tissues, and organs
must have, at variouss intervals in evolution, givenrise to the unforeseen appear-

tion
ion of suitable new
                ne aeeaseeritstrategies or
                                         0 serve as stepping stones to reach

yet more overarching or
                     organizational structures. Such patterns might consist of
morphological elements (as, for example, changes in the relative distribution of
                   232          THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




                   embryonic tissues that wouldopen the door for new functionalities) or dynamic
                   elements (¢.g.,      the establishment of new semiotic control loops), but in either
                   case the principle would be the same.
                   <=
                      And1 by terming thisisphenomenon semiotic emergence, 1 wish to bring out
                   as; forcefully «as possible the common underlying principle exhibited in these
                   cases, ie., thee principle that the emergence of higher--level patterns is the result of
                   semiotic — and not just physical — interactions between entities at the lower level.
                   Semiotic emergence will; of course, build on patterns of semethic interactions
                   and it is» perhaps a question of te
                                                    terminology when — or from which level of the
                   process — one should talk about vea/ emergence.
                      The appearance of a uniquely flexible kind of consciousness in big-brained
                   animals is perhaps the most obvious case of semiotic emergence. Integrating the
                   ideas put forward by Sheets-Johnstone with those of the robot scientists may
                   give us a hint as to how the emergence ¢of such consciousness might have taken
                   place. Neurobiologists have proved experimentally that proprioceptive infor-
                   mation is more important than vision when the task is to direct a correct move-
                   ment such as reaching out for something: “The remarkable trajectory errors by
                   patients with large-fiber sensory neuropathy indicate that proprioceptive infor-
                   mation is critical if accuracy is to be achieved,” writes Ghez et al. (1995, 561).
               —
                         More remarkable, perhaps, is that the task of proprioceptive information
                   does not consist in any simple or direct correction of errors. Rather, sense inputs
                   from proprioceptive sense receptors supply data that the brain must use to cal-
                   ibrate the organism'songoing action in the environment. As Ghez et al. (ibid.)
                   explain,, ‘proprioceptive information “‘operates by generating and recalibrating
                   internal models of the mechanical properties of the limbs. . . . It appears that
                   the motor systems predict interaction torques and control their effects so as to
                   achieve the kinematic results required by the behavioral task. In such a system,
                   internal models would provide the means for predicting the unfolding scenario
                   of goal-directed movements.”
                     It is fascinating to speculate (as we have noted earlier — Hoffmeyer 2002a)
ere

"a lyiYP5fr\   ,               s                             .
,              ., that these internal-model schemas, which are generated and calibrated by pro-
                  prioceptive information, might perform the same trick in the moving body
                  as do the motor emulators in industrial robot systems. An emulator is a piece
                  of onboard circuitry that replicates certain aspects of the temporal dynam-
                  ics of the larger system, and its role is to predict —i.e., determine probabilis-
                  tically  — what the feedback from the sensory periphery is likely to be. If the
                  device is reliable —i.e., if it is properly calibrated— these predictions can be
                _used in lieu of actual sensory signals, so as to generate faster error-correcting
                   activity. According to Andy Clark (1997, 22), the human body is in need of such
                   a mechanism: “Proprioceptive signals must travel back from bodily peripheries
                   to the brain, and this takes time — too much time, in fact, for the signal to be
                                                         ENDOSEMIOTICS             233


 used to generate very smooth reaching movements.” The purpose of the motor
 emulator is to overcome this problem. A motor emulator “facilitates real-time
 success by providing a kind of ‘virtual feedback’ that outruns the feedback from
 the real sensory peripheries. . . . It models salient aspects of the agents’ bodily
 dynamics, and it can even be deployed in the absence of the usual sensory inputs”
 (ibid.; italics added). The evolutionary advantage of such an emulation device
 would apply not only to human bodies, but to all animal bodies above a certain
 size. And brains capable of developing such virtual action-coordination con-
 trols must have been created by evolution long before the arrival of humans. The
 point is that this swbstitute-interpreter, as we mightc.
                                                       callit,would seem to bea
 perfect early precursor for human consciousness.
“Tes primary (survival) function is to facilitate smoothly coordinated goal-
 directed movement, but it does so by making a construct which is not as such
 a direct reflection of the regularities of sensory input in the naive inner-model
 sense (for this would require an infinite regress of homunculi to view the mod-
 els). Rather this construct is based upon a particular set of sensori-motor schema
 that are “selected” from the organism’s entire behavioral repertoire, so that it ori-
 ents the organism for the immediate next action. While still probabilistic, this
 selection of which schema to activate is both evolutionarily and ontogenetically
 informed. It thus functions as a qualified guess that will be continually re-cal-
 ibrated by the actual incoming inputs from the proprioceptive senses for fine-
 tuned appropriateness and accuracy. In other words, and most essentially, this
 systemic substitute
          s          or virtual interpreter has a ready attained a degree ofauton-

these properties aree exactly Ane should     be expected ffromaneventual early pt
                                                                               pre-
 cursor for what much later would become the virtual world of human conscious-
  a



Peness,  as wea know
  Take ieee      ahaa itt
                        from our own lives. And this corroborates Sheets- Johnstone’s \
  conclusion (1998,290) that the internalization of sensing surfaces to produce|
 proprioceptive organs is an “epistemological gateway, one that, by descent with/
                                                                                      ee
  modification, may clearly be elaborated both aftectively and cognitively.” =——
     We may conclude, that the deepest sources for the cognizing self lay inscribed Ly 4
  in the:very ba:
                basic
                   senso-motoric wnity of animal multicellular life. And in the next
 chapter, I will discuss in detail the appearance of the peculiar abstractive talents
 that came to characterize the uniquely human form of such cognition. It is impor-
 tant at the outset, however, that one understands the basic phenomenon of cogni-
_tion asaquitee general product of semiotic emergence in multicellular organisms.
 Nothing could be more backwards, in other words, than to understand human
 cognition as the primary or most definitional form of cognition. Human cogni-
 tion should be understood more modestly as an extraordinarily interesting— but
 obviously species-specific — development of the cognitive capacity that quite gen-
 erally characterizes all moving, living, adaptive semiotic systems.
234       THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




                      The Internal Surroundings

The realization that organisms do not have just an external environment,
but also an internal environment  —a milieu interieur —was the seminal
idea of the French physiologist Claude Bernard (1813-78). Bernard saw
that a constant internal milieu was a prerequisite for the efficiency of com-
plex organisms, and he expressed this in saying, “The fixity of the internal
environment is the condition for free life” (Olmstead 1938, 254). Inspired
by Bernard’s ideas, the American physiologist Walther Cannon published a
famous book entitled The Wisdom of the Body in 1932. It is in this book that
Cannon first introduces the term homeostasis (from the Greek roots for “the
same” (homo) and “state” (stasis)) as a designation for the surprising ability
of all animal bodies to maintain a stable internal state concerning parame-
ters such as temperature and salt balance, even under conditions of severe
stress. Science has learned since then that the phenomenon of homeostasis
depends on the coupling between the saturation degree of specific receptors
and a range of response mechanisms in certain cells. If the concentration
of an important component falls outside of the usual range, compensating
reactions or feedback reactions will occur. For example, the blood sugar lev-
els in a normal person having awakened after a good night’s sleep will lie
at approximately 90 milligrams per 100 milliliters. If the person then has a
breakfast containing a good deal of sugar or carbohydrates, these compounds
will successively become degraded into glucose and enter into the circulatory
system — accordingly, blood sugar levels will go up. The increase will be reg-
istered by specialized cells in the pancreas, and these will command the pan-
creas to excrete insulin to the blood. Insulin stimulates body cells to absorb
glucose from the blood. It especially stimulates liver cells and muscle cells to
store glucose as polysaccharide (glycogen) — and through this process, blood
sugar levels are brought back down to normal.
   When, a couple of hours later, this same person’s blood sugar level is again
approaching a low (due to metabolic consumption of the available glucose)
the pancreas is once again in charge of rectifying the condition — this time by
excreting the hormone glucagon that induces muscle and liver cells to degrade
glycogen back to free glucose. The constancy of blood sugar concentrations is
thus at all times in a situation of touch and go, with insulin and glucagon as the
enforcement officers and pancreas as the executive officer. And, of course, these
hormonal mechanisms do not operate in a vacuum, but are tightly intercon-
nected with brain processes. Neurons in the area of the brain called the hypo-
thalamus are continuously monitoring blood sugar concentrations and when
the level is too low, the hypothalamus induces a feeling of hunger     — whereas,
when the level is too high, a feeling of satiety will ensue.
                                                         ENDOSEMIOTICS             235



   In general, a subtle and highly complicated interplay goes on between the
nervous system (and in particular, the hypothalamus, acting in concert with
the rest of the limbic system) and the endocrine system (i.e., the hormone-
producing glands that physically maintain the homeostasis). Homeostasis,
however, is far from a static set point as one might find programmed into a
thermostat. Rather, some parameters run through well-controlled cyclic
oscillations (e.g., those coupled to the menstrual cycle), while others change
in ways correspondent with the ongoing phases of life, or in connection to
abrupt changes in the conditions of life. In addition, a range of more or less
programmed changes of the homeostasis can be initiated by the manifestation
of recurrent emotional patterns.
   A hormone can be taken as the prototype molecule used to function as a mes-
senger between different locations in the system of the body. Originally, hor
mone was the term used to describe those substances excreted into the blood
by a diversity of glands and carried away with the blood to exert their effects
in such tissues as were ready to interpret them (i.e., to recognize these sub-
stances and to respond accordingly). But the definition has had to be expanded
in recent years to include a variety of signal molecules that are emitted not from
glands, but from specialized cells in other tissues and organs. Well-known is for
example histamine, a substance many readers may be familiar with from its role
in allergic reactions, but which may also be formed in the event of tissue dam-
age or infection.
   Another important group of signal molecules are called prostaglandins. These
I have discussed previously, in Chapter 2, with regard to their role in the low-
ering of the threshold for the feeling of pain in the skin. Yet prostaglandins are
also involved in enabling many other internal control mechanisms in the body:
they dilate passages in the bronchia, they inhibit the secretions of the intestinal
tract, they stimulate the uterus, they influence nerve function, they cause fever,
and they facilitate coagulation of the blood.
    A related group of signal molecules that should be mentioned here are the
growth factors that stimulate cell divisions and normal development. All these
latter signal molecules operate by parachrin regulation — i.e., they are excreted
to the interstitial fluids (the liquid that fills empty space between cells); they are
generally short-lived; and their effects, therefore, are mostly local    — which are
exactly the qualities one wants in a control mechanism that is required to play
its role at a specific moment in the trajectory of development, and then be gone.
Yet another particularly interesting group of hormones are the newrohormones
or neuropeptides, peptides that are transported along nerve threads (axons) and
released into the interstitial fluids. Neuropeptides play a central role in the com-
munication between the nervous system and the immune system — I will be hay-
ing much more to say about this critically important communication shortly.
        236          THE SEMIOTICS OF NATURE



              Finally, in Chapter 5, we saw how some hormones (those called steroid
         hormones) may act directly upon the transcription of specific genes, as these
         hormones are targeted by the relevant cells and become attached to specific pro-
         teins. Most hormones, however, operate more indirectly (and more obviously
         biosemiotically) through the processes of signal transduction. We also saw in
         Chapter 5 that the same hormone may have quite different effects upon dif-
         ferent cells, since the effect depends upon the protein profile of the cell —ice.,
         on how the actual proteins present in a given cell will interact with the sec-
         ondary signal evoked at the membrane’s inner side by the binding of hormone
       molecules to surface receptors. Here, aseverywhere in living systems, we see
     ae ‘the essential principle at work that shows us that signals do not contain their
(v ffy
         own message.», Rather,when the concentration of a hormone surpasses a certain
 ral
        threshold value (ie., when the degree of saturation of specific receptors at the
        receiving system at
                         attains
                         al       its
                                  itscritical value), the hormone acts as a sign that induces
                            cGticae)
                            iagns
        the formation by thesystem    of an interpretant. And the nature of this interpre-
        tant depends exclusively. on the contextual situation of the receiving cell.


                                  The Self as Iconic Absence
        An important aspect of endosemiotic control is the systemic property of the
        body that Leo Buss aptly called its somatic ecology. This is the incessant cor-
        rective effort exerted by white blood corpuscles (lymphocytes, macrophages,
        etc.) all over the body, settling potential conflicts between cellular and
        bodily interests.
           Traditionally, the immune system has been conceived of as a “defense depart-
        ment” against infections —a defense that was based on the dynamic cooper-
        ation between a multiplicity of white corpuscles that continually patrol the
        tissues and body fluids of an animal.’* Immunological identity, however, does
        not consist simply in a demarcation of the biochemical self as a stable, unam-
        biguous entity to be protected from the (equally unambiguous) invasions from
        the outside. Rather, the term refers to a far more complex and ongoing series
        of events — what Francisco Varela (1991, 88-89) has characterized as “a self-ref-
        erential, positive assertion of coherent unity
                                                     —a ‘somatic ecology’ mediated
        through free immunoglobins and cellular markers in a dynamic exchange.” For
        to act upon some currently residing element within the body as alien to the mul-
        ticellular system of the self and to act upon some other currently residing ele-
        ment within the body as constituent of the multicellular system of the self are,
        logically, two sides of the same behavioral coin. Expressed differently, other-

        13    In the human body the number of white blood corpuscles has been estimated as 107 (one
        trillion),
                                                                 ENDOSEMIOTICS                237,


reference and self-reference are inseparable aspects of the dynamics of the living
(see Chapter 2).
   The immune system identifies potentially foreign molecules that might have
penetrated the body through the processes of exposing their iconic interaction
with the body’s own lymphocytes. Such indexicality   — the clue pointing out
the identity of the perpetrator, in this case — paradoxically appears as 2 breach
ofan expected iconic absence. In other words, the foreign molecules are disclosed
because they engage in a kind of iconic semiosis that should have been out of
reach to them —as, indeed, it is to all authentic molecular members of the
bodily self. Uexkiill, Geigges, and Hermann (1993, 38-39) express it this way:
“To identify the unknown means to recognize something familiar: nonself is a
potential variant of self”
   I shall not attempt to present a complete semiotic analysis of the numerous
refined mechanisms of the immune system here, for such an analysis would eas-
ily take several volumes the length of the present one.'* Here, I shall focus on
just one such mechanism, which I believe will give the reader insight into the
general principle under discussion — for this mechanism concerns a sophisti-
cated cellular plot whereby foreign antigens are lured into an iconic trap that
then serves as an index to the body.
   Few things bear clearer witness to the communicative nature of the body’s
inner cellular life than does the fact that each cell, at its surface, carries a
“tag” — a “Hello, my name is           ” — that identifies its origin. The mecha-
nism seems eerily identical to the one used by travel agencies when they equip
tourists at foreign destinations with characteristic hats or scarfs, or other eas-
ily recognizable markers for identifying one another. The character of these
cellular tags is infinitely more complex and interesting, however, in that they
consist of degradation products from the cell’s own proteins. These are pep-
tide fragments with a length of -ten to twenty amino acids, that
                                                              — borrow-
ing Kilstrup’s expression — “are stretched out and laid like a sausage in a hot
dog bun, between the protein flaps of the MHC molecule” (MHC=Major
Histocompatibiliry Complex) (Kilstrup 1998, 110). The “whole hot dog”
(amino acids plus MHC molecule) is then transported out of the cell and pre-
sented to the surroundings by being placed at the surface of the cell. (And the
term presented to is actually a quite precise technical designation in this con-
text, as we shall see below.)

14   Interesting contributions to such an analysis can be found in Sercarz et al. (1988).
Unfortunately, none of
                     these contributions seems aware of the possibilities opened by the Peircean
tradition in semiotics. A fine discussion ofthis latter issue may be found in Neuman (2005) and in
Kilstrup (1998, in Danish). By the time this book went to press, a biosemiotically informed anal-
ysis of the relationship between hosts and parasites was published by Elling Ulvestad (2007). See
also Kawade (1992).
238          THE   SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE




   MHC is a class of protein molecules that exhibits extraordinary variation
from individual to individual. This variation is based, however, on one common
molecular theme in the form of a cleft (or hollow) in the three-dimensional struc-
ture “intended” for the binding of cellular peptide fragments. Such wide varia-
tion is enabled by the fact that every individual organism has its own absolutely
specific MHC molecules —and this is why, for example, transplantations of
organismic tissue from one individual to another is likely to provoke the forma-
tion of defensive antibodies in the new host. Conversely, this individual molec-
ular signature means that the body’s own cells may be assured that if the MHC
molecules at the surface of a cell are correct —i.e., match their own — this cell
will indeed be “one of us”. Another characteristic trait of the “MHC hot dog”
worth emphasizing is that the peptide fragments confined inside are positioned
in a stretched (linear) form, rather than in its original three-dimensional struc-
ture, indicating that the amino acid sequence of the relevant peptide fragment is
displayed. The significance of such display will become clear presently.
   For it isnot an overstatement to say that the key to the immune system's ability
to distinguish between se/fand nonself resides in the action of the T
                                                                    cells —lym-
phocytes thus named because, after having been formed in the bone marrow,
they get their definitive “tag” through a maturation process in the thymus.
      T-lymphocytes carry special receptors on their surfaces (T-cell receptors,
abbreviated TCR) that specifically recognize and bind to the stretched-out pep-
tide fragments (as presented via “MHC hot dogs”) bearing the signature mark
of the individual. Each TCR specifically binds to one, and only one, MHC-
presented peptide fragment, iconically corresponding to the empty place on
that particular receptor.’’ As long as the immature lymphocyte stays in the thy-
mus, it will only encounter peptide fragments degraded from the body’s own
repertoire of proteins — and in the rare case that it attempts to bind to one of
these, it is immediately eliminated. This ensures that the surviving mature lym-
phocytes (the ones that leave the thymus in order to take part in the immune
defense) will never possess T-cell receptors shaped for the iconic recognition of
peptide fragments from their own body. The immunological selfthus is based on
an iconic absence — the absence, under normal conditions, of iconic representa-
tions of the “empty place” on T-cell receptors.
   Moreover, when an organism is infected by a virus ora bacterium, the infected
cells will degrade parts of the attacker's proteins to small peptide fragments to

15 Properly speaking, it takes an interpretant to establish the iconicity of a given relation. What
I mean by calling this correspondence iconic is that the body, thanks to its evolutionary ancestry,
has constructed this system of TCR + HCM-peptide binding relations in the expectation (in the
sense of genetically fixed past experiences extrapolated to the future through inheritance) that it
will serve to (mis)direct foreign pathogens into a binding trap based on likeness of shape between
the TCR-receptor and the degraded fragment of a foreign protein.
                                                                ENDOSEMIOTICS                239



be presented by the “MHC hot dogs” on the cell surface as warning signals. This
partial degradation does ot prevent the cell from being destroyed by the attack,
nor does it prevent a new generation of virus particles from being released onto
the lymphatic vessels, but it does effectively summon the omnivorous white cor-
puscles, the macrophages, and these will swallow up the prey (vira or bacteria)
by phagocytosis —a process whereby the cell wall is turned inside out to engulf
the prey and to successively digest it through a battery of enzymes released from
organelles (the /ysozomes) inside the macrophage.
   The next link in the process is bifurcated and consists firstly in the presen-
tation, by the macrophages, of fragments of the degraded virus proteins at sheir
surfaces. Parallel to this, a very specific reaction takes place whereby the B lym-
phocytes recognize and bind to certain domains of protein molecules (called
antigens) that belong either to the surface of as yet unphagocytized vira or bac-
teria, or to free proteins in the blood or lymph. This binding is made possible by
the presence on the surfaces of the B lymphocytes of a kind of receptor that also
functions as an antibody against the antigen in question. The binding causes an
activation of the B lymphocyte that now starts breaking down the infectant and
presenting the antigens at its own surface, in the same way the macrophage did.
   To really appreciate the subtlety of this arrangement, it is necessary to con-
sider the numeric relations involved. There are an estimated 10° to 10° different
receptor types (each of them corresponding to ove specific antigen) on the sur-
faces of the population of lymphocytes in the human body. Each single lympho-
cyte has one, and only one, of these receptor types, and the enormous diversity
depends — as in the case of T lymphocytes — on a chance-generating princi-
ple.*® In practice, this means that there will always be present in circulation just
one B lymphocyte to make the single antibody effective towards precisely one
corresponding foreign protein that might have entered the body. Conversely,
each receptor at the B lymphocytes is specific enough that it will only recog-
nize one single protein among the millions of different kinds of protein mol-
ecules present in nature. The next link in the defense process is the formation
(through cell division) of clones of those B lymphocytes that recognized the for-
eign protein molecules, and thus must have carried receptors with antibody
activity against them. This is where the T lymphocytes enter the picture, and
specifically, the kind of T lymphocytes called T helper cells. The receptors on
T helper cells are geared to recognize (and to bind to) those exact antigens that

16 The principle is based on crossing-over events under the formation of each single clone of
lymphocytes. For example, the immunoglobulin G (IgG) of two light polypeptide chains, couple
to two heavy chains. Since every cell line, through such crossing-over events, will have attained
just one out of three thousand possible light chains, and one out of five thousand possible heavy
chains, this arrangement implies that the complete IgG molecule will represent one of 1.5 x 10°
(one-and-a-half million) molecular possibilities.
240          THE   SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE



are presented as “MHC hot dogs” on macrophage and B lymphocyte surfaces.
Here —as in the other recognition processes we have discussed in this sec-
tion — recognition is based on iconicity in the sense that significant domains
on the relevant antigens have shapes and electrostatic properties that are iconic
to the potential (but in the body, nonexistent) protein domain, that “fits” the
specific receptor of the T helper cell.’”
   We may now see why biochemists have chosen the (from a scientific stand-
point) rather strange (and, in fact, illogical) verb, to present, for the behavior of
the macrophages and the B lymphocytes. For the immunological effect of these
processes is precisely to make antigens visible to the T helper cells. When T
helper cells successively register and recognize the presented antigens (which
are being presented to it via a correct MHC complex and at the same time as
being zonself), they respond by releasing the production of yet another class of
signal molecules, the cytokines (interleukins, tumor necrosis factor, lymphokines,
interferons) that cause the cells to engage in a process of reciprocal activation
under the formation of clones containing large amounts of those exact B and T
lymphocytes that are involved in the inactivation of the infection.
   Many of the B lymphocytes in the clone successively develop further into
plasma cells that release large amounts of specific antibody. Such antibodies will
bind to antigens at the surface of intact bacteria (or vira), thereby forming com-
plex aggregates that will further attract bacteria-eating macrophages and also
induce an aftercare (via the help of the complement system) that assures that the
antigen-antibody complexes remain dissolved until the lymph or blood has car-
ried them to locations of intensified phagocytosis (lymph nodes, spleen, or liver).
There they will be taken up and degraded. Some of the activated B and T lym-
phocytes will survive in the organism for years and function effectively as mem-
ory cells that will ensure a quick mobilization of the immune defense system
should that same kind of infection appear again in the future.
   The interplay between the astronomical number of cells involved in the immu-
nological reaction is, of course, far more complex than this brief description has
been able to even hint at. But my only aim here was to show how the immune
system discloses foreignness as an iconic presence only because of the equally
constructed background of a presumed absence. The whole system contains the
further finesse that while B lymphocytes exclusively form antibodies against
antigens (i.¢., against certain domains at the surface of proteins called epitopes),
T lymphocytes will only initiate cytochemical activation when the sequence of
amino acids in the epitope — as stretched out in one dimension — is recognized
as nonself. The safety system thus is double-stringed and requires B lymphocytes


17 Iconic recognition as described here exemplifies the phenomenon Stjernfelt (1992) has called
categorial perception.
                                                       ENDOSEMIOTICS             241




to recognize the three-dimensional surface structure as foreign at the same time
that the T lymphocytes recognize the one-dimensional sequence of the epitope
to be foreign.
   Seen ina larger view, the immune reaction is based on a special selection pro-
cess called clonal selection.As in so many other cases in the world of the living,
the effectual principle here consists in the gross overproduction of entities — fol-
lowed by the selection for survival of exactly those entities (here, clones of lym-
phocytes) that have shown themselves most useful. In the nervous system, as
we saw, all superfluous or inactive neurons soon become eliminated, but in the
immune system the mechanism is slightly different in that an incredibly rich
Lymphocyte diversity is maintained throughout life. Selection here is thus rather
concerned with the allowance of certain lymphocytes to form clones contain-
ing numerous identical cells. The mechanism, in fact, resembles that of gene reg-
ulation where, similarly, genes passively await the time that cellular machinery
eventually recognizes the need to activate the protein resource specified by the
gene in question.
   In sum, we may say that the recognition of molecular foreignness is obtained
through the development of a maximal iconic openness, followed by the elimi-
nation of those openings that allow the self to be recognized. This causes a dig-
itization —i.e., a discontinuous distribution
                                           — of protein domains into two
classes, self and nonself, where nonself is distinguished through the occurrence
of iconic recognition processes available exclusively for nonself molecules.
  The biosemiotic problem that the immune system has solved in this intri-
cate but elegant way consists in the fact that foreignness is a negative property,
a property that cannot be understood in any other way than as nonself. But zon
is a phenomenon meaning “x plus its denial,” and as such it is not accessible for
immediate iconic representation. By making self negative (in the form of an
absence) however, it became possible to make nonself positive in the form of
a multitude of potential icons for nonself —i.e., a multitude of T lymphocytes
capable of recognizing all conceivable peptide fragments other than those that
form parts of the body’s own proteins. The negative property nonself was con-
verted to a positive property, an index
                                    foreignness.
                                        for
   Complex as it seems here, this very same principle is familiar to us from our
experience in the anthroposemiotic area, where numerous cases of the detec-
tion of nonself (or the other, as the term is used in the social sciences) is based
upon the absence of a presumed, constructed, and otherwise invisible unifor-
mity. Examples might include the tattoos and insignias on the backs of “outlaw
bikers,” the veils of Muslim women in the West, the Bibles of Christians leav-
ing a church on Sunday morning, all sorts of sports team attire, and — not the
least — the various uniforms of soldiers. Employing this strategy also runs the
inherent risk that the system can be fooled by the adoption of a false uniform
242        THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE



as in “The Captain from Kopenick.” Conversely, the police may perhaps just as
easily place an informer in a group that zhey might want to infiltrate, simply by
having that person satisfy the said group’s criteria for uniformity — be it physi-
cal or psychological.
   This strategy offaking, based on the strong organizing power of iconic rela-
tions, runs all through the biosemiotic repertoire of living systems. For exam-
ple, HIV vira have become specialized for infecting T helper lymphocytes and
these vira are surprisingly skilled in avoiding detection. Here the hiding strat-
egy is made possible by an extraordinarily high error frequency in the transla-
tion of virus RNA to virus DNA that precedes integration of the virus into the
host chromosome. Thus, the virus simply mutates into any conformation other
than its present one as soon as it has become recognized. It changes its uniform,
one might say — and as it is always the uniform and not the wearer per se that is
present to inspection — the virus thus avoids the full effect of the immunologi-
cal response. In this respect, the HIV virus resembles the influenza virus — and
in both cases (and for the same reason), it has proved very difficult to pro-
duce vaccines that are not outdated before they reach the marketplace. (In this
respect, the HIV virus is approximately sixty times more iconically deceitful than
the influenza virus.)

                                                           ae    QenneH   —   ANSSs NA
                             The Bodily Psyche
In discussing the internal milieu, I noted how the hormones insulin and glu-
cagon cooperate to keep our blood sugar level inside an optimal range. But
we also saw that mere chemical brute force was not in itself sufficient for true
homeostatic regulation since it had to be augmented with brain-based supervi-
sion — executed by neurons from the hypothalamus that signal hunger when
the sugar level goes too low and a feeling of satiety when the sugar level goes too
high. Ic is no longer a secret, then, that our psychological life is influenced by
our internal chemistry — and vice versa. We tacitly understand that people get
irritable when hungry, or accept, as a matter of course, that unexpected behay-
ior rnay be caused by PMS (premenstrual syndrome). This is also why we fear for
the possible side effects of hormonal treatments and antidepressant drugs, and
why a controlled and balanced mental life is important in the world of sports
and entertainment — even professional chess players, it has been shown, do bet-
ter if they undertake decent body training.
   In other words, not many people willnowadays ‘seriously deny that body and
mind are twodeeply integrated aspects of  of human
                                             hur life. And since one can hardly
quarrel:with one’s wife or play chess while unconscious, it is difficult also to deny
that this whole business of
                         of what \we call human consciousness is effectively part
                                                                 ENDOSEMIOTICS                 243



and parcel
        ofthe slimy dynamics of the body’s incessant corporeal functioning.
The question remains, though: How can this possibly be?
   The Australian-American philosopher David Chalmers has introduced
a distinction between1
                     the soft problems and thehard problem that need to be
explained in_accountin
                    nting— for this consciousness —and his distinction has
become a standard one in the cognitive sciences and in the philosophy of mind.
The soft problems concern the question of the mechanics of how the brain man-
ages to integrate andprocess its electro-chemical data. Finding the answers to
these problems may take decades, but will not, according to Chalmers, force us
to break with any already fully accepted explanatory principles. However, solv-
ing the hard problem will, for the hard problem consists in explaining why brain
processes are so often
                    en accompanied by an experienced iinner life. Here we  are
confronted with1a problem that, as Chalmers (1996, xiv) carefully reasons, can-
not be attacked by the usual scientific methods: “I argue that reductive explana-
                                              »18
tions
   of consciousness are impossible.
   Other philosophers have argued, persuasively I think, that science cannot!
possibly describe conscious experiences in a language that in principle oper-
ates exclusively inside the limits of grammatical third-person descriptions.,
An “I” cannot, John Searle (1992) claimed, be described by an uninterrupte
sequence of “it” phenomena, no matter how complicated such sequences migh
be. Articulating the same problem a bit more poetically, philosopher of mind
Thomas Nagel (1986, 13) once famously asked, “How can it be the case that one.
of the people in the world is me?”
     The error of confusing first-person experience     and third-person experience
is widespread in muc         scientific” thinking, aswasilh
                                                          illustrated by a
                                                                         a newspaper                         :
story that      appeared some >
                              years agot  under this heading: SCIENTISTS °WILL
                                                                                                         t
SOON BE ABLE TO SEE CONSCIOUSNESS. The impetus behind this                                               U
alarming title turned out to be aquote from an expert in mathematical mod-
eling working with brain-scanning technology. “I am pretty sure that one day
we will have a picture on our scanner of the activity patterns constituting con-
sciousness,” he told the newspaper. But will he?

   Let us imagine him scanning my brain while I — living in the dark winter of                       f
   Denmark — have an experience of longing for summer. Here I personally have no
   difficulty in believing that this experience might somehow have been evoked by
   a brain activity which can be visualized on the scanner. For the sake of the argu-
   ment, let us now further assume (though I take it to be not very likely) that one day


18 Chalmers does not doubt that consciousness is a natural phenomenon or that it should be
possible to construct a scientific theory ofit. But he thinks such a theory would necessarily con-
tain kinds oflawfulness very different from the kind we are used to from physics. In this sense, at
least, biosemiotics and Chalmers share the same perspective.
          244         THE SEMIOTICS OF NATURE


             our expert would be able to tell his colleagues while scanning me, that at this time
            Jesper Hoffmeyer had an experience of longing for summer — and also that I did,
            in fact, have such an experience at exactly this time. Even then, of course the expert
             did not “see” my longing, for it cannot be “seen,” it can only be felt— and only by me
         isn (Hoffmeyer 1999b).

            Philosophers have used the term qualia as a designation for this aspect of
     Z   our world, the inner feel of lived experience —e.g., the feel of redness when
we       you look at a red tomato or the joy of moving in the rhythm of dance. Qualia is
         thus the essentially subjective dimension of consciousness (as this term is used
          in its everyday— not its Deelian semiotic — sense). And as such it constitutes
          the deepest challenge to cognitive science. For while all other aspects of our psy-
          chological life, at least in principle, might be explained within the ontology of
          natural physical law, doing so seems impossible as concerns the phenomenon
          of qualia.
            And this presumably is the reason why materialistically inclined cognitive
          scientists go to such efforts to argue that the whole notion of a felt, lived, per-
          sonal qualia is based on some kind of misguided illusion      — neuronal brain
          states exist and are real, but beliefs, feelings, desires, and thoughts, are misde-
          scriptions of these brain states. To believe in them as real as such is to fall prey
          to a widespread, but scientifically illiterate illusion (Churchland 1986, Dennett
          2001). But, one may ask, can you really be mistaken about anything if you are
          not someone? Can pure things have il/usions? The answer, it seems, has to be
          no —for if things were pestered by illusions, the il/usion-having itself would
          constitute a genuine kind of subjectivity. Our
                                                      urfeeling ofbeing asubject can par-
          adoxically only be illusory ifit istrue. To call subjectivity an illusion is simply
          self-contradictory.
             One strategy for circumventing the qualia problem has been to reject the set
          of conceptions that — with a certain, and unfortunately not rare, scientific con-
          descension — has been called folk psychology (Churchland 1984). By this term
         is meant the whole set of everyday conceptions about life and the world that
         we have all grown up with and take to be self-evident — such as the belief that
         other people have mental states like ourselves, or that maybe even animals have
          some kind of animal equivalent of such, and that neither they nor we are mere
          unthinking biological machines, as the detractors of this folk psychology insist
          that we, in reality, are.
             One often discussed example of such folk psychology is the idea that the cog-
          nitive philosopher Daniel Dennett calls the Cartesian theater —i.e., the con-
          ception that in some well-hidden locality “in the obscure ‘center’ of the mind/
          brain, there is a Cartesian theater, a place where it all comes together and con-
          sciousness happens” (Dennett 1991, 39). It is, I suppose, true enough that we
          all have this immediate experience of a world presented to us by the senses —a
                                                       ENDOSEMIOTICS             245



continuous and coherent world in both time and space, and a world that exists
outside ofus in more or less the same way it is presented to us inside our skull. It
does not cost Dennett a lot of effort to show that this folk-psychological funda-
ment about our own understanding is not reconcilable with the neurobiologi-
cal facts concerning perception (nor, for that matter, with the conception of the
nature of experience as arrived at by analytical philosophy!).
   In this chapter, I have already discussed the “illusion” of visual perception as
a spatio-temporal continuum. We saw that the fast movements of the eyeballs,
the saccades, could not possibly give us information about anything but a small,
if accurately selected, sector of the whole visual field — and that the experience
of seeing before our eyes a “filled out space” where none, perceptually, exists,
apparently must also be the construction of the brain. Nonetheless, I decline to
accept without further ado Dennett's claim that we are all suffering a folk-psy-
chological illusion concerning visual perception and that qualia belongs in this
same drawer of imaginary brain constructs. For it may be objected that the illu-
sion of the Cartesian theater is only an illusion relative to the concrete mechan-
ics of visual perception, not relative to what is seen.
  What Dennett has proven is in reality only, as the philosopher Alva Noé
(2002, 3) has elegantly expressed it, that “it turns out we are mistaken in our
assessment of how things seem to us to be.” Our illusion does not concern what
we think we see, but only how we experience that which we think we see. Vision
is experienced as discontinuous, Dennett claims, but we think it is experienced
as continuous: “One of the most striking features about consciousness is its dis-
continuity —as revealed by the blind spot, and saccadic gaps, to take the sim-
plest examples. The discontinuity of consciousness is striking because of the
apparent continuity of consciousness” (Dennett 1991, 356). But it is far from
obvious what should be understood by an “apparent continuity of conscious-
ness.” Apparent to whom? Dennett’s attempts to identify consciousness with the
neural processes that are substrate for its appearance seem in this case to lead us
to logical monsters that won't be conjured away simply by calling them apparent.
Don Favareau (in a personal communication) has expressed it thus: “If the argu-
ment of the eliminative materialists is that consciousness is an illusion brought on
by neuronal brain activity, this only begs the further question of exactly how and
why this illusion appears to me in the way that it does. What explains the experi-
ence of the illusion? In other words, this idea — that what we think is our men-
tal experience is a fallacy — is itselfa self-contradicting fallacy.”
   Neuropsychological research indicates that the cognitive structure that is
responsible for vision in human beings may be divided into two cooperative,
butal independent, visual brain systems— one of which (the oldest in an
eyolutiona context) is specialized in the control of vision-based here-and-
now motoric activity, whereas the other (more recent innovation) controls the
246           THE   SEMIOTICS     OF NATURE




knowledge- and memory-
                    based selection of well-prepared planned actions
        to as “insight, hindsight, and foresight about the visual field” (Milner
‘referred
  Goodale
and           1998)."° For illustration, consider a series of experiments discussed
in Milner and Goodale (1995). In these experiments, subjects were given the
task of following a visual track with their eyes and, at the same time, required
to indicate the path of the track manually. The experience was performed in
such a way that the track at unexpected times suddenly was a little bit displaced.
Under these circumstances, subjects without difficulty traced the displacements
(as disclosed by measuring the saccades) without consciously recognizing that a
displacement had taken place.
   Successively, it was shown that if subjects that unconsciously had followed
the track correctly, in spite of the displacement, were afterwards asked to
indicate where the goal (now removed) was last seen, they would place it at
the location at which it would have been had no displacement whatsoever
taken place. The experiments suggest that memory is integrated with con-
scious visual experience while the (largely unconscious) motoric operation is
controlled by a separate and more sensitive dynamic that is very much in the
here-and-now.
   On the basis of a series of experiments like the one described above, Andy
Clark has suggested an experience-based selection model for visual perception
that is based on the principle that “conscious visual experience presents the
world to a subject in a form appropriate jor the reason-and-memory-based selec-
tion ofactions” (Clark 2002, 197; italics added). Clark here takes his point of
departure from skill theory as developed by O’Regan and Noé (2001). Skill the-
ory, briefly sketched, rejects Dennett's objections regarding visual perception
by claiming that visual experience is nothing other than the control by the visual
brain of immediately relevant senso-motoric challenges. We see exactly what we
need to see for the accomplishment of any given action — and since the world
(in the sense of an object for our actions) lies open to our eyes, there is no rea-
son to also have it represented on the inside of the skull. Should anyone be in
doubt of this, the skill theorist maintains that such people simply need to take
a look— and what they need to see is exactly what their unconscious saccades
choose to tell them.
     Skill theory, however, does not really take into account that the visual-infor-
mation processing in the brain is segregated into two tracks (or pathways) — one
of which draws upon available knowledge and memory resources: “ What mat-
ters, as far as conscious seeing is concerned, is that the object/event is ‘one of


19                         BL “brains”
      The first of these visual   Rey     ant   i                  ;             :
                                       is identified as “a dorsal visual-processing stream leading to
the posterior parietal lobule, and the latter with the ventral stream projecting to the inferotempo-
ral cortex” (Clark 2002, 195).
                                                        ENDOSEMIOTICS             247


those’ (i.e., falls into such-and-such a class or category) and that a certain range
of actions (not movements but actions such as grasping-to-throw, grasping-to-
drink, etc.) is potentially available. Both ‘visual brains’   lam sugge sting, repre-
sent by activating implicit knowledge ofsome set of possible actions and results”
(Clark 2002, 199). Clark (ibid., 201) concludes his analysis by an outright rejec-,
tion of the folk-illusion kind of theorizing: “Our visual experience is not itself |
misleading. The scene before us is indeed rich in color, depth and detail, just as /
we take it to be. And we have access to this depth and detail as easily as we have
access to facts stored in biological long-term memory. It is just that in the case o
the visual scene, retrieval is via visual saccades and exploratory action. Our daily
experience only becomes misleading in the context of a host of unwise theoret-
ical moves and commitments.”
    In other words, the brain’s two-tracked visual processing technique gives us
a visual experience that both emphasizes what is relevant in the context of our
immediate motivated dealings with the world, aud positions this processed
information in a coherent spatio-temporal visual context reflecting our general
memory and knowledge.
    In effect, the folk-psychological conception of vision as a Cartesian theater is|
only an illusion if we, for ideological reasons, identify visual consciousness with
the naked sense inputs that reach retina here and now via the saccades         — or,
in other words, if we insist on identifying consciousness with the unprocessed
neurobiological basis for sensual experience. Such an identification would, of
course, free us from explaining the phenomenon of qualia, but it would also,I
strongly believe, “free us’ ’ from the ambition of ever reaching an DESI
of what kind of a thing mental a   li cent is.




of the
    Ree   ais origin oe qualia. Seen.from.a biosemiotic meters quae j
las nd-thus-the experiential dimension of existence — isa lea in dAb \
  e Peircean sense (see Chapter 3), an aspect of                    h, and therefore
also of life and of cognition in general. The phenomenon of qualia in living sys-
tems cannot therefore surprise us, although the concrete manifestations it takes
in human psychological life calls, like everything else in science, for an analy-
sis of its historical origins as well as the rmechanics of its enabling neurobiology.
Thus, while Clark’s hypothesis of experience-based selection offers an interesting
proximal explanation for how visual qualia is neurologically based in modern
homo sapiens, the American philosopher Maxine Sheets-Johnstone’s seminal
ideas about bodily consciousness, mentioned earlier in this chapter, provide us
with a more distal (evolution-centered) understanding of the qualia phenome-
non (Sheets-Johnstone 1990; 1998).
     248         THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE



        Sheets-Johnstone’s analysis takes its starting point in the Socratic “know your
     self” — which is also, and to the highest degree, a biological dictum — as I have
     hoped to show in the preceding discussion regarding the immune system, as well
     as in Chapter 2. Remarkably, Daniel Dennett also endorses this bio-Socratic
     point of departure when he states that simple organisms may not have a lot of
     self-knowledge but must nevertheless possess some rudiments such as “when
     hungry, don’t eat yourself!” (Dennett 1991, 427). But, as Sheets-Johnstone
     (1998) observes, Dennett’s and many other cognitive scientists’ theories about
     the self are in a very fundamental sense umbodily       — not paying attention at
     all to the body’s feeling of its own movement, and still very much Cartesian
     at heart, despite all loud protestations to the contrary. For example, Dennett
     appeals to the visual metaphor when he suggests rules for how the organism
     orients itself: “Do something, and look to see what moves” (ibid., 427). Yet
     Sheets-Johnstone (1998, 272) remarks that “were we to examine Dennett’s the-
     ory of human agency with respect to infants, one would straightaway discover
     é          »          4
     its errors, and explains,


        We humans learn “which thing we are” by moving and listening to our own moye-
        ment. We sense our bodies. Indeed, we humans, along with many other primates,
        must learn to move ourselves. We do so not by looking or seeing what we're moving;
        we do so by attending to our bodily feelings ofmovement, which include a bodily felt
        sense of the direction of our movement, its speed, its range, its tension, and so on.
        Our bodily feelings of movement have a certain dynamic. We feel, for example, the
        swiftness of our movement, its constrictedness or openness, its tensional tightness
        or looseness, and more. In short, we perceive the qualia of our own movement; our
        bodily feelings of movement have a certain qualitative character.

        Sheets-Johnstone’s own theory
                                   consciousness
                                      of    and qualia, as fundamen-
     tally | rooted in the needs of animals to know themselves as moving creatures,



     swarm of
            ofprocesses.. The
                           e reductive conception of the body as ruled =processes
     that may,
          ma in principle, |be explained ffrom the bottom-up by sheer biochemistry
cK
 ~   (orin algorithmic terms) does not, in the nature of the case, offer any help in
     explain ing how such1 knowledge could :appear iina moving animal. The biosemi-
     otic model, on the contrary, has no difficulties with this connection, since semi-
     otic emergenceinherently implies thepotential for the creation of systems with
     increasingly high
                  high degrees of semiotic freedom.
       Biosemiotici               meche has stressed that there is always.a phenomenal
     _aspect to semiosis — an aspect that in the Peircean sign conception is contained
     in the concept of the qualisign. In our discussion of alarmones, for example, we
     saw how the symbolic function of cAMP was dependent on — though not fully
     reducible to — its lower-level indexical and iconic aspects. And, in fact, traces
                                                               ENDOSEMIOTICS               249



of such Secondness and Firstness can always be unveiled even in complex signs,
such as in symbols or in human propositional arguments. Emmeche (2001,
679-80) points out that

  A single sign may be a token of some general type (e.g., a perceived pattern may be
  recognized by the organism as being of a certain dangerous kind, say, a predator),
  but it has always also an aspect of being a tone — i.e., being qualitativelyfeltin some
  way. The type/token/tone is a genuine triad, where the Firstness property of the
  tone is always hidden, so to speak, within the “objective” or more external property
  ofthat sign’s belonging to a type. This corresponds to the first trichotomy ofsigns in
  Peirce (that according to the character of the representamen itself), where every legi-
  sign is always realized by a particular simsign, and every concrete sinsign includes a
  qualisign. What is the qualisign? Only phenomenologically can we approach a clear

  ity insofar as it is a sign,” “e.g., a feeling of ‘red’” Thus, the umwelt, as a semiotic phe-   =
  nomenon, includes qualisigns with very sensuous “tonal” qualities.



                           The Psychological Body
Although most of us spend our lives as if our body was a tool for the satisfac-
tion of our psychological needs, it takes only a moment’s reflectionto see that
the body is the precondition for the evolutionarily much later psyche, rather
than vice versa,
            The body was there first, and onlyin the course of evolution-
ary time did bodies develop brains sophisticated enough to support what we
would today recognize aspsychological life. It follows that bodies must some-\ $7
how have benefited by the possession of a psychological tool. Inits most prim-
itive versions, psychological life probably served to assure a.coupling between, 4
                           .             oe    1      .   {7
on the one hand, negative and positive emotions and, on the other hand, rele-
    Se                                        Sa


                      actions. The
                  of action.
       patternspsion
vant patter                        functi the development of felt emotional reac- \

operation of the senso-motoric functions. Over thecourse of many millennia,
  ie                 SS
                     aaa      ae    —     cS cosa  ri i eee
                                                        tennpee
these couplings have become more and moresophisticated       —and _gradually
they were integrated into the anticipatory and memory-based steering function
of
eS
   embodied
     ——$<—<—
              brains.
                                          >                 °        .     .
   In his important 1994 book, Descartes’ Error, the American neurobiologist
Antonio Damasio (1994, 230), suggests that the cognitive and the emotional
aspect of our lives have grown through a kind of co-evolution:

  If ensuring survival of the body proper is what the brain first evolved for, then,
  when minded brains appeared, they began by minding the body. And to ensure
  body survival as effectively as possible, nature, I suggest, stumbled on a highly effec-
  tive solution: representing the outside world in terms of the modifications it causes
 250             THE       SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE



       in the body proper, that is, representing the environment by modifying the primor-
       dial representations of the body proper whenever an interaction between organism
       and environment takes place.

     This reinterpretation of the standard neurobiological account was largely
  based on Damasio’s observations on a range of brain-damaged patients that
  simultaneously suffered reduced reasoning/decision-making and reduced emo-
  tion/feeling. To his surprise, Damasio found that many of these patients were
  unable to make rational choices for the one and only reason that their brain
_ damage had interfered with their abiliry to generate appropriate emotional
| responses. Damasio (1994, 128) concluded from these and similar studies that
“the apparatus of rationality, traditionally presumed to be neocortical, does not
 seem to work without that of biological regulation, traditionally thought to be
 subcortical. Nature appears to have built the apparatus of rationality not just on
|top of the apparatus of biological regulation, but also from it and with it.”
       Thus, feelings are as fully cognitiveas any other perceptual image, claims
                                 because01
 came first in development and retain a primacy that subtly pervades our men-
 eariiter Becatae disBauriahe body Gian audience, feelings are winners
 among equals. And since what comes first constitutes a frame of reference for
 what comes after, feelings have a say on how the rest of the brain and cognition
 go about their business. Their influence is immense.”
    The distinction between emotions and feelings is central here. The emotional
             .   .     .           =   ee   ee   eee   .   a                         .




 reactions are spontaneous, in the sense that they occur without any interfer-
 ence from consciousness and are released by the limbic system in the subcorti-
 cal region of the brain, primarily via the structure called the amygdala (LeDoux
 1996). Through these emotions are established characteristic functional states
 of the body, or rather, kinds of readiness that are connected to basic survival
 functions such as defense against dangers, reproduction, foraging, or aggres-
 sion. Emotions are manifested either endogenously, or as the result of inputs
 from the surroundings. The emotions may therefore be seen as bodily interpre-
 tants that immediately release subsequent interpretants in the form of charac-
 teristic kinds of behavior.
       Too, the neural organization responsible for the primary emotional types of
 behavior is rather uniform for all vertebrates (fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds
 and mammals, including humans). This does not, as underlined by LeDoux,
 imply that the brains of all these animals are identical. But it does imply that
 our understanding of what a human person is in the biological constitution as
 an emotional being must take into account this fact that we are so like other
 animals with whom we ultimately share a common ancestry (LeDoux 1996,
 17). Nor did Charles Darwin himself ever doubt this: “The fact that the lower
                                                                  ENDOSEMIOTICS                 251



animals are excited by the same emotions as ourselves is so well established that
it will not be necessary to weary the reader by many details. Terror acts in the
same manner on them as on us, causing the muscles to tremble, the heart to pal-
pitate, the sphincters to be relaxed, and the hair to stand on end. Suspicion, the
offspring of fear, is eminently characteristic of most wild animals” (Darwin 1981
(1871, chapter 3).
    But while the emotional response, to a high degree, works much the same
 in all vertebrate animals, feelings, in Damasio’s terms, are far more specific for
 humans — for feelings consist in the experience of emotions. The experience of
fear, for instance, appears as the conscious: recognition ofvt Te
                                                               the |emotional response
 toa, dangerous situation.”” As such, feelings are much more varied and sub-
 tle than emotions, since they integrate the emotions ivzo the rich repertoire of
 nuances available for conscious awareness      — the danger may be imminent or
more distant, it may be life-threatening or just inconvenient.
   In human beings, claims Damasio, this leads to the formation of secondary
emotions, which arise “once we begin experiencing feelings and forming system-
atic connections between categories ofobjects and situations, on the one hand, and                            ;
primary emotions, on the other” (Damasio 1994, 134). The formation of these                               oe
secondary emotions is no longer dependent only on the limbic system, but now                              \

also involves the pre-frontal and somato-sensoric brain cortexes.                   .*
   The separation of the emotional response from the experienced feeling opens Oy
up towards a decisive insight in that it frees the understanding of the emotional\ | \\
response from its mysterious (and quite incorrect) anchoring in a conscious                               e
brain. It thus becomes possible to understand the emotional response without \
any need to necessarily solve the intractable mind/body problem that imme-
diately presents itself when we talk about conscious emotional experiences. In
fact, claims LeDoux, emotions as such are as absent from our awareness as is
most of what else goes on in our brain. Biologically understood, the reason for
this is simple. When an organism encounters a threat, the first command is for
the body to discover the source and to react to the danger — and this, precisely,                     /
is what the emotional response makes happen. Only at the next higher level do
we need the fear, the strongly inconvenient feeling that can only be extinguished
by confronting the threat through appropriate action.
   Consciousness about bodily states and feelings may therefore be conceived
as a fundamental carrier wave running through our entire psychological life,
always ready to absorb and to carry forward the stream of interpretations and


20    In this way, William James's famous claim that “we do not start running because we are
afraid of
        the bear, but, on the contrary, we are afraid of the bear because we start running” is con-
firmed to the extent that one is talking about feelings and not —as James did— about primary
emotions.
 252        THE   SEMIOTICS    OF NATURE




 re-interpretations that occur incessantly in both body and brain. Almost implicit
 in this understanding is the acknowledgement that these emotional body states
 are themselves subjected to intervention byfeelings — and thus, to cortical mod-
 ification, giving rise to what Damasio called secondary emotions. The amygdala
 and the rest of the limbic system (and in particular, the hippocampus, hypo-
 thalamus, and nucleus accumbens) not only feed nerve impulses to the cortex
 but are themselves fed by impulses from the brain cortex (some even consider
 the orbitofrontal cortex as part of the limbic system now, largely as the result of
 Damasio’s work). The secondary emotions are bodily interpretants that are con-
 tinually re-patterned, reflecting the psychological reality that the person finds
 himself in, and these emotional interpretants then themselves enter into further
 semiotic loops of feeling-based experiences in an uninterrupted chain (or net-
 work of chains) constituting the psychosomatic reality of a human being. By
 far— and like almost all other biological functioning— the major part of this
 swarming semiotic control activity remains unconscious to the person within
 whomritis incessantly taking place. Yet it tacitly takes care of the necessary sur-
 vival-orientated integration by which body and mind are (or the body/mind is)
 established, moment by moment.
    Another important tool for the accomplishment of these operations is the
| autonomous nervous system that governs the central components of the body’s
internal life (e.g., breathing, blood flow, heart beat, and digestion). But it has
 become increasingly clear that both the endocrine and the immunological sys-
 tem are involved in the semiotic activity by which the psychological situation of
 the organism feeds back into its somatic readiness potential. These connections
 are the theme for a new field of research in medical science that has developed
 strongly through the last few decades under the name of psychoneuroimmunol-
 ogy (PNI) — which, in spite of the name, also includes the endocrine system as
 part of its subject matter.
    In a pioneering work, Robert Ader and Nicholas Cohen (1975) showed that
 changes in the immune defense in mice might be conditioned in much the
 same way that dogs, in Pavlov’s famous experiments from the beginning of the
 twentieth century, had been conditioned to salivate when hearing the sound
 of a certain bell that had previously repeatedly been rung at the time of feed-
 ing. In Ader’s and Cohen’s experiments, the compound cyclophosphamide (a
 compound that has frequently been used in chemotherapy) was injected into
 mice at the same time as they were fed a solution of the sweetener saccharin.
 Cyclophosphamide induces nausea, and it was thus not unexpected that the
 mice responded by developing an aversion to the taste of the saccharin solution.
 In earlier experiments, Ader and Cohen had noticed that some of the experi-
 mental animals who were conditioned this way quite unexpectedly died upon
 drinking the saccharin solution, even in the absence of cyclophosphamide. And
                                                       ENDOSEMIOTICS            253



since cyclophosphamide is also a strong immunodepressant — i.e., a substance
that weakens the immunological response potential—Robert Ader suggested
that the mice were in reality dying because the saccharin solution had worked
as a conditioned reflex (like the bell in Pavlov’s experiments) and had thus edic-
ited reduced immunological readiness in the mice. This would have weakened the
mice’s general resistance towards infections and some of the animals might then
have succumbed to fatal infections.                                             — |
   In Ader’s and Cohen's experiments from 1975, this hypothesis was essentially
confirmed. The intake of saccharin in the absence of any injection of cyclophos-
phamide by the conditioned mice evoked a significant inhibition of the immune
system, as measured by reduced antibody reaction in the mice toward the injec-
tion of red blood cells from sheep. The intake of the quite innocent compound
saccharin was thus — in the conditioned animals — capable of influencing the
immune system of the animals. This and many of the subsequent studies are dis-
cussed in further detail in Ader and Cohen (1993).
   A recurrent objection to the psycho-immunological interpretation of these
and other experiments of the kind has been that it may not necessarily have been
the taste aversion per se that conditioned a reduced immune response. Instead,
                                                                                           aay’
the reduction might have been caused by the general situation of stress inflicted~Ww
                                                                               leas
upon the mice by the cyclophosphamide-saccharin regimen. It is well-known <4] are
that stress causes immunodepression, and due to the conditioning process itself°
the mice may have experienced the saccharin solution as a stress factor. The effect          calle
                                                                                             amvv

of saccharin intake on the immune system need not have been caused by corti-                  4
                                                                                               ‘


                                                                                      6 the
cal impulses (e.g., taste recognition) — rather, stress signals from the subcortical aldols
                                                                                        Here
                                                                                     Seni
regions may have sufficed.
  It has proven extremely difficult to fully rule out this possibility, so long as
animal experiments are our only source of information and the correspond-
ing experiments on human persons are, for good reasons, excluded. In the wake
of the original experiments by Ader and Cohen, however, an almost exponen-
tial growth in PNI research has taken place, and retrograde attempts to explain
away the persistent indications for psychological constituents in the endocrino-
logical and immunological systems appear increasingly forced.
    The advertising industry, for one, is in no doubt of the efficiency of condi-
tioned reflexes in influencing our choices of consumption. The stream of del-
icacies presented in commercials are certainly not intended for the appeal to
reason — in fact, reason would be much too risky to depend on. If, however, our
endocrine response is successfully stimulated, we become unconscious victims          ae



of the suggestive ads.
   An important channel for delivering messages from the cerebral cortex to
the immuno-endocrine control systems follows the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal axis (HPA axis) where, depending on conditions, the hypothalamus
254          THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




secretes neuro-hormones that significantly influence the activity of the neigh-
boring pituitary gland, and thus the release of pituitary hormones to the blood.
Via the blood, pituitary hormones reach the adrenal glands, where they control
the production of adreno-cortical hormones such as cortisol. The following, from
an online resource         (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal axis), sums up the relationship nicely: “The fine, homeostatic inter-
actions between these three organs constitute the HPA axis, a major part of
the neuroendocrine system that controls reactions to stress and regulates var-
ious body processes including digestion, the immune system, mood and sex-
uality, and energy usage. Species from humans to the most ancient organisms
share components of the HPA axis. It is the mechanism for a set of interac-
tions among glands, hormones and parts of the mid-brain that mediate a gen-
eral adaptation syndrome.”
   Let us now have a more detailed look at just one small part of this homeo-
static interaction system, and this will concern the role played by opioids, so
named because of their molecular similarity to opium. Many different sub-
stances, and among them opioids, are produced by cells from the immune sys-
tem and subsequently recognized by specific receptors at the surface of nerve
cells. Endogenous opioids are formed naturally in the body and contribute to the
pleasant — sometimes nearly euphoric — feeling experienced upon successfully
executed physical or mental work. And this experience is most likely the reason
for the strong attraction that many people feel towards artificial opium derivates
such as morphine or heroin. Even animals have been shown to greedily pursue
these substances and to become addicted to them. This implies that the direct
effect of the opioids is subcortical or, in other words, that they exert their influ-
ence on one’s mood through brain processes that do not depend on prefrontal
involvement (Panksepp 2001). On the other hand, we know that the experience
of positive feelings can also lead to the release of opioids, suggesting that rela-
tions between mood and opioids work bothways. And with this acknowledge-
ment, |a broad gate is opened forthe intrusion of psychological forces into the
regulatory machinery ofthe body. Or, as Damasio reminds us in the quoted pas-
sageabove,   the operation of thecerebral cortex “does not seem to work with-
out that of biological regulation, traditionally thought to be subcortical. Nature
appears to have built the apparatus of rationality not just on top of the appara-
tus of biological regulation, but also from it and with it” (Damasio 1994, 128).
    One animal experiment that most persuasively suggests the existence of a
two-way interconnection between the brain and the immune system was based
on measurements of the activity of a class of immune cells called natural killer
cells (NK cells) in mice. The experiment showed that stress-provoked reduction

21    Wikipedia November 1, 2006.
                                                        ENDOSEMIOTICS             255


in NK-cell activity may be counteracted if, simultaneously with the stress fac-
tor, animals are fed specific substances that bind chemically to the brain’s nor-
mal binding sites for endogenous opioids. If, on the other hand, animals are fed
an opium derivative that is unable to penetrate into and influence the brain, no
effect on NK-cell activity was observed (Shavit et al. 1986). Shavit’s and cowork-
ers’ experiment thus unambiguously showed that the stress-provoked effect
upon NK-cell activity is mediated through opioid receptors in the brain, and is
thus broadly open to psychological influence.
   All this said, it should be noted that, as of the time of this writing, PNI
research still finds itself in an explorative and somewhat immature phase.
Numerous binding relations between a diversity of body/brain parameters are
now being scrutinized, yet it is still too early to claim the emergence of any clear-
cut pattern. Seen from a semiotic point of view, one may worry that the nar-
row biochemical approach that still counts as the prevailing paradigm for PNI
research may disallow the introduction of theoretical tools that might help PNI
to transcend the tyranny of trifles.
  The vast quantity of potentially relevant substances, the multiplicity of cell
types, and the incalculable number of combinatorial possibilities that must be
considered if the contextual outcomes of antecedent events are included in the
analysis — as of course they should be — quickly leads the researcher into an
overwhelming jungle of possible parameters to keep track of. As an alternative, I
would suggest that PNI researchers consider whether insights into the semiotic
logic of the communicative dynamics of the system might make it possible to
select and focus the analysis upon a relatively minor fraction of nodal points. At
the present time this, of course, is pure speculation, but it might turn out to be
just the theoretical tool that PNI research needs in order to be able to approach
the data of simultaneously cascading cellular interaction with anything resem-
bling the efficient /ogic of the cell itself.
   Beyond doubt, PNI research is a much needed attempt to establish a scien-
tific understanding of the deeper nature of the psychosomatic interplay— an
interplay whose significance for human health and disease is unmistakable, but
whose precise choreography so far remains dimly lighted.


      The Global Organism — Ecological Endosemiotics
Our discussion on the phenomena of endosemiotics would not be complete with-
out mention of that world of prokaryotic communication that led the micro-
biologist Sorin Sonea (1991; 1992) to talk about a global organism. Compared
to the early pro aryotes ; (essentially the bacteria), the development of eukary-
otic organisms may be seen asa privatization of the hereditary material. Bacteria \{
 256          THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




 easily engage in widespread reciprocal exchange of DNA fragments across spe-
 cies barriers, and they thereby effectuate the rapid spread, around the globe, of
 any DNA-written “talent” that can potentially be interpreted by prokaryotic
  machinery. Since bacteria are surrounded by cell walls, uptake of DNA frag-
  ments from the surrounding milieu is not normally a passive process, but must
_ be actively facilitated by the bacterium’s own activity. In the process of conjuga-
tion, bacteria take up linear DNA fragments transmitted from other bacteria,
| and in the process of sransduction, bacteria take up a plasmid (or phage), which
 isa little bit of self-replicating DNA that is successively integrated into the chro-
 mosome of the host cell — becoming a prophage.
       This transduction process has interesting semiotic consequences, for prophages
 often contain genes that are useful for the bacterium. Pathogenic bacteria are
 notorious for developing resistance toward antibiotics —and this resistance,
 more often than not, is caused by prophages hiding in the bacterial chromo-
 some and possessing genetic instructions that furnish the means for the bacte-
 ria to resist the fatal effects of the antibiotics. Normally, prophages will remain
 stably integrated into the chromosome, but if growth is inhibited (for instance,
 because nutrients are missing), prophages are released into the cytoplasm and
 immediately start using the bacterial machinery to multiply themselves at the
 expense of the bacteria. The multiplication of the plasmids will, like any other
 normal biological process, proceed with a certain margin of error, so that occa-
 sionally a bacterial gene will become incorporated into plasmid DNA.
       Now, considering the astronomical numbers of bacteria in the world (lat-
 est count, 5 x 10°’ — five nonillion—a magnitude that we have encountered
 nowhere else in our discussions so far!), even a low frequency of chance errors
 will imply that, in the long run, not a single bacterial gene will escape ending up
 as part of plasmid DNA. And upon release from their dead host cells, these plas-
 mids will spread via wind and water, and through infections. When this pro-
 cess is seen from a global perspective (for bacteria are practically everywhere
 on Earth) it becomes clear that virtually all bacterial genes ever constructed
 will be present in plasmid-form somewhere on Earth — and probably in many
 locations.
    Seen from the point of view of a starving or otherwise stressed population
 of bacteria, this state of affairs represents a “hope” for being rescued. For even-
 tually the stressed bacterial population might be fortunate enough to become
 infected by a phage that possesses a gene for an enzyme that can be used to
 overcome the stress condition. And while, for any single population, the prob-
 ability of such a “lucky” outcome is, of course, infinitesimal — considering the
 astronomical numbers of bacteria present everywhere, a successful result is vir-
 tually guaranteed to occur somewhere. Thus the global existence of the bacte-
 rial species is rarely, or never, threatened. “Whenever a new type of bacteria
                                                                  ENDOSEMIOTICS                  257


successfully joins a mixed bacterial community,’ writes Sonea (1992, 380), “it
also brings its own genes, including the plasmid and/or prophages it carries.
These newly arrived small replicons will, in time, be freely offered to any other
member of the community.”
     In sum, we may say that prokaryotic life on our planet has managed to make
use of the law of great numbers to establish akind of global prokaryote semi-
osphere
     —a semiotically based coordination of prokaryotic life into one big
                                                                                                        amp
                                                                                                        hy
worldwide
        swarm. And as Sonea-suggests,-because of this holistic integration,
we should not look upon bacteria as individual organisms but rather as short-
lived units in a huge global organism, consisting of the worldwide network of
prokaryotes. The exchange of DNA-coded aa between all these entities may
                                                                         f “Erte
                                                                           (/
                                                                         Lf)
then be seen asa kind of global endosemiotics.”*
  ‘Compared to the extreme openness toward foreign DNA-messages exhib-
ited all over the prokaryote world, eukaryotic organisms appear to be very iso-
lated beings. Too, it should be noted that in spite of the statistical character of
the semiotic interactions in bacteria, these interactions are nevertheless highly
controlled and rely upon the well-regulated occurrence of specific receptors at
the surfaces of cells, as well as the induction in the cells of specific enzymes suit-
able to support this kind of communication. With the appearance of eukaryotic
life forms, these horizontal mechanisms for DNA-communication disappeared,
and DNA-communication became exclusive to the “family” line. Thus, in
eukaryotic cells, DNA-transmission is strictly vertical or temporal, limited to
the events of cell divisions. The one major exception to this, of course, is the
fusion of genomes that takes place during the course of sexual reproduction.
    A deep difference in semiotic logic between prokaryotic and eukaryotic life is
buried here. According to current theory, eukaryotic cells arose through endo-
symbiosis from prokaryotic life forms (see Chapter 5). As we saw present day
mitochondria, chloroplasts, and microtubules (the intracellular organelles con-
cerned with movements) are all, according to Magulis’ suggestion, descendents


22    The richness of the collaborative patterns and communicative mechanisms to be found in
the bacterial world is only now beginning to be realized (see Ben-Jacob et al. 2004). For in order
to get reproducible results, microbiologists have almost always had to study bacteria while they
are in the exponential growth phase, where they are close to optimally supplied with nutrients.
Under natural conditions, however, this artificial laboratory situation is probably not typical at
all — and it has now been shown that under more poor growth conditions, all kinds of interest-
ing cooperative strategies arise between bacteria — patterns that are never observed under expo-
nential growth conditions. This has inspired some researchers to talk about a bacterial linguistic
communication and about its networked social intelligence. These metaphors are hardly satisfy-
ing because they tend, once again, to neglect the code-dual nature of bacterial semiotics, stressing
the digital (linguistic) aspect unduly. But it is, of course, encouraging to see that microbiologists
now are tempted to engage in clear-cut semiotic terminology in order to better grasp the nature
of their subject matter.
258          THE SEMIOTICS OF NATURE



from individual bacterial species that, long before their present relations of
symbiotic cooperation appeared, were adapted to niche conditions that had
prepared them for their later function in the eukaryotic cell (Margulis 1970;
Margulis and Fester 1991).
      Gradually, many of the genes that originally belonged to individual endo-
symbionts were transferred to the shared pool in the cellular nucleus (that in
this process had its genetic material doubled many times — relative to the typi-
cal prokaryotic content of genes). Thus the eukaryotic cell engaged in a new sur-
vival strategy. Rather than depending on the reception of visiting genes through
plasmid infection, eukaryotic cells relied on genetic self-sufficiency. Yet this
strategy had the consequence that eukaryotic organisms became genetically
segregated from one another, and increasingly more reliant upon endosemiotic
resources than on exosemiotic interactions for both their survival and for the con-
tinuation of their line.
      But what eukaryotic life forms lost in capacity for horizontal genetic commu-
nication, they copiously gained through the development of sophisticated kinds
of communication based on a diversity of nondigital biochemical and behay-
ioral signs. For while the evolution of eukaryotic cells implied a strong restric-
tion in the channels suitable for digitized communication, it opened the way to
the development of life forms that possessed far more architectonic multiplicity
and behavioral degrees of freedom than prokaryotic organisms could ever have
obtained. The transition from prokaryatic to eukaryotic life forms thus exem-
plifies a general principle pertaining to emergent processes — i.e., that in emer-
gent processes, freedom ofpossibility will always be constrained at the simpler level
in order to allow an altogether new kind offreedom to appear and unfold at amore
complex level. The emergence of multicellular life and of social life are but two
more examples of this fundamental dynamic principle.
      The idea of the superorganism (such as the plasmodium phase of the slime
mold that we discussed earlier) has a long pre-history in biology, especially as
concerns social insects. Both the ant hill and the bee hive have been suggested
as cases of superorganisms, with the implication that the individual insects were
seen as just subunits — mobile cells in the superorganism. But as we have seen
earlier, the delimitation of the individual is not always as clear-cut as it may
seem in the world of vertebrate animals. Yet I have no wish to choose sides in
this quarrel.”* From a semiotic point of view, one might perhaps suggest the cri-
terion that, ifa system’s semiotic interaction with its environment presupposes a


23. In my book Signs ofMeaning in the Universe (Hoffmeyer1996b), I did suggest a swarm-semi-
otic model of the brain functioning involved in creating a mental life. And this proposal does in
some sense accord ontological reality to swarm-dynamic systems of the kind we find in social
insects.
                                                       ENDOSEMIOTICS             259



finely elaborated internal semiotic activity (aproto-endosemiotics), then the sys-
tem deserves to be counted as an organism.
   Deborah Gordon's laborious and highly rewarding work with ants of the
species Pogonomyrmax barbatus (who live in a harsh zone bordering the des-
erts between Arizona and New Mexico) has revealed a much more sophisti-
cated pattern of semiotic interactions between individual ants than had been
expected — and the survival of colonies of this species are so dependent on this
protoendosemiosic regulation that the nomination of ant colonies to the status
of superorganisms feels reasonable in this case (Gordon 1995; 1999). Gordon
does not, herself, draw this conclusion, however. For (and most remarkably, in
this connection) she found that ant-colony behavior is not absolutely determin-
istic. Rather, a particularly important element in the colony’s growth process is
what Gordon calls job allocation — and she shows that although this task does
indeed rely on a quite schematic interaction pattern between different groups of
ants, an element of unpredictability persists: “An ant does not respond the same
way every time to the same stimulus; nor do colonies. Some events influence
the probabilities that certain ants will perform certain tasks, and this regularity
leads to predictable tendencies rather than perfectly deterministic outcomes”
(Gordon 1999, 139).
  Gordon’s experiments in this area may also be seen as a response to experi-
ments performed by the founder of sociobiology, Edmund O. Wilson, that were
claimed to show a full-blown determinism in the response pattern of ants to
chemical signals (e.g., oleic acid, Wilson 1975). Gordon’s experiments, on the
contrary, showed that “just as the same word can have different meanings in dif-
ferent situations ...so the same chemical cue can elicit different responses in dif-
ferent social situations” (Gordon 1999, 97). Physiological, social, and ecological
processes are simultaneously at work, says Gordon, and none of them are more
basic than the others: “Linking levels of organization are central to any study of
social behavior. For humans and other social animals, an individual’s behavior is
always embedded in a social world” (Gordon 1999, 96).                            Lf
   The semiotic competence of subunits, then— whether these subunits are
human individuals in a society, plants in an ecosystem, cells in a multicellular
organism, or ants in an ant colony— is the medium through which the behav-
ior and integrity of the higher-level entity is maintained. To the extent that such |
a system’s endosemiotic relations perceive and utilize cues and signs that indi-/
cate (are indices for) the state of the holistic unit and its needs, it seems justi-
fied to talk about these processes as genuinely endosemiotic — consequently, the
holistic system itself deserves to be ascribed a status as an autonomous unit: a
superorganism.                                                             |    \
  The evolutionary formation of this kind of autonomous            macro-entity is\
the quintessence of what is called emergence (Figure 7.3). Figure 7.3 claims a
                                                                                  —
    260         THE   SEMIOTICS   OF NATURE




                                     Endasemiotisc processes




    Figure 7.3 The connection between semiotic emergence and downward causation.
    Downward causation operates through indexical sign relations, i.e., the values of sys-
    tem parameters are interpreted by lower-level agents as indexical signs. But this state

a   of affairs in itself depends on the formation of a large-scale pattern with a behavior that
    stabilizes the semiotic interaction between parts. Semiotic emergence and downward
    causation may thus be seen as two sides of the same coin.


    connection between semiotic emergence (whereby macro-entities or stable large-
    scale patterns are established through semiotic interactions among small-scale
    entities) and what has been called downward causation (the influence of large-
    scale patterns upon small-scale interactions) (Bickhard and Campbell 1999;
    El-Hani and Pereira 2000; Emmeche, Koppe, and Stjernfelt. 2000), and it is
    suggested that this connection is taken as constitutive for both phenomena.
       The semiotic relations between subunits that collectively account for the
    stability of the large-scale or holistic system (for instance, the ant hill, the
    multicellular organism, or perhaps the symbiotic system of bobtail squids
    and light-emitting vibrio bacteria) must necessarily be geared to respond to
                                                      ENDOSEMIOTICS           261



changes in the environment in ways that do not threaten the integrity of the
large-scale system. Subunits, for their part, must receive messages telling them
how to uphold the macro-system, and probably the easiest way to do this is
to distribute the needs of the macro-system via indexical signs — as we saw in
the case of N-acyl-homoserin lactone in the“symbiotic sq id-vibrio system.
When night approaches, the squid makes sure that the bacterial density in its
mantel cavity (and thus the homoserin-lactone concentration) is high enough
for the bacteria to respond by allowing for the transcription of /ux-operon
genes — and thus for light emission — to start. Thee point is that the semiotic
emergence whereby this system was gradually established in-thecourse of evo-
lution necessarily also demanded the invention of semiotic means for assur-
ing thestability of the system, and these semiotic means are precisely what wel/
understand by downward causation.
  Downward causation and semiotic emergence are thus two interwoven, but
not identical, aspects of the same process. That this mechanism, based on index-
ical semiosis, is indeed coupled to the circadian rhythms of the squid, was con-
firmed by the finding that the squid has means at its disposal to fine-tune light
emission. It may, for instance, change the wavelength of the emitted light by
help ofayellow filter, or it may weaken the intensity oflight by opening a bag of
ink (Bruni 2002). Presumably, the indexical sign process itself is too slow in its
effects to compensate for momentary variations in background light (as occurs
under cloudy conditions), and evolution therefore had to provide the macro-
system (the squid) with a number of additional “screws” for fine-tuning.
            PART 3
      BIOSEMIOTICS

AND   THE   HUMAN    BEING
                       Fe (eh                     |

    PUT                    OR             S4Oia       y
                                          hae
                                          1 Sr        avis.
>    fw       —            eS        *

eS        4       Vow           1" b:
                       5



                            —        ——
                                Se


                                     a
                                     ne




                   —




                                          iNT
