8
                     From Animal to Human




                                      Facing Reality
From the biosemiotic point of view, semiotics (the study of sign processes) does
not belong primarily, much less exclusively, to the humanities; rather, human
beings should be considered as a species with unusually pronounced semiotic
talents. Such talents may justify the claim that semiotics, in its point of depar-
ture, had to be particularly concerned with human significative and commu-
nicative practices — but it cannot justify the privileging of human being as the
only semiotic animal on Earth. The human talent for semiosis is not miraculous
and cannot be absolutely unique in the world of living organisms, for such tal-
ent must necessarily have arisen through an evolutionary process involving prior
life forms. To speak most accurately, then, the branches of semiotic inquiry
that are concerned with the practices of the human species should therefore be
delimited as anthroposemiotics — the study of the particularly human forms of
sign use, especially as these might differ from other naturally existing sign sys-
tems. This, however, immediately raises the question to be discussed in the pres-
ent chapter: How is such anthroposemiosis evolutionarily connected to a more
general biosemiosis?
   In posing this question this way, however, it can be seen that I have already
turned upside down the hegemonic theoretical dualism that is at the heart of
both the humanities and the natural sciences.’ The somewhat unusual way that
the present book has dealt with the concept of semiosis through the last four
chapters  — where purely biological interactions were the main theme   — may
have irritated some readers, if it has not already chased them away. Little can be


1 Charles Darwin would probably have been open to this question, as may indirectly be con-
cluded from the positions that he argues in The Descent ofMan (Darwin 1981 (1871)). But his
contemporary successors have by and large approached human evolution in a reductive —i.e.,
asemiotic — way. Concerning the humanities, it must be noted that the recourse to ontological
positions, like those of Heidegger or Sartre, that characterize human beings in ahistoric and abso-
lute terms, necessarily will have to be transcended in order for the kinds of questions being posed
here to be addressed at all in any meaningful (i.e. not in a trivial or reductionistic evolutionary
psychology) sense.
266        BIOSEMIOTICS   AND   THE   HUMAN   BEING




done to ameliorate this, for such discussion was indeed necessary, as will be evi-
dent from the arguments to unfold in the present chapter (see p. 281ff ).Human
semiotic competence, as exhibited for instance in language and art, are, as we
shall see, fundamentally anchored in human corporeal nature. Thus, at the root
of these phenomena, we find ordinary organic life processes — and, first and
foremost, movement (Sheets-Johnstone 1990). A suitable way to embark upon
a journey into the theoretical quicksand dealing with the connection between
animals and humans might be to depart from an aphorism put forward by the
American philosopher John Deely when discussing the remarkable fact that
philosophy, in its earliest expressions, was always poetically elaborated in the
form of verse rather than directly written in prose: “Reality was not merely dis-
covered, we might say, it was celebrated,” writes Deely (2001, 5).
   To celebrate something is, in the nature of the case, to stage it— and an
aesthetic staging of reality is certainly one way to protect oneself against the
implicit threat in the idea of an extra-personal reality: the realization that the
personal J must necessarily be decentered, and in some cases, virtually put aside
in order to make space conceptually for a reality that is independent of the J.
   This, however, is a very modern way of stating the matter. What happened
to the people who, in our distant prehistory, gradually wrested the idea of a
self-subsisting reality from its omnipresent embeddedness in their own experi-
enced worlds, may perhaps rather be compared to the awakening from a dream.
Our magic and unquestioned belonging in the world was challenged and made
fragile by the unavoidable separation of speech from what is spoken about. The
idea, made possible by spoken language, that a reality   — “the world” — exists
whether or not you yourself exist, must in the long run, have consumed the
simple-minded confidence of an unproblematic belonging. Animism, myths,
heroic legends, and songs may well have helped to veil or contain the reality
of the human thinker’s divided existence. But by the time of Greek antiquity, a
philosophy appears that has the audacity to express itself in prose rather than in
lyrics, and in so doing, starts meeting reality at eye-level, rather than celebrat-
ing it behind the talisman of a poem. It is generally supposed that Pherecydes
of Syros, in the sixth century BC, was the first philosopher to write in prose
(Deely 2001, 4) and Deely endorses the conception (first suggested in West
1971) that “it cannot be an accident that the three oldest prose books that have
survived — Pherecydes, Anaximander, and Anaximenes — were all expositions
of the origin and nature of the world” (Deely 2001, 4). The following citation
from John Addington Symonds (1893) illustrates this connection: “It was a
great epoch in the history of European culture when men ceased to produce
their thoughts in the fixed cadences of verse, and consigned them to the more
elastic periods of prose. Heraclitus of Ephesus was the first who achieved a nota-
ble success in this new and difficult art. He for his pains received the title ‘the
                                                       FROM    ANIMAL     TO HUMAN                267



obscure’; so strange and novel did the language of science (i.e., knowledge try-
ing to achieve exact expression) seem to minds accustomed hitherto to noth-
ing but meters” (1920 reprint of third edition, 11-12, cited in Deely 2001). It is
(still according to Deely) precisely such linguistic competence that allows (and
perhaps even forces) human beings to transcend the simple Umwelt that each
human individual, just like all other animals, constructs and projects onto its
surroundings. The possession of language brings us into a linguistic Lebenswelt*
where it becomes possible to distinguish between the reality of self-subsisting
things and the more immediately known and equally real objects of our experi-
ence. In short, the term thing, in Deely’s terminology, simply refers to what exists
as such in the world, whether or not anybody knows about it.’ An object, on the
contrary, refers to what “exists as known” (Deely 2001, 6). Objects, according to
this understanding, may well exist as things in the real world at the same time
as they are objects in our cognition (the print on this page may be an example),
but lots of objects are only objects (i.e., not things), since they refer to entities
that exist exclusively in our cognition —as for instance, a letter that you never
wrote, or Denmark’s King Christian the Twenty-Third.*
   Deely’s terminology may at first seem foreign since it implies that, for instance,
the Umwelt of an animal equals the animal’s objective world, in the sense of the
world as it is recognized or modeled exclusively as an object of the animal’s expe-
rience. Objective in Deely’s terminology precisely means “to exist as known”


2    Lebenswelt was Husserl’s term for the sensual world as we unconditionally recognize it, and the
Lebenswelt may thus be seen as constitutive for the world conjured up by science — though this is
rarely recognized among scientists, who for the most part are still following in the dualistic tradi-
tion of Bacon and Descartes. Yet, since the Lebenswelt is a necessary presupposition for all experi-
encing, it may be said to bea transcendental condition that, according to phenomenology, comes
before the world as analyzed by science. Unfortunately, the word transcendental, too, now carries
all kinds of spiritual and supernatural overtones (for scientists) that are in no way implied by my
use of the term as explanatorily presupposed here. Having to always stop and clarify such things
shows how wide the gap between science and the humanities has become              — and much of the
work in biosemiotics right now is devoted to clearing up such incapacitating misunderstandings.
3 What is at stake here is simply that the thing concerned possesses a dimension or an aspect
that is not part of the relation through which the thing is recognized as an object. In other words,
there is no allegation of a Kantian Ding-an-Sich — the idea of some ontologically mysterious an-
Sich reaching beyond our capacity for cognition — an idea that strangely has managed to mystify
Western thinking ever since it was first put forward in 1781 (see CP 5:452).
4   Luse this example with equanimity, since the occurrence of the name Christian in the Danish
list of kings presently ends with Christian the roth, and since modesty prevents me from consid-
ering the possibility that the present book might be in use when, or if, Christian the 23rd even-
tually should attain royal status. In either event, the object of our thoughts right now, Christian
the 23rd, can fully serve as the object of much logical, reasonable, and predictive analysis — with-
out having to exist as an actual thing in the world at this time. Such ontological oddness lies at the
heart of our uniquely human semiotic competence (see Hoffmeyer 1996b, chapter 10).
268           BIOSEMIOTICS      AND    THE   HUMAN     BEING




(ibid.) — and to an animal, unlike to us, that which is known immediately and
that which exists mutually exhaust each other. The subjective, on the other hand,
is a mode of existence that has nothing to do with cognition — though, again,
on first glance this terminology is the inverse of contemporary usage.” My liver
thus is an object as soon as I or my doctor think about it — but it is also a sub-
ject to the extent that its status as a locus of physical interactions with the rest of
reality go on quite independent of my or any other's reflections upon it.
    I find this terminology more suitable than its dualistic normal usage because
it unsentimentally detaches the cognitive situation from the psychological set-
ting peculiar to humans. Here, cognition conjures up an objective world for
us —a world that is cut loose from all sorts of irredeemable historical bonds
to classic ideas of truth, intersubjective control or solipsistic certainty. Seen
from the standpoint of semiotics, objective being is constituted through the
creation of an interpretant (the putting together, by an agent, of things and
objects into signs) while subjective being corresponds to the pre-semiotic sub-
strate (or —to the extent that living beings are concerned— perhaps to the
Innenwelt in Uexkiill’s explanatory schema),° whose relation to the interpre-
tant doesn’t concern it.
      The understanding that things and objects are not identical is, for Deely, the
distinguishing mark separating animals and humans—and he ascribes the
human capacity for making such a distinction as arising from our belonging in
a communal linguistic Lebenswelt. Animals only know of objects, not of things.
The emergence of philosophy in early Greek antiquity exactly consists in the
free (and nonmetric) reflection upon the implications of this basic distinction.
That the distinction between what Deely calls things and objects now becomes
subjected to deep reflection is in itself a gigantic step in human understand-
ing— and yet, nearly another two thousand years had to pass for the further
recognition to dawn upon thinkers that such an understanding is only possible
because of the properties of the sig — and that our universe, just as Peirce said,
is literally saturated with signs.
      This millennial historic move in the history of philosophy is the theme for
Deely’s major work Four Ages of Understanding (2001). Here, as my point of
departure, Iam going to focus on just this great move                    endorsing, as it were,



s Deely (2001), a historian of philosophy, describes in scholarly detail how such a nominalist
inversion of these terms has come to have taken hold.
6 “The interior state, both cognitive and affective, on the basis of which the individual organ-
ism relates to its physical surroundings or environment in constituting its particular objective
world or Umwelt is called an Innenwelt. The Innenwelt is a cognitive map on the basis of which
the organism orients itself in its surroundings. The Innenwelt therefore is ‘subjective’ in just the
way that all physical features of things are subjective: it belongs to and exists within some distinct
entity within the world of physical things” (Deely, 2001, 6).
                                             FROM ANIMAL TO HUMAN               269



the fundamental view that animals, through their Umwelts, are partakers in an
objective (mind-dependent / individual-experience-dependent) world, whereas
they do not, in any significant sense, have entry to the insight that beyond (or
hidden behind) the objective world of the Umwelr, there is another world, a
(self-subsisting / individual-experience-transcendent) subjective world—a
world that precisely “is not our own world, to borrow Thomas N agel’s fine for-
mulation (Nagel 1986, 18).
   But since language possession is usually regarded as the main key for open-
ing the door to the human Lebenswelt, a central task for our theories of human
origins will be to explain the appearance in our human ancestors of linguis-
tic competence as such. How could it possibly have happened that the species-
specific Umwelt characteristic to a group of apes would gradually. through an
evolutionary process of less than a million years, acquire this radically new flex-
ibility, this Lego-brick kind of functional constitution that, in a certain sense,
alienates its possessors from the world — while at the very same time makes the
world manipulable by its possessors in an extremely powerful (but in the end,
perhaps almost unimaginably dangerous) way? These are the issues to which I
now turn.


                      The Puzzle of Discontinuity

Although John Deely clearly places the human dinguistic Lebenswelt in an evo-
lutionary framework by emphasizing its generic relationship with the Umwelts
of animals, the radical nature of the difference that he points to in the semiotic
experience of animals and humans nevertheless stands as a severe conceptual
obstacle blocking any easy understanding of how the one thing could lead to
the other. While biological evolution, according to mainstream theory, implies
minute continuity, the evolution of language exhibits a remarkable discontinu-
ity. No candidates are found among the animals for the role of primitive lan-
guage users — and thus the classical question in biology of how improvements
of language competence might be correlated to environmental factors cannot
therefore be meaningfully posed.
    Indeed, the much debated warning calls observed in vervet monkeys have
often been posited as sorts of primitive Linguistic utterances — and this case is
illustrative of the kind of misunderstandings about the different levels of sign-
processes that mar the whole field of language evolution and animal communi-
cation studies. The vervet monkey hypothesis goes like this: In the 1980s, Robert
Seyfarth and Dorothy Cheney from Pennsylvania University reported their find-
ing that, in the wild, vervet monkeys had three distinct alarm calls that warned
conspecifics against threats from eagles, leopards, and snakes, respectively. The
270        BIOSEMIOTICS   AND   THE   HUMAN   BEING




“eagle call” would make the monkeys jump down from the trees, the “leopard
call” would, on the contrary, make them climb the trees, whereas the “snake
call” would make them raise and look around to identify any eventual threat
in the grass or shrubbery. This, of course, was all very rational seen from a sur-
vival point of view, and Seyfarth and Cheney (1992) made the apparently obvi-
ous suggestion that these warning calls were analogous to names for the implied
predators — just like people shouting Fire!
   The calls of vervet monkeys are different from genuinely /inguistic utterances
in a very crucial sense, however     — for even though each of the calls does, in
fact, refer to concretely occurring threats, the monkey’s way of referring to these
threats is fundamentally different from the way that humans normally use words
to refer (Deacon 1997, $7). It is of course highly interesting to notice that mon-
keys do refer as precisely to the outer world as is here the case, and it certainly
points to an important aspect of their way of life. But if we think upon such ref-
erence-based actions as crying, groaning, smiling, or laughter, it is immediately
obvious that an activity does not become a word just because it refers to some-
thing else. When somebody laughs, for instance, we cannot easily get away from
the feeling that there must be some reason for it, and that the laughter refers to
that reason (and hopefully that this reference is not something that you have
just done to embarrass yourself ). Laughter clearly has a reference, if only some
inner mental state or memory in the laughing person. Yet in situations where
many people are assembled, it may be hard not to laugh when all the others
are laughing— even though you may not know what the reason is for this syn-
chronous outbreak. Laughter is infectious, as we say — and this will have some
implications for the monkey calling behavior, as we shall see.
   Newborn babies at the hospital exhibit a similar infectious behavior when
they start crying and screaming by the mere sound of crying and screaming from
neighboring babies. And exactly this infectious way of a self-initiated activity
spreading like wildfire through a group is characteristic of the alarm call behav-
ior in vervet monkeys where typically all the monkeys in the troop will continue
shouting the very same call for some time, once that call has been initiated. And
such behavior, in fact, is exactly what is implied by the expression “to ape.” Try
to consider, however, how utterly different this situation is from normal talk
among people. Terrence Deacon (1997, 58), in his masterful book on language
evolution, The Symbolic Species, observes, “Not only do we seldom parrot what
we have just heard from another, such a response is generally oddly annoying.
... How odd and unnatural it would feel to enter a room where people were
echoing each other's speech in the same way that they tend to echo each other’s
laughter. This may be why certain ritual practices that employ such patterns of
language use are at the same time both disturbing and powerful, depending on
whether one feels included or excluded.”
                                                      FROM    ANIMAL    TO HUMAN               277




   The point is that you cannot conclude from the mere fact that a vocal behav-
ior is referential that it is referential in the same deep, flexible, and multiply
meaningful way that a human linguistic word is referential. That many biol-
ogists so easily put vocal utterances on an equal footing with linguistic refer-
ence shows how much the de-semiotization of biology leaves us with a lack
of qualified explanatory tools for making critically important distinctions. To
refer to the surroundings is of course a fundamental semiotic capacity— it is
derived from the Latin, referre = to carry back (e.g., signs of the outside world
to the interior of oneself )— and this is a semiotic capacity that all living sys-
tems possess to some extent (Hoffmeyer 2000b; 20012). But the essential point
in Deacon's analysis is precisely that human-style /anguage is based upon a prac-
tice that he calls symbolic reference — while the alarm calls of vervet monkeys (as
well as human crying, smiling, and laughter) are primarily based upon the much
simpler and more limited practices of indexical reference.”
    lam going to discuss Deacon’s theory in quite a bit of detail below. But before
doing so, I want to direct the reader’s attention to what language evolution the-
orists sometimes call the discontinuity puzzle. That puzzle, in short, asks this:
Since —as linguists all but unanimously insist — there are no known primitive
examples among animal species of the kind of communicative practice that lan-
guage offers to human beings, how then could this apparently exceptional tool,
language, have arisen through an evolutionary and nonsupernatural process?
   In answering this question, many linguists and communication                      researchers
have been of the opinion that it was necessary to point to a phenomenon that
biologists would traditionally call hopeful monsters —i.e., the sudden appear-
ance, in a population, of mutants with radically changed phenotypes. That this
(in other contexts much-ridiculed) hypothesis has been widely accepted in this
case is partly due to the supposed absence of alternative possibilities — but the
reason that this is so is that what these alternative possibilities are being called
on to explain is itself a somewhat mysterious theoretical construct: influential
American linguist Noam Chomsky’s theory of a universal grammar (and, by
extension, a hard-wired Language Acquisition Module in the brain) as a com-
mon fundament beneath all human languages. All children must have at their
disposal, argued Chomsky, an innate universal grammar— for there seems to
be no other way to explain how they can possibly learn so fast, so perfectly, and
so invariably the complex, rule-bound grammars of their own native languages
(Chomsky 1972).


7 AsI shall discuss in more detail below, Deacon here uses the term symbolic in a more restric-
tive sense than did Peirce, though the admittedly great influence of Peirce’s architectonic of sign
relations deeply informs Deacon’s nested hierarchy of iconic, indexical, and symbolic reference, as
we shall see.
272          BIOSEMIOTICS   AND   THE   HUMAN   BEING



   A linguistic grammarian by training, Chomsky based his theory on a purely
grammatical analysis of human linguistic competence. He observed that
although human languages exhibit a nearly unbelievable variation in their sur-
face structure, they all ust derive from the same underlying Deep Structure (his
term) from which each of the specific grammars applying to the individual lan-
guages may be inferred through deductive reasoning. Each individual child, in
facing the real-time task of learning how to speak, however, finds itself in the
opposite position of the analytical linguist. There, she or he encounters only
the surface structure of the local language — and encounters them in the form of
huge quantities of only grammatically valid utterances (with no counter invalid
utterances to compare and use to thereby tease out the patterns of valid versus
invalid grammar) — yet from this poverty ofstimulus (again, Chomsky’s term),
the child must from these examples alone deductively infer the deeper logic that
alone will make the local grammatical rules understandable.
   Chomsky claims that as a deliberately undertaken cognitive reasoning task,
this simply is not possible, practically speaking. The amount of data that the
child receives in the form of sentences, is not only too small but in many cases
these sentences are not themselves absolutely correctly performed (due to “per-
formance errors’ on the part of the speaker), and in addition, the child will often
not get sufficient feedback to its own erroneous utterances. Since language thus,
in practice, is not learnable in the traditional sense that math and reading are,
and since all children nevertheless do learn successfully to use it during the first
two to three years of their lives, the conclusion seems quite compelling— that
linguistic competence must be assured by an innate ability, a language-acquisi-
tion device inherent in the neural architecture of the child’s brain.
      Again, as a linguist (and very busy political activist) Chomsky did not him-
self deal with the question of how biological evolution would have managed to
bring forth the neural substrate for this ability in so short an amount of evolu-
tionary time, nor could Chomsky, who claimed no neuroscience knowledge,
specify exactly in what this innate language module should consist. But in the
absence of any theory (or even neurobiological evidence) concerning the nature
of the proposed neural equipment involved, it is not possible even to begin to
look for the evolutionary origin of this supposedly innate device, and the hope-
ful-monster hypothesis is essentially the only remaining way to lend Chomsky’s
 intuition some biological credibility.
      The last few decades have seen a mounting revolt against Chomsky’s theory
among certain circles of linguists, who object that the learning of language is
not an abstract mental activity (whether innate or deliberate), but always an
interaction between situated, meaning-making participants that takes place ina
context of mutually semiotic action. The child does not just learn what words to
say, but also — and simultaneously — how, to whom, in what ways, why, and in
                                             FROM   ANIMAL   TO HUMAN           273



which situations she should use them. It has also been pointed out that a range
of communicative functions (e.g., to label, to request, to mislead) must be pres-
ent in the psychological system of the child already before the child learns to
master a formal language in which to express them (Bruner 1990). Learning to
speak proceeds much faster when the child has already pre-linguistically con-
ceived the significance of what is talked about, and in which situations the talk
takes place. Not only the dictionary (or semantic) aspect of language use, but
also its grammar (syntactic appropriateness) is always acquired in a genuinely
meaningful, mutually semiotic context. Jerome Bruner (1990, 72) points out,
“Not surprisingly, then, I think the case for how we ‘enter language’ must rest
upon a selective set of prelinguistic ‘readiness for meaning? That is to say, there
are certain classes of meaning to which human beings are innately tuned and
for which they actively search. Prior to language, these exist in primitive form
as proto-linguistic representations of the world whose full realization depends
upon the cultural tool of language” (italics added).
  According to these critics, Chomsky’s theory depends on a set of conclusions
that only appear reasonable because he has already separated language as a cog-
nitive tool (to be learned, privately, through a kind of inductive analysis) from
language as a source for the constitution of communal meaning. If, instead, one
sees the child’s learning of a language as embedded in a corporeal and social
developmental process, supported — again both corporeally and socially — by
the social environment, then one’s perception of the challenge of learning to use
language becomes essentially different. Rather than being a question of a pre-
formation-based “tuning” of the young brain to specific formal parameters in
order to master language use (and grammar in particular), the question instead
becomes one of accounting for how linguistically mediated sign-processing can
emerge — ontogenetically and phylogenetically
                                         — from the ability for corpo-
real sign processing that is at the heart of all mediation of meaning.
   It may be necessary here to warn the reader against a possible misunderstand-
ing of what I am claiming here. One should not from these last reflections infer
that body language is in any way a precursor of speech, for as Gregory Bateson
persuasively pointed out many years ago, evolution never develops new tools
for mastering functions that are already well taken care of by other tools. More
likely, the spoken word is a completely new invention which has been spread
on top of the semiotic relations of body language like a layer of whipped cream.
Human beings are every bit as capable as animals when it comes to communi-
cating messages effectively with their bodies; just think of dance or mime — not
to mention telegenic politicians. So body language is obviously not a commu-
nicatory appendix on the brink of extinction. But such extravagance — equip-
ping an animal with two dedicated means of performing the exact same
function
      — is, from a biological point of view, unheard of. The only sensible
274          BIOSEMIOTICS    AND   THE   HUMAN   BEING




conclusion, Bateson maintains, must be that the spoken word communicates
something quite different from what body language can communicate (Bateson
1968; Sebeok 1987; Hoffmeyer 1996b).
      Worded, vocal communication must have yielded an advantage upon our
remote ancestors that body language could not possibly have mimed, and I
tend to concur with Terrence Deacon’s suggestion that this advantage has to
do with the unique capacity of language to carry symbolic reference. This does
not, however, contradict the idea that language in its remote origins may have
been modeled upon the expressive register of the body, as will be discussed later
in the light of Maxine Sheets-Johnstone’s theory of language origins. It does
mean, however, that the increase of semiotic freedom that language use bestows
on human animals could never have been achieved by the more indexical and
iconic capacities of body language alone — as I will now argue in more detail.
   It should be understood at the outset that it is one task to attempt to explain
the origin (or starting point) of language as the detachment of human speech
from its basis in corporeal expression; and quite another task to explain the con-
tinued modulation in the course of human evolution of this more and more cog-
nitively specialized tool for expression and reflection. The discontinuity in the
communicative ways of primates and humans is a hard challenge to any theory
of language origins, given the relatively short amount of evolutionary time dur-
ing which modern humans have diverged from our closest primate relatives.
    In order to meet this challenge, I believe that it is necessary to divide the
discontinuity into two separate developmental dynamics. One of these con-
cerns the relation between discrete expressive sounds and their meanings, while
the other concerns the relation between entire systems of expressive sounds and
meaning. It is primarily the last of these two dynamics that accounts for the
radical discontinuity that we encounter when comparing human language and
primate (or other animal) communication in general. But this dynamic itself
would never have been possible had it not been for the prior freeing of sounds
from their utilitarian enslavement in the service of corporeal functionality. And
yet, as we shall see, even the fully developed linguistic universe of expressive
sounds remains internally connected to those pre-linguistic expressive forms.
      To understand how this is so, we must first review Terrence Deacon’s the-
ory of the evolution of language in the primate world as the emergence of a rad-
ically new form of reference wherein individual sound signs or words are always
webbed into a complex system of other words or sound signs. Deacon’s term for
this very unique form of reference — rarely, if ever, seen in the rest of the ani-
mal world — is symbolic reference.* Next we shall pursue the origin of this pecu-


8 As acomment on the title of Deacon’s book, The Symbolic Species, it might be noted that
already the German philosopher Ernst Cassirer characterized the human being as the symbolic
                                                        FROM    ANIMAL     TO HUMAN               275



liar system of meaning-carrying sound-signs backwards in evolution to its roots
in a diversity of corporeal forms of expressions and impressions, as suggested by
Maxine Sheets-Johnstone.


                  The Awakening of the Cerebral Cortex
Deacon’ theory is based upon an original double take, whereby a neurobiolog-
ically substantiated rejection (or rather transcendence) of the hypothesis of the
cerebral localizability of a “language instinct” (e.g., Chomsky, Pinker) is com-
bined with a Peircean understanding of the nested categorical hierarchy of ref
erence relations into (ascendingly) iconic, indexical, and symbolic relations.’
While such localizability may often be observed in connection with indexi-
cal relations (e.g., Pavlov’s dog), Deacon shows that a rigid anatomical bind-
ing would in principle act as a preventative for the establishment of an ability to
perform symbolic reference.
   Deacon goes to great lengths to show that the human propensity for sym-
bolic reference is not (as is too often supposed) a simple consequence of a
general mental agility ascribable to the characteristic “brain size to body size
ratio” of our species. Instead the neural substrate responsible for this pro-
pensity is intimately connected to the fact that the cerebral cortex in human
beings leaves a surplus of synaptic places free (i.e., nondedicated and under-
determined) to be invested in the accomplishment of novel coordinative and
associative tasks —as opposed to being neurobiologically reserved for the
unimaginative control of the senso-motoric apparatus, as is the case with the
vast majority of our animal ancestors (including, to a lesser but still consider-
able extent, the apes).


animal (animal symbolicum) contrary to the —at that time     — more general expression of the
rational animal (animal rationale), which was explicitly emphasized by Charles Morris (see
Petrilli 1999). The idea of symbolism as a key to human mental life was apparently quite wide-
spread in the early twentieth century. Susanne Langer (1942, 21) in Philosophy in a New Key,
points out, “Quotations could be multiplied almost indefinitely, from an imposing list of sources,
from John Dewey and Bertrand Russell, from Brunschwicg and Piaget and Head, from Kéhler,
Koffka, Carnap, Delacroix, Ribot, Cassirer, Whitehead —from philosophers, psychologists,
neurologists, and anthropologists — to substantiate the claim that symbolism is the recognized
key to that mental life which is characteristically human and above the level of sheer animality.
Symbol and meaning make man’s world, far more than sensation.” Deacon’s book, however, put
this insight to use in an elegant evolutionary theory on the origins of human language.
9 Ascendingly here denotes logical necessity, not value or importance. Specifically, it notes that
in order to establish a symbolic relation, preexisting :ndexical relations must first be in place, and
in order to establish an indexical relation, preexisting iconic relations must first be in place. This
is the essence of what Deacon calls Peirce’s nested hierarchy of sign relations, as will be discussed
in more detail presently.
276          BIOSEMIOTICS      AND   THE   HUMAN    BEING



   Classical neuroanatomic theory assumed that the development of each brain
structure behaved as an independent unit and that different parts of the brain
therefore could be influenced by evolution independently of the others. But this
has proven not to be the case. Like so much of the rest of our animal bodies, the
growth of the brain proceeds, as we have already discussed, very much via an
overproduction of cells — followed by the elimination of nonfunctional cells.
It is, as Deacon writes, simpler to construct a door by first building the wall and
then removing that part of it where the door should be placed. From a human-
engineering point of view, such a strategy may seem to involve a needless waste
of material — but from the natural engineering, or evolutionary, standpoint, it
is a highly efficient way of utilizing information: “It circumvents the difficul-
ties of planning ahead and allows development to proceed with a minimum of
design or regulatory mechanisms” (Deacon 1997, 196)."°
   Expressed in the terminology of the present book, we might say that the
final development of the brain is guided by an epigenetic semiosis—and that
the traditional idea of a preformationistic causal control from the genetic foun-
dation therefore has to be left behind. For it is striking in this connection that
although the human brain possesses perhaps a thousand times more neurons
than there are neurons available in the brains of minor vertebrates — and many
millions more synaptic connections, indeed it has been calculated that one
cubic millimeter of grey matter houses a total of four kilometers of axons (Nunn
2007) — this neural surplus can not be retrieved as any systematic increase in
the size of the human genome. No gene literally codes for the structure we call
the human brain.
   For while it’s true that genetic changes lie at the basis of the human brain’s
deviation from the general primate brain plan, these changes do not concern
the precise elaboration of specific brain structures but, rather, merely underlie
changes in the most overall and basic architectural patterns of the brain. A com-
parison of human embryonic brain development to the corresponding devel-
opment in primates shows that the relative increase in brain size in humans is
derived from certain dorsal regions of the neural tube (the extended tube-like
structure that runs down along the back from head to tail in the undifferentiated
embryonic body), that cover a mainly continuous layer from the future cerebel-
lum to the future telencephalon (cerebrum). The increased amount of cellular
divisions in these regions, due to their increased general growth, is caused by an
enhanced activity of just two homeotic genes, Otx and Emx.
   These homeotic genes were originally observed in fruit flies (Drosophila mel-
anogaster), via mutants that exhibited remarkably altered phenotypes in their


10 Note the remarkable parallel here to the results obtained in the field of situated robotics as
discussed in Chapter 7.
                                                   FROM ANIMAL TO HUMAN                    277,




     Empty        Ortho-
     ‘splrace — dentical




Figure 8.1 Three families of homeotic genes in Drosophila (HOM, Orthodenticle, and
empty space spiracle families) and the corresponding families in mice (Hox, Otx and
Emx). These gene families are also found in the human genome. Each small dark rect-
angle corresponds to a particular homeotic gene on a DNA thread. Vertical arrows indi-
cate probable homologies. Note the isomorphy between the linear arrangement of
genes and the sequence of body segments whose growth rates these genes regulate
(from Deacon 1997, 178 with permission).


body structures. It was discovered that some of these mutant flies carried dam-
aged genes possessing a distinct DNA-sequence of approximately 180 base pairs,
and this sequence was given the name of a homeobox.’ Using the homeobox
as a molecular probe, it was found that a whole series of these homeotic genes
(called Hox genes, for short) were actually present in the normal, and not just
the mutant, population of fruit flies — and, what is perhaps even more remark-
able, that the very same genes (or slightly modified versions of them) were also
present in a range of other organisms, including humans. Subsequent research


11 In essence, homeotic genes specify transcription factors (see Chapter 5) and the 180 base
sequences of the homeobox corresponds to a distinct sequence of 60 amino acids involved in the
specific binding of transcription factors to the DNA molecule.
278         BIOSEMIOTICS     AND   THE HUMAN      BEING




has shown that the task of the Hox genes invariably shows itself to be the con-
trol of the growth of distinct body segments (Figure 8.1). Alterations of basic
body structure between species are therefore largely caused by changes in the rel-
ative activity of the homeotic genes — and this applies to changes in brain archi-
tecture as well.
   Explanations of the incredible abilities of the human brain relative to the
brains of other species must therefore proceed from an examination of the
increased activity of cell divisions in the embryonic regions that are destined
to become the human cerebellum and prefrontal cortex. But in order to under-
stand the later dramatic mental effects that these changes will eventually allow,
claims Deacon, one must first also consider the phenomenon that he has called
neuronal displacement. Behind this phenomenon we find a mechanism we have
earlier discussed —i.e., that of synaptic competition, which is the competition
among growing axons to fivd vacant places for the formation of new synapses.”
Neurons that succeed in forming functional synapses will survive, while neu-
rons that do not are eliminated.
   Yet the term fivd in this connection may need closer examination. An impor-
tant difference between nerve tissue and other tissues in the body is that nerve
cells are specialized for long-distance communication. Whereas, for instance,
the formation of the anatomy of the hand is mostly ruled by local cell-to-cell
communicational processes, the construction of the brain and the nervous
system is to a large extent influenced by signals arriving from far away loca-
tions — and especially from other parts of the embryonic (and to some extent,
neonatal) brain. In Chapter 5, we saw how embryonic nerve cells develop path-
ways in an exploratory fashion by extending their axons from an area in the tip,
called a growth cone, that literally feels its way forward along the cell surfaces it
passes by. Small protrusions from the growth cone called filopodia extend them-
selves or contract depending on the kind of signals they receive from the sur-
faces of other cells or from the extracellular matrix (see Figure 5.14).
   The same basic mechanisms are also involved in the cerebral guiding of axons
to suitable destinations in the brain. Differences in the surface chemistry of the
cells they pass by, molecules that attract or reject, and differences in the mechan-
ical properties of different tissues all influence this canalizing growth dynamic.
Most importantly, specific growth factors, secreted from destinations in need of
establishing neural connections, attract the exploratory behavior of the growth
cones of neurons.
   The fact that even the remotest cells in the brain may exert a genuinely causal
influence upon the behavior of another cell far away implies that a nonlocal

12 See the discussion in Chapter 5 on the development of functional blindness in cats that is
observed in kittens that are blinded in one eye from birth.
                                                   FROM   ANIMAL    TO HUMAN                 279




developmental logic is overriding, interfering with, or at least re-shaping the local
differentiation process. And due to this complex interaction between local and
global influences, brain tissues come to exhibit a more fine-grained variation
than tissues of other organ systems. It is for this reason, too, that they contain
considerably more potential functional differentiation than can be seen else-
where in the human body. The brain essentially builds itself, so to say, online.
And in fact, this genetic indeterminacy is exactly the unique strength of human
brain development:

  Cells in different areas of the brain are not their own masters, and have not been
  given their connection orders beforehand. They have some crude directional infor-
  mation about the general class of structures that make appropriate targets, but
  apparently little information about exactly where they should end up in a tar-
   get structure or group of target structures. In a very literal sense, then, each devel-
   oping brain region adapts to the body it finds itself in. There is a sort of ecology of
   interactions determined by the other brain regions to which it is linked that selects
   for appropriate brain organization. This process provides the answer to the prob-
   lem of correlated adaptations in different parts of such a complex system as brain
   and body. There need be no “preestablished harmony” ofbrain mutations to match
   body mutations, because the developing brain can develop a corresponding organi-
   zation “on line,’ during development (Deacon 1997, 205; italics added).

   Synaptic competition means that the share of neuronal connections to the
brain that a given embryonic gland or organ will obtain, must, for geometric
reasons alone, depend upon the size of the gland or organ — and this applies
to peripheral tissues, as well as to the brain’s own tissues. Deacon (1997, 207)
describes the process:
   Among competing structures, the structure that sends the greatest number of axons
   to a particular target will tend to drive the activity patterns of cells in that target
   more effectively, and this will give connections that are from a larger source popu-
   lation a “voting” advantage in determining which connections will remain. This has
   very important implications for understanding the patterns and processes ofbrain
   evolution, because it means that modifications of the relative proportions of periph-
   eral and central nervous system structures can significantly alter connection pat-
   terns. So, although genetic tinkering may not go on in any significant degree at the
   connection-by-connection level, genetic biasing at the level of whole populations of
   cells can result in reliable shifts in connection patterns.

   Anthropomorphizing a bit (but perhaps far less than at first sight may seem
to be the case), we could say that the efforts of individual tissues to get a neu-
ronal foothold in suitable brain centers acts as a kind of recruiting activity — in
the sense that relative increases in the neuronal populations of such tissues will
tend to result in a yet more efficient recruiting of both afferent and efferent con-
nections. This effect is exactly what Deacon implies is the result of the process
280           BIOSEMIOTICS   AND   THE   HUMAN   BEING




of displacement. However, that such relatively simple mechanisms have resulted
in the dramatic effects that we find in human cerebral development is due also
to another surprising circumstance that we must briefly discuss — and this is the
all too small body ofthe human being.
   The point here is that in a certain sense human beings do not so much have
an extraordinarily big brain. Rather, it is the corresponding growth rate of the
body that has been disproportionately reduced. This means that an adult human
would have a weight of about five hundred kilograms if he or she were like other
primates in the brain size to body mass ratio. The consequences of this are nota-
ble, for it means that a whole range of tissues have been too weakly represented
in the synaptic competition and have not been able to recruit enough-connec-
tions to their respective brain centers. Those parts of the brain that would nor-
mally operate these body parts have therefore diminished their shares of the
joint pool of synaptic places in the brain.
   And yet this does not necessarily imply any loss of efficiency of the cerebral
control of peripheral tissues, muscles, or sense organs. If, for instance, the retina
had had a surface proportional to that heavier overall body weight, this would
have required that the visual cortex, in order to keep its control function intact,
should indeed have conserved a bigger share of synapses. But as it is, the rela-
tively diminished visual cortex has ample supplies of synaptic targets for the
diminished retina.
   Having a relatively oversized brain does, however, have yet another very deci-
sive consequence. For the displacement effect implies that nerve endings from
the prefrontal cortex — which are increased by 300 percent in human beings
as compared to our closest primate relatives — by the sheer force of number,
will have a competitive advantage that assures them access to virtually every-
where else in the brain. The result is that a network ofcausal and communicative
relations is established via the prefrontal cortex that reaches out to all areas of
the brain and body. And, as we shall see, this network is of crucial importance
for the specific human talent for constructing symbolic reference—and there-
fore, following Deacon, for the linguistic ability and its accompanying cogni-
tive power.


                  From Iconic to Indexical Reference
Language “seems to be as counterintuitive for us to understand as it is sim-
ple for us to use,” writes Deacon (1997, 51). And, indeed, for centuries phi-
losophers, psychologists, and linguists have quarreled about the nature of
language — joined, in modern times, by the company of new kinds of “experts”
such as biologists trying to get apes to talk, and computer scientists who — not
                                                     FROM    ANIMAL    TO HUMAN               281



surprisingly— suggested the possibility of intelligent machines that will “con-
verse” with us. And yet, a general weakness common to all of these efforts to
grasp the nature of language has been, and still is, the failure to appreciate that
human language is (in the words of Deacon) an anomaly. For how else should
we characterize the finding that there exists no counterpart to genuine linguistic
reference in the rest of the biological world?
   One main reason for this lack of reflection over —or curiosity about the
uniqueness of the practice of language use in the natural world may be that it
is not acknowledged as such by anyone who takes evolution or biology seri-
ously.” Ambiguous definitions of the differences between words, sentences, and
language on the one hand, and reference, meaning, and understanding on the
other, has allowed too much room for metaphoric and misleading reasoning.
Among animals, there often occur modes of expression that lend themselves
to be conceived by humans as “defective counterparts” or “proto-versions” of
words. When, for instance, a dog obeys one’s dinguistic command for fetching or
sitting, does that not show that the dog understands the words fetch or sit just
as the person uttering those commands does? Indeed, and as we saw in the case
of vervet monkeys, it has felt natural to many scientists to describe such sound-
action association pairing as language — albeit, one without, say, the fancy syn-
tactic combinations that characterize human grammar. In other words, if we
could just add grammar to this sound-action association, we would have lan-
guage in these animals!
  The deep, unquestioned anthropocentric bias of “language science” in general
(and of Saussure-inspired semiotics in particular) is probably nowhere better
disclosed than through this widespread, tacit (if not overt) confusion of sign-
hood with word-hood. And this leads to a critically important misunderstand-
ing that prevents progress in grasping what is the essential characteristic of the
object of study (i.e., language). At the heart of this misunderstanding, accord-
ing to Deacon (1997, 52-53), is the fact that the majority of language research-
ers do not know how to discuss communicative practices other than in terms of
human language:
   We look for the analogues of words and phrases in animal calls, we inquire about
   whether gestures have meanings, we consider the presence of combinations and
   sequencing of calls and gestures as indicating primitive syntax. On the surface this
   might seem to be just an extension of the comparative method: looking for the evo-
   lutionary antecedents of these linguistic features. But there is a serious problem with
   using language as the model for analyzing other species communication in hindsight. It


143 This leaves only those hardcore dualists in the humanities who believe that calling something
part ofculture means that one now need not inquire into the ways in which that thing is also part
of nature. I don’t spend much time in this book addressing such a retrograde Cartesianism.
282            BIOSEMIOTICS     AND   THE   HUMAN   BEING




      leads us to treat every other form ofcommunication as exceptions to a rule based on the
      one most exceptional and divergent case. No analytic method could be more perverse.
      Social communication has been around for as long as animals have interacted and
      reproduced sexually. Vocal communication has been around at least as long as frogs
      have croaked out their mating calls in the night air. Linguistic communication was
      an afterthought, so to speak, a very recent and very idiosyncratic deviation from an
      ancient and well-established mode of communication. It cannot possibly provide an
      appropriate model against which to asses other forms ofcommunication (italics added).

And Deacon does not shrink from comparing this revisionist fixation with
human language in the study of animal communication to a fictive situation
whereby birds would be classified by biologists according to how closely their
wings would resemble penguins’ wings — the penguin wing being taken as the
exemplar case of what constitutes a wing. But language, Deacon argues, is more
like penguins’ wings than, say, sparrows’ wings —i.e., it is a species-specific
exception to a more general evolutionary rule, and one that should be studied
as such, accordingly, if we are to properly understand either penguin wings or
wings in general.
      This fixation with the anomaly that is human communication leads us to ana-
lyze animal communication as a kind of deformed or ceficient language— as
“some version of language minus something” (ibid.). The absurdity of this proce-
dure may be seen most clearly, perhaps, if we apply it to ourselves — for as a con-
sequence we would have to call our own smiles, grimaces, sobs, kisses, and hugs
“words without grammar.” And yet, the polemic character of Deacon's reasoning
in this case appears justified when considering that this narrow-minded language
paradigm is exactly the implicit fundament for currently prevailing theories on
the evolution of language (Bickerton 1990; Seyfarth and Cheney 1992).
    Contrary to these traditions, Deacon has attempted to dig beneath the super-
ficial structure of word reference as a kind of sound-to-action or sound-to-men-
tal-image association pairing in an attempt to find a general fundament for
explaining the way that the human use of words may be derived both analyti-
cally and evolutionarily as a special case of a the more general ability of animals
to “know” the world through signs and reference. And this is where the Peircean
understanding of sign relations comes to be of help. For the key to the difference
that Deacon searches for is found in the Peircean concept of the interpretant,
which, in the present case, is identical to the cognitive process taking place in
the head of the organism that interprets the sound expression. This entails that
the dog’s interpretation and the human’s interpretation of the vocal phenome-
non “sit” are not the same, as we shall see.
   It is exactly here that Peirce’s well-known sign trichotomy reflecting the three
fundamentally different ways that signs may refer to their object —ice., the
major categorical trichotomy of icon, index, and symbol — shows itself to be the
                                                      FROM ANIMAL TO HUMAN                      283



key that unlocks the understanding as to what joins human language to the evo-
lutionary lineage of other animal communication systems, and what makes it
unique. For only humans are able, in natural settings, to communicate using
the high-order tools of symbolic reference, says Deacon. True, in a few radically
atypical and unnaturally human-created learning situations, some few labora-
tory-raised chimpanzees may eventually become trained (by humans) in some
limited use of symbolic communication — but in their natural state and habi-
tat, these creatures are, as Deacon expresses it, basically pre-maladapted to this
kind of communication.
   Experience tells me, however, that I had better be careful in the way I choose
to specify this ability that apes are invariantly lacking, and that every human
child possesses. That chimpanzees are pre-maladapted for symbolic reference
means no more (and no less) than that they, in their natural state, are not very
apt to master this particular kind of reference — just as humans, in their natu-
ral state, are not very good at sleeping in an erect position, or in distinguish-
ing foe from friend by smell alone. Thus, the expression pre-maladapted implies
that the difference between humans and apes is not necessarily based on some
sort of general intelligence (much less a specific “gene for” explanation) — but
rather on a much more specific ta/en¢ that humans have developed and chim-
panzees haven't.
   The trichotomy — of likeness (com), physical closeness or correlation (index),
and conventional law (symbol) — has roots long back in the history of thinking,
but it was Peirce’s genius to see that this trichotomy corresponds to a logical tri-
chotomy of communicational processes.'* The icon represents the most basic
and immediate type of reference (in effect, brute sensation); the indices (phys-
ical associations) and symbols (higher-order relations between associations)
appear through the formation of more logically complex interpretants — with
each stage in the process furnishing the necessary relata of the next.
   Deacon now takes this trichotomy a step further by converting Peirce’s logi-
cal partitioning of these levels of sign processing into an evolutionary (and tem-
poral) partitioning, where the capacity for iconic reference is seen as the basis for
the development of a capacity for indexical reference — and this again becomes
the basis for the later development in human beings of the ability to think and
communicate via symbolic reference.
   Many semioticians will perhaps think that Deacon, in suggesting this evolu-
tionary temporalization of one particular set of Peircean sign types, is treating


14 The trichotomy of icon, index, and symbol divides signs according to the way they relate to
their objects. In addition to this trichotomy, Peirce also designated a trichotomy of signs reflect-
ing the nature of the quality of the sign in itself and a trichotomy of signs based on the nature of
their relations to their interpretants.
284            BIOSEMIOTICS     AND   THE   HUMAN    BEING



Peircean semiotics a bit too heavy-handedly, and we shall shortly consider some
criticism of Deacon’s way of using the term symbol. There is, however, no doubt
that Deacon’s transfer of these concepts to an evolutionary frame of reference
opens up some very interesting and promising agendas for a biological under-
standing of human origins. Rather than using such criticism in sterile rejection of
Deacon’s ideas, we should use them to tighten up and refine the terminology.
    For those not yet conversant with these ideas, the icon is in one sense the eas-
iest — and in another the most difficult — of the three sign types to add to one’s
conceptual toolbox, for likeness per se, of course, is no unambiguous property.
When attempting to find one’s way about in an unaccustomed milieu (such as,
for example, when attempting to use subway lines in a foreign country), one
quickly discovers that those icons that would guide one’s steps immediately in
the correct direction ( if only one could understand them or pick them out in
the first place) are far from obvious to the eyes of a foreigner — though they are
almost transparently obvious to the eyes of the customary user. The problem
goes much deeper than this, however, for as soon as one does learn to see and
understand the meaning of such subway icons as colors, numbers, arrows, and
unfamiliar graphical representations, that sign has already more or less ceased
being merely an icon, and has instead become an index, that points to some
meaningful information — the right direction.”
   Deacon gives a telling example in discussing the iconic character of wing cam-
ouflage in certain species of moths that hide on tree trunks. The whole idea of
camouflage, of course, is to avoid being discovered— or, in this case, to fool a
bird into thinking that you are just another piece of bark. And if the bird, while
passing by, does vor register anything worthwhile eating while the bark-colored
moth is blending in with the real bark of the tree, then the color pattern of the
wing is in a way not a sign at all, for in this case no second nonbark icon— or
differentiating interpretant— is formed in the brain of the bird. It just perceives
“bark, bark, bark” and not “bark, moth, bark.” In Deacon’s words, the inter-
pretive process involved in iconicity is “something that we don’t do. It is, so to
speak, the act of mot making a distinction” (Deacon 1997, 74).
   This way of formulating the matter may seem a bit extreme, but the example
does show that iconic reference does not reside in the primary sign itself (the
color pattern of the moth’s wings) but in the relation between moth wing and its
perception (or lack thereof) by the bird. Its iconicity (likeness relation) derives
from the absence of a differentiation in the recognition process — or, positively
formulated, in a mis-recognition. The color pattern of the moth’s wings refers


15    It may even cease becoming either an icon or an index, but instead become a symbol, if the
knowledge of the significance of the icon is based on a convention rather than on a physical
association.
                                                       FROM ANIMAL TO HUMAN                      285



iconically to the bark (for the bird) precisely by its not being discovered as non-
bark! Such a failure or (near failure) in distinguishing a difference constitutes
the ground under every icon, even though we are rarely conscious of it." When,
for instance, a small gentleman is depicted on the faceplate of an out-of-the-
way door, it is reasonable to assume that behind this door, there will be a men’s
room. The figure in this case is an icon of a man — but at the basis of this ico-
nicity lies an element of indistinguishability that is nicely expressed by the term
re-cognition.
   Another way of expressing this analytically troublesome connection is to say
that the icon, like so many other analytical concepts, is a border case. Many signs
are actually degenerated, which means that although a sign, according to Peirce,
always consists in a triadic relation, the interpretant may often play a very lim-
ited role in the relation (as is the case with indices) — and that when also the
object relation of the sign is close to disappearing, we get an icon. The icon thus
is essentially a kind of Firstness —a pure quality — and, if it is an icon at all, it
is because the degeneration is not total, so that an element of Secondness and
Thirdness persist to make it a sign.’’ That a sign is iconic, then, just means that
quality as such is prevailing in the sign process, while Secondness (association)
and Thirdness (convention) only play minimal roles.
     In short, the process by which something gets recognized as something differ-
ent is the root form of all semiosis. We saw in the preceding chapter, that many
ATP-degrading enzymes in bacteria are not capable of distinguishing between
cAMP and ATP and will therefore eventually bind to cAMP instead of ATP.
The effect of this is that all the usual ATP-based energy supplies are blocked by
the false substrate — with the result that the energy metabolism of the bacteria
is effectively stopped. Seen as a molecule, cAMP in this case functions as an icon
for the ATP molecule, and this iconic relation successively implies that the con-
centration of cAMP in the cell becomes an index for a deficient energy metabo-
lism. The evolutionary process then finally utilized this relation for the further
development of cAMP as a cellular symbol (as suggested by Tomkins 1975; see
Chapter 7).
   Seen in this framework, the invention of symbolic reference was a theme in
evolution a long time before humans appeared. The potential of symbolic (con-
ventional, law-bound) reference has, in fact, been used by life processes ever
since the replicative sign systems of RNA and DNA first appeared. For if —to
stay with the metaphorics suggested in Chapter 5 —a gene plays the same role

16    Floyd Merrell (1992, 271) uses the example ofasmoke ring in a room filled with smoke, and
observes that this ring “serves as a primitive paradigm (or com) for all systems containing the rudi-
ments ofself-reference which has set them on the recursive path to selfhood.”
17 Peirce suggested the term Aypoicon as a designation for icons understood as real signs (CP
2:276).
286          BIOSEMIOTICS   AND   THE   HUMAN   BEING




in the life of the cell (or the organism) that a menu choice plays in a computer-
based inventory-control system, then the semiotic process in which the gene
(or menu choice) takes part is obviously not conditioned by /ikeness (icon) or
by any immediate physical causality (index), but rather by a conventional, evolu-
tionarily emergent connection between the specific sequence of the gene and the
cellular (or organismic) situation that releases its expression (interpretation).
   In this case, we are talking about endosemiotic symbolic reference, whereas the
theme analyzed by Deacon (and in much of this present chapter) is the exosemiotic
processing ofsymbols —i.e., the use of symbolic reference by communicating indi-
viduals, And to create sucha system is of course an evolutionary challenge of a quite
different kind (although not necessarily more overwhelming). Too, although one
may, as we shall shortly see, quarrel with the claim that human linguistic compe-
tence is unique in the world when considered as a system for the exosemiotic use
of symbolic reference, Deacon is right, in my view, in claiming that normal com-
munication among animals is based upon iconic and indexical reference, and that
the development of human linguistic communication therefore constitutes a log-
ical jump to the more abstract cognitive world of the symbol.
      One important point (among many) in Deacon’s analysis is that the trans-
formation from indexical to symbolic reference contains elements that are very
much like the steps taking one from iconic to indexical reference. And since the
latter of these transformations is the simpler of the two it is a good idea to start
the analysis there.
   An indexical relation presupposes a prior establishment of a multiplicity of
iconic relations — and to show how this works, Deacon uses the relation between
smoke and fire as an example. That animals are frightened by smoke is probably
in most cases due to a genetically determined sensibility. But in human beings,
this reaction is strongly based on — or at least heavily reinforced by — experi-
ence. If we ponder how the indexical connection in this case is brought about,
we find that it may be dissolved into two correlated sets of iconic experiences.
      Early in life, presumably, we have all been puzzled by the smell or sight of
smoke, and little by little, as we encounter still more cases of this experience, we
started recognizing it as a token of a kind — in other words, we began establish-
ing an iconic reference between each new occurrence of this experience and all
preceding occurrences of it. Now, different instances of smoke are not identi-
cal — and certain versions of the phenomenon will gradually acquire the charac-
ter of our prototype of smoke. To the extent that we do not differentiate between
these instances (e.g., “that is smoke” and “there is smoke again”), we have estab-
lished an iconic relation for what constitutes this one phenomenon in the world,
smoke, from all else that is not smoke.
   In most cases the child will also, either simultaneously or at least within a very
few moments, discover that something is burning and the distinct occurrences
                                               FROM ANIMAL TO HUMAN                287



of fire will—just like the occurrences of smoke        — come to iconically refer to
each other. Here, too, certain experiences of fire will come to stand as proto-
types of the general phenomenon offire. The only thing now missing for the for-
mation of a full-blown indexical relation between the icons of smoke and icons
offire is the formation in the child’s cognitive system of a third icon — namely
the correlation itself as an icon of the always experienced correlation between the
presence of smoke and the presence of fire. And as this gradually happens, pro-
totype smoke becomes an index for prototype fire: “What I am suggesting, then,
is that the responses we develop as a result of day-to-day associative learning
are the basis for all indexical interpretations, and that this is the result of a spe-
cial relationship that develops among iconic interpretive processes. It’s hierar-
chic. Prior iconic relationships are necessary for indexical reference, but prior
indexical relationships are not in the same way necessary for iconic reference”
(Deacon 1997, 78).
   This understanding explains why words in many cases — but certainly not in
the majority of cases, as we shall see — may also work as indices. For words, like
other signs, may become iconically associated with previous uses of the same
word, just as the object to which the word refers may be iconically connected to
earlier versions of the same object. Previously experienced correlations between
these two sets of icons then ensures that the object mentally resuscitates upon
the mere hearing of the sound of the word. Exactly this kind of conditioning
was the basic methodology behind the training of pigeons and rats in Skinner
boxes, and it is a fundamental principle in many forms of animal training.
    But experiments with animals in Skinner boxes also disclose a property of
indexical signs that makes them very different from normal nouns in language.
An index must be reliably and repeatedly correlated to its object in space and
time, otherwise the association between its icons will quickly become weakened
and eventually lost. Once a rat no longer receives any reward (e.g., food) when
it presses a certain button upon perceiving a signal, it will quickly stop pushing
that button, and the indexical significance of the signal will thus be lost (to use
behavioral psychology’s own words, “the association will be extinguished”).
   Correspondingly, we see in human beings that an often repeated but contin-
ually unfulfilled threat gradually ceases to be taken seriously. Literary examples
are numerous, but the story of the boy shouting, “The wolf is coming!” is proto-
typical. It is important to note, however, that even within the logic of the story,
the warning does not lose its symbolic signification — none of the villagers, of
course, ever doubt what the outcry is meant to ean — but the indexical signi-
fication is eventually lost due to the high number of times that the sentence was
repeatedly used out of correlation with the event it reported.
   In normal talk, the significance of a word is quite independent of repeated
and reliable physical correlations with the object or event that the word refers
288          BIOSEMIOTICS       AND   THE HUMAN        BEING



to. Angels, unicorns, ghosts, Santa Claus, pink elephants, and the Fountain of
Youth are all sensible words in English but very few of us, if any, have ever come
upon their referents. Yet nor do we have difficulties in understanding the man-
ifold signification of words whose referents we have never had any direct expe-
rience of. Only rarely, for instance, have I been asked to a torskegilde (a Danish
word for tax audit that literally means “cod feast”!) — but I have no doubt that
I would greatly prefer to avoid it.
   Words are not normally, then, indices — and this is most evident in their all
but unbreakable interdependence. A weathercock is expected to indicate the
direction of the wind, and a compass should point north quite independently
of the wind’s direction. The one index —at least considered as an index — has
nothing to do with the other index. And if the compass should, for some reason,
be placed upon the weathercock, it would not stop pointing north. But words
have everything to do with each other, for words acquire their signification as
much from their connections with other words as they do from their connec-
tion to single objects or events — probably more.
    For example, consider the sentence: The ham sandwich at table five is becom-
ing impatient. Here, we must give up any attempt at interpreting the words
sensibly if we take it that ham sandwich refers indexically to that popular
arrangement of food.’* But the sentence will make perfect sense if we assume,
for instance, that the term ham sandwich refers metonymically to the guest at a
restaurant who has ordered such a dish.” A hint of why this might be the case
is found in the words sable five—a rather exceptional designation for what is,
after all, just another table — unless by chance we are working in a restaurant.
One might then imagine that the utterance was meant as a reminder from the
waitress to the cook to hurry up. Most of us spontaneously make up interpre-
tations like the one offered here, by placing the utterance in an imagined sense-
making context that cannot be deduced by merely considering the individual
words — but only from considering their internal play with one another, and
the whole system of worded relations wherein such play makes sense. Such sys-
tems, when considered as a whole, we call languages.
   The symbolic reference of language thus depends on the fact that the real com-
municative and knowledge-bestowing power of words and symbols derives
primarily from their ability to refer to other words and symbols
                                                              —and only

18 I am vaguely aware of having borrowed this example from John Searle, though I cannot
locate the exact source for citation.
19 Metonymy being the everyday linguistic practice of referring to something by naming a thing
that it is closely linked with, rather than the actual referent itself, as in “Russia asserts... “ and
é The                                                 :
      White House denies ....’ As in the ham sandwich example, one has to transcend the tempta-
tion to interpret these words indexically, and must interpret them instead symbolically, if they are
to say anything true about the world.
                                                     FROM ANIMAL TO HUMAN                     289



indirectly, through their linguistic situatedness, to the reality of things impli-
cated in the linguistic utterance. The symbolic layer in communication is thus
subsuming the original indexical layer — over-layering it so to say — nourishing
itself upon it while taking it in new directions of its own.
   The symbolic power of words is, then, as Deacon puts it, “distributed in the
relationships between words.” Deacon (1997, 83) writes, “Symbolic reference
derives from combinatorial possibilities and impossibilities, and we therefore
depend on combinations both to discover it (during learning) and to make use
of it (during communication). Thus the imagined version of nonhuman animal
language that is made up of isolated words, but lacking regularities that govern
possible combinations, is ultimately a contradiction in terms.” In this under-
standing of the inner anatomy of linguistic reference, the problem of human
evolution very much changes from one of how our ancestors could possibly
learn to speak to one of how our ancestors managed to unlearn their propensity
for making (what we must assume were largely successful and reliable) indexi-
cal references. How did our ancestors get rid of the much too narrow binding to
reality exhibited by pure indexicality?
   Entrance into the landscape of symbolic understanding clearly enough
depends on the prior establishment of a rich inner world of relationships that
are themselves detached (in some meaningful sense) from an iron-bound phys-
ical relation to the brute cause-and-effect relations of the external world. The
capacity for imagining a world that does not necessarily exist — in other words,
to think the impossible — thus appears as the key to the distinction between
the world-in-itself and the world-for-us, or in Deely’s terminology, the dividing
line between things and objects. This distinction, as we saw, began to be seriously
reflected upon in a philosophical sense only starting in Greece around the sixth
century BC — but it was latently present in the Lebenswelt that our hominid
ancestors placed themselves in by their growing development of language.
   Indeed, Deacon analyzes in depth the many attempts made by human exper-
imenters to teach apes to express themselves by using language-like tokens, and
concludes that these animals are not prevented from doing so either from a
lack of general intelligence nor by the lack of the appropriate anatomical means
for vocalization. Instead, it turns out that it is the apes’ strong cognitive and
practical dependence on indexicality that is the stumbling block that prevents
them from becoming the kinds of uninhibited language users that virtually all
human children become without further ceremony.” Thus, because apes cannot

20 The French cognitive philosopher Dominique Lestel has elegantly expressed this point in
noting that “anybody taking an interest in this question of ‘speaking apes’ is struck by the fact
that although it is beyond doubt that the nonhuman apes exhibit language abilities (primitive,
but real), shey have nothing to say” (emphasis in original). “Qui s'intéresse a cette question des
singes parlants est frappé par le fait que si les primats non humaine montres indiscutablement des
290          BIOSEMIOTICS        AND   THE   HUMAN     BEING




unlearn how to understand the world indexically they stay pre-maladapted for a
life based on symbolic reference.
    And now, perhaps, Deacon’s evolutionary reading of Peirce’s hierarchy of
sign logic becomes clear. For just as we saw that indexicality presupposes the
transcendence of the nondynamic, self-catching operation of iconic relations,
we now see that symbolic reference presupposes a transcendence of the indexical
bonds. A mental inversion must take place that pushes the objects and events
of the surroundings to the mental background in order to permit the estab-
lishment of a new systemic web of word-to-word (or more accurately, symbol-
                                                    — one based on the
to-symbol) relationships capable of imprinting meaning
network of relations between words and other words (symbols and other sym-
bols) rather than on the more fixed, dyadic relations between words and real-
ity — upon the flat indexical backdrop.
   To understand the puzzle of language is to understand the emergence of this
experiential reconstruction in the brain of the little child. But how our hom-
inid ancestors acquired the capacity for such a revolutionary re-construction of
their pre-linguistic Umwelts in the first place is the central question that an evo-
lutionary theory of human language origins must answer.


                         Language Occupies the Brain
The question posed at the end of the preceding section may be divided into
two. We must first explain how in the human being a brain could be developed
that would allow this new (and, in the animal world, decidedly unique) talent
for symbolic reference to grow up. Secondly, we must delineate what reproduc-
tive advantages, if any, this talent for symbolic referencing might have bestowed
upon the populations of hominids that originally developed this trait that
directly contradicts an eons-long background of successful indexical reasoning.
   In answering the first of these questions, Deacon suggests what is proba-
bly his most fruitful idea in this context. Classical theories about the brain-
language relation have placed the cart before the horse, says Deacon. These
tried to explain the emergence of language as resulting from the growth of
the brain volume of hominids — connecting this physical increase with the
assumption of an increased general ability for information processing. Yet
whether this idea is accompanied by a theory of the formation in the human
brain of a special neuronal language device or whether it is accompanied by
the theory that language development is simply the natural result of the

capacités linguistique (primitives mais réelles) ils n'ont rien a dire” (Lestel 1995, 6). Lestel, how-
ever, suggests that the indexicality of the actual talk of apes is due to the positivistic paradigm
behind their training programs.
                                                       FROM    ANIMAL    TO HUMAN                291



general increase in brain complexity, the basic understanding, at any rate,
is that the humanization of the brain preceded the invention of language.
Deacon now suggests the opposite.
   He sees the nascent ability to make symbolic reference as the single most
important factor characterizing the selective pressure that pushed human evolu-
tion forward by rewarding individuals possessing a brain architecture approach-
ing that of contemporary humans. In other words, according to Deacon, it is
this nascent linguistic ability that explains the specific growth of the human
brain, rather than the growth of the brain explaining the origin of language:

   If neither greater intelligence, facile articulatory abilities, nor prescient grammat-
   ical predispositions of children were the keys to cracking this symbolic barrier,
   then evolution ofthese supports for language complexity must have been conse-
   quences rather than causes or prerequisites of language evolution. More important,
   these adaptations could not have been the most critical determinants of brain evo-
   lution in our species. Approaching the language origins mystery from this perspec-
   tive is like stepping out of amirror to find everything to be the reverse of what we
   assumed. From this perspective language must be viewed as its own prime mover.
   It is the author of aco-evolved complex of adaptations arrayed around a single core
   semiotic innovation that was initially extremely difficult to acquire. Subsequent
   brain evolution was a response to this selection pressure and progressively made this
   symbolic threshold ever easier to cross (Deacon 1997, 44).

   This suggestion takes Deacon to a theoretical position not far from that of
the Baldwinism that was discussed in Chapter 6.” Essentially, what Deacon sug-
gests is that an inseparably mental and social property — the ability to commu-
nicate with symbols — has influenced and even shaped the evolutionary process
in human beings. On the surface, this view would seem to stand in considerable
opposition to firmly held intuitions in the scientific world holding that physi-
cal changes (like the evolution of the brain) must similarly have physical causes.
But Deacon's theory does not conflict with such intuitions. For one thing,
Deacon —as we shall see — anchors the ability for symbolic thinking solidly in
the specific organization of the human brain. In addition, his scenario for selec-
tion — like any other neo-Darwinian selection scheme — assumes that muta-
tions are the concrete source for inherited changes. The only deviation from
prevalent scenarios is that Deacon ascribes a social factor — i.e., the fact that our
ancestors gradually learned to communicate via symbolic signs, and then came
to depend on this process —as a decisive influence upon determining those


21 Deacon, of course, is fully aware of this and he explicitly recognizes the relationship. However,
as he has later pointed out, Baldwinism per se is only half the story — the unique nature ofsym-
bolic reference is what really tells the tale of human origins (see footnote 24 to the section “The
Biosemiotic Core of Evolution” in Chapter 6; Wiles et al. 2005.
292          BIOSEMIOTICS   AND   THE   HUMAN   BEING



changes in the brain that would win in the competition for reproductive success
among our remote ancestors.
      It is important for an evaluation of Deacon’s conception to recognize that
not even contemporary humans are born with the ability of symbolic refer-
ence. Small children may well— unlike the pre-maladapted apes — be biolog-
ically prepared for the task, but it remains nevertheless a hard exercise, one that
it takes the child at least two years to master to a significant extent. And com-
pared to the situation that our remote ancestors who originally tried to acquire
the art must have had to cope with, contemporary children have the advan-
tage of growing up in a semiotic milieu where language, virtually from the very
beginning of life, plays a decisive role. And yet, the hominid young of those past
times would have been not only handicapped by the fact that their brains were
more ape-like than human-like, but they would have also had to master the trick
of symbolic communication de novo —i.e., without any help from the adults.
How can they possibly have managed to do this?
    Here we have a typical problem for all theories of evolution. We know that
the process of language invention has indeed taken place, but we do not know
how —and no matter what scenario we posit in order to explain it without
invoking the use of supernatural events (e.g., miracles and, to a lesser extent,
hopeful monsters), we must recognize that such “just-so” stories necessarily feel
impoverished when compared to the enormity of the phenomenon that they
are attempting to explain. I have inserted this remark only to prevent the reader
from concluding that Deacon's scenario is uniquely not a fully satisfactory
one — for indeed I believe that such an objection may be launched against any
and all naturalistic scenarios for the origin of language.
      Deacon suggests that the ability for symbolic communication originally may
have arisen as a solution to the need in early hominid groups to establish a bind-
ing social cooperation that, in the end, would imply the creation of marriage-
like institutions. The need for such institutions ultimately derives, according
to prevailing theories, from an imbalance between the genders in life in close
groups where the male’s contribution to parental care stands in logical opposi-
tion to the male’s principled ignorance of paternity to the offspring. Moreover,
one major advantage of having big brains is the abiliry to learn — which means
that big-brained babies are born with a lot to learn or, differently stated, that
they are born very unfinished. The implication is that parental care is a much
more demanding task for humans than it is for other species — and, very likely
in fact, it could not have been successfully accomplished in the hominid lin-
eage without the participation of both sexes.           Marriage-like institutions
might have solved this potential conflict by providing a ritual consolidation
of paternity. However, Deacon (1997, 401) claims that pure indexical think-
ing would never have been able to support such institutions, whereas even a
                                                        FROM    ANIMAL     TO HUMAN                293



limited ability for symbolic understanding would have sufficed: “The need to
mark these reciprocally altruistic (and reciprocally selfish) relationships arose
as an adaptation to the extreme evolutionary instability of the combination of
group hunting/scavenging and male provisioning of mates and offspring. This
was the question for which symbolization was the only viable answer. Symbolic
culture was a response to a reproductive problem that only symbols could solve:
the imperative of representing a social contract.’
   Deacon’s theory of the possession of symbolic reference as a motive force
in the evolution of the human brain does, of course, presuppose that even-
tual gains in the ability for symbolic communication would also increase the
evolutionary fitness of the concerned individuals. Rather than entering into a
detailed discussion of Deacon’s specific attempts to support this concept, how-
ever, I shall content myself by noting that the theory does indeed illustrate how
social advantages might be gained from the mastering of symbolic reference.
But scenarios implying social institutions other than marriage may, of course,
just as convincingly be suggested.”
      To begin with, our remote hominid ancestors were hardly any more capable
of symbolic thinking than are present-day chimpanzees, and it is not unlikely
that this new capacity may have first appeared simply as a fluke. It may then have
been conserved in the group in the same way that laboratory chimpanzees born
to parents that with great difficulty (and strongly supported by their trainee)
acquired a limited ability for symbol use, have been reported to be able to learn
this skill with much less ado (Savage-Rumbaugh and Lewin 1994). Whether it
was just for fun or because it was, in fact, advantageous to the population, the
habit of symbolic referencing must at some time have persisted long enough to
be incorporated into the social network in a way that eventually stabilized it.”
If so, then hominids that exhibited the most talent in this regard may have also
managed to thrive above average in the social game, and their share of the gene
pool would thus have tended to grow. The main conception can now be summa-
rized in a simple way: “The human brain should reflect language in its architec-
ture the same way birds reflect the aerodynamics of flight” (ibid., 45).
   By thus posing the invention of the ability to manipulate symbols as a precon-
dition for further brain evolution, rather than vice versa, Deacon establishes a
strong argument against Chomsky’s explanatory hypothesis of an innate universal

22 Asaloose speculation, let me point to the phenomenon ofchildren’s          play as a possible source
of this new ability. Even today we have the expression playing with words, and symbolic referenc-
ing in the beginning simply may have been fun. Children capable in this respect may perhaps have
had acquired a lifelong advantage. It is, after all, in children that the linguistic ability must first
have appeared (since the capacity to learn this skill seems to decline with age) and children’s play
is the root form of most happenings in the social life of adults.
23.    See the discussions on semiotic scaffolding in Chapters 4 and s.
294         BIOSEMIOTICS     AND   THE   HUMAN   BEING




grammar. Now, what was thought to be the insoluble dilemma posed by gram-
mar — its supposed unlearnability — may be solved in another way. For not only
did the brain gradually undergo evolution, but so did language, hand-in-hand.
   In its beginnings, language must have been primitive and clumsy — but the
increasingly mandatory social use of this new semiotic tool must have gradu-
ally tuned it to result in the establishment of simpler and more efficient linguis-
tic patterns that everybody could easily learn (indeed, we see this process still
at work today, in our shorthand words and phrases for otherwise cumbersome
linguistic constructions — fax for a facsimile sending and receiving machine,
OPEC for Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries               — even the con-
scious misspelling induced by text-messaging may in a way testify to the univer-
sality of this mechanism).
   The pointhere is that while biological evolution of even the smallest morpholog-
ical change takes numerous generations and is exceedingly slow, language — and
especially symbolic language, which is not tied to any physically necessary rela-
tions of cause-and-effect — may evolve with lightning speed. In fact, linguists con-
firm that a language may change to unrecognizability in just a thousand years.
Seen in this light, Chomsky’s puzzle may be elegantly solved: “Children’s minds
need not innately embody language structures, if language [evolve to] embody the
predispositions of children’s minds” (ibid., 109). Deacon’s scenario points to the
obvious possibility that language gradually changed in such a way that its gram-
mar came to correspond optimally to what children would immediately intuit.
Since changing human brains is an extremely slow process, what happened instead
was that language adjusted itself to the patterns of children’s brains — and that the
human brain the next time round adapted to the new linguistic challenges.
   That this last process also occurred is evident, of course, and well-stud-
ied — although not well understood. Obviously we are dealing here with the
development of brain regions that have to do with the production and deci-
phering of speech sounds, but before anything else the human brain is a deviant
in nature because of its oversized prefrontal cortex. This immediately confronts
us with a new puzzle, for patients with injuries to the prefrontal cortex are only
rarely hampered in their ability to produce or understand speech or to correctly
analyze grammar. Destruction of basic language abilities are connected instead
to two areas in the lower brain that seem to be involved in hearing and speech
movements (Warnicke’s and Broca’s areas, respectively). Also, up until relatively
recently, it had been customary to treat an epileptic by performing a pre-fron-
tal lobotomy — yet this treatment did not generally result in any immediate lan-
guage-processing damage, nor lowering of the IQ.”*

24 However, the implications of this intervention do, as we now know, show up in anumber of
special learning contexts and there they may be severe.
                                                   FROM ANIMAL TO HUMAN                    295


  In general, then, the functions of the prefrontal cortex are not well under-
stood and have resisted attempts at unambiguous function-to-structure map-
ping. Unlike in the topography of the sensoric or motoric brain centers, there
are apparently not, in the prefrontal cortex, any direct connections between dis-
tinct areas and distinct functions. Rather, and as mentioned earlier, the relative
increase in the volume of the prefrontal cortex in humans is accompanied by an
increased recruitment of synaptic connections to all the other parts of the brain.
Information processing in the prefrontal cortex must therefore be assumed to
influence or even dominate nearly all facets of brain function. As Deacon puts
it, the prefrontal cortex makes its influence felt everywhere in the brain, not
so much because it has a greater capacity as because it simply “has more votes”
(ibid., 257).
   A comparative analysis of the many disabilities that are seen as the effect of
prefrontal damage in humans and monkeys alike, however, does gives us a hint
as to the kind of skills and abilities that this part of the brain is responsible for.
Deacon (1997, 264) sums up the case:
   In general, tasks that require convergence on only a single solution are minimally
  impacted by prefrontal damage, but those that require generating or sampling a
  variety of alternatives are impaired. This capacity has been called divergent thinking
  by J. Guilford (1967), and it may explain why prefrontal damage does not appear to
  have a major effect on many aspects of paper and pencil IQ tests. Prefrontal dam-
  aged patients exhibit atendency to be controlled by immediate correlative relationships
   between stimuli and reinforcers, and this disturbs their ability to entertain higher-
  order associative relationships. In summary, these human counterparts to different
  frontal lobe defects in monkeys also involve difficulties in using information neg-
  atively. Impairment of the neural computations provided by these cortical areas
  makes it difficult to subordinate one set ofassociations to another, especially when
  the subordinate associations are more immediate and salient (emphasis added).

   Returning to the discussion of the cognitive leap from indexical to symbolic
thinking, we may now see that this jump relied on precisely those abilities that
seem to be impaired in patients with damages in the prefrontal cortex. This cor-
responds exactly with what I was referring to earlier when I wrote that “a mental
inversion must take place that pushes the objects and events of the surroundings
to the mental background, in order to permit the establishment of a new sys-
temic web of word-to-word (or more accurately, symbol-to-symbol) relation-
ships capable of imprinting its meaning — one based on the network of relations
between words and other words (symbols and other symbols) rather than on the
more fixed, dyadic relations between words and reality — upon the flat index-
ical backdrop.” The prefrontal areas are absolutely necessary to produce those
associative connections that presuppose the subsuming of one learning process
by another —as must be required if the indexical bindings between signs and
296        BIOSEMIOTICS    AND   THE HUMAN   BEING




objects are to be loosened enough for the signs to be networked instead into sys-
tems of other signs.
   Neither general intelligence nor the presence of a specific language center
is thus to be found at the root of the peculiar human adaptation for language
acquisition. Instead, prefrontal involvement in even the remotest corners of
intensely intercommunicating brain activity does the job. This does not mean,
however, that the construction of symbolic relations therefore can be localized
in the prefrontal cortex in the same way that indexical relations are rooted in
specific senso-motoric pathways that may be connected with one another in
the brain.
    Rather, the symbolic associations generating the changing contextual signi-
fications of words are probably highly dependent on mnemonic support from
sensorically based “pictures.” This conception is confirmed by the frequent
occurrence of semantic disturbances observed in patients suffering damages of
the posterior cortex, and is borne out, too, by our everyday introspective intu-
itions of having pictorial representations while reading or listening to stories.
Such pictures are not as such symbols, but should rather be considered as neuro-
logical buoys. Deacon (1997, 267) says, “Like buoys indicating an otherwise best
course, they mark a specific associative path, by following which, we reconstruct
the implicit symbolic reference. ... The critical role of the prefrontal cortex is
primarily in the construction of the distributed mnemonic architecture that sup-
ports symbolic reference, not in the storage and retrieval of symbols.” Symbols,
then, cannot be localized, for they are essentially relational; they appear and dis-
appear like the relations between buoys in the neural continuum.
  The shaping of the human brain therefore corresponds nicely with a scenario
that has the ability for symbolic reference as its decisive mark of separation, by
which the branching evolutionary hominid lineage sorted itself out into those
that did and did not enter into the niche of the linguistic world — and in which
the contemporary representatives of one of these lineages, H. sapiens, now
scampers about with such exquisite symbol-using agility. For when the habit
of playing with symbols, no matter how primitive, first took hold in a group
of hominids, the development of this peculiar ability became an essential fac-
tor for the continued evolution of that lineage. Like any other social resource,
then, language ran through a process of adaptation that optimized its usability
and intelligibility. And gradually, as language use spread, it must increasingly
have become the key to social success. The resulting cature ofsymbolic reference
then established the evolutionary pressure on children’s brains that, over time,
resulted in the reconstruction of the associative patterns of brain in the image
of the associative patterns of symbolic language.
   As intimated previously, however, one objection to Deacon’s theory con-
cerns his use of Peirce’s symbol category in a considerably narrower sense than
                                                  FROM ANIMAL TO HUMAN                   297


has been usual among Peircean semioticians (Stjernfelt 2000). Peirce devel-
oped a complex taxonomy of sign types which Deacon has chosen to simplify
for the purpose of its use within the biological— and particularly, the evolu-
tionary  — context. This makes Deacon's symbol concept at the one time both
broader and more specific than the Peircean concept. For example, the kind of
conditioned Pavlovian reflexes that in Deacon’s analysis are described as exam-
ples of indexical relations, would have been considered instances of symbolic
(law-like, conventional) relations if the Peircean terminology were followed,
for they instantiate a kind offuture directedness, an esse in futuro —i.e., a habit-
like existence. Stjernfelt (2000) writes, “Accordingly, Peirce’s symbol concept
includes a wide range of subtypes of very different complexity degrees, rang-
ing from simple terms over propositions to arguments — each of these in turn
including a whole fauna of further subtypes. Thus, symbol use is neither as sim-
ple as Deacon presupposes (with respect to symbol subtypes) nor as complex as
he presupposes (with respect to the simpler types).”
   Too, behaviors that, at least according to Peirce’s criteria, deserve to be called
symbolic are indeed widespread among animals, as discussed at quite some
length by Thomas Sebeok, among others (see Sebeok 1979; see also the anal-
ysis of Sheets-Johnstone discussed below). Stjernfelt claims that Deacon’s cri-
terion of symbolic reference is too weak to distinguish the cognitive capacity of
humans from that of monkeys, and suggests that Peirce’s analysis of the human
abstractive forms offers a better starting point for the establishment of such a
criterion. Particularly, accordingto Stjernfelt, the human capacity for making
hypostatic abstractions” should be considered the core ability that distinguishes
the human mindset from that of chimpanzees. In support of his view, Stjernfelt
reminds us of Peirce’s explicit emphasis on the capacity of language as a medium
for self-control:
   For thinking is a kind of conduct, and is itself controllable, as everybody knows.
   Now the intellectual control of thinking takes place by thinking about thoughts [as
   in hypostatic abstractions]. All thinking is by signs; and brutes use signs. But they
   perhaps rarely think of them as signs. To do so is manifestly a second step in the use
   of language. Brutes use language, and seem to exercise some little control over it.
   But they certainly do not carry this control to anything like the same grade that we
   do. They do not criticize their thoughts logically (CP 5:534).

Stjernfelt (2007, 254) notes,
   Man as well as animals are consequently rational beings, probably even necessarily
   so.... But what enables man to build up his symbol systems and its resulting more


25 As when the experience of hot things gets abstracted into the concept of heat, which then
                                                                                heat.
may be the subject ofurther theorizing such as for instance the kinetic theory of
298        BIOSEMIOTICS    AND   THE    HUMAN   BEING




  acute and accelerated rationality is precision and abstraction working together,
  making it possible to isolate and make explicit single phases in the ongoing chain of
  arguments in order to control them, scrutinize them, experiment upon them, com-
  bine them, and make them better.

   This capacity for making hypostatic abstractions, however, also carries with it
an increased risk for committing serious errors, a capacity for being fooled or for
lying. Of course, all higher animals possess such abilities, writes Stjernfelt, but
“abstraction adds the possibility for the construction of enormous subdomains of
discourse: myth, religion, literature, science whose vast capacity for general truth
mirrors an equally large capacity for general fallacies” (ibid.). And Stjernfelt adds
that this all points to the reasonable assumption that a very strong selection pres-
sure must have prevailed against this increased risk for fallacies “especially against
the formal logical fallacies without any empirical content” (ibid.).
   While these objections seem well-founded, I do not think that they deci-
sively undermine Deacon's fascinating suggestion of human brain evolution as
in some sense shaped by the needs of linguistic communication rather than vice
versa. But they do accentuate the need for an even more nuanced elaboration of
the idea of human language evolution as the finalizing step in the temporaliza-
tion of the Peircean sign trichotomy. If the term symbol is used in its more usual
sense, as in Peirce, and not in the very elaborate sense given to it by Deacon,
then, obviously, symbolic reference is not what the enlarged prefrontal cortex
enables us for. Rather, in this case, hypostatic abstraction may be seen as the tal-
ent that presupposes prefrontal cortical interference in all and every part of the
brain. When Deacon (1997, 267) says, as noted above, “The critical role of the
prefrontal cortex is primarily in the construction of the distributed mnemonic
architecture that supports symbolic reference, not in the storage and retrieval
of symbols,” then this very term mnemonic architecture itself implies a capac-
ity for figurative reasoning that might serve as a tool for supporting hypostatic
abstractions.
  Proposals of radically new           theories probably always suffer from the
Procrustean-like weaknesses that lead us into the even more fruitful phases of
clarification and specification. But in sum, I believe that Deacon’s central the-
sis — ie., that linguistic ability arose through the transcendence of a more prim-
itive, indexical level of communication, one where individual indexical bindings
of signs to their objects prevented a more autonomous system of referential rela-
tions from breaking loose — seems both compelling and well-founded, all the
same. Whether one should best classify linguistic signs as symbolic markers or
rather envisage them as analytical units in the abstractive schemes ofhuman cog-
nition — or perhaps even some innovative synthesis of the two — is a question
that shall not be further pursued here. This work must be left for future biose-
mioticians to do.
                                                 FROM ANIMAL TO HUMAN                  299


                        Language and Biosemiosis

Terrence Deacon's theory is presented in the context of evolutionary anthro-
pology and neurobiology— but both thematically and theoretically, it belongs
naturally in a biosemiotic complex of theories. For a cornerstone in the the-
ory is that language is not a unique invention on the planet, but should be
seen instead as a sophisticated new semiotic resource that grew from the web of
semiotic activities already well established in the animal kingdom, long before
human beings appeared. Too, rather than seeing language as an either-or phe-
nomenon, with the discontinuity puzzle as its inevitable consequence, Deacon’s
evolutionary temporalization of Peirce’s icon-index-symbol trichotomy allows us
to understand language as a special case of a more general biosemiosis. And seen
in this way, i.e., as a particular species’ instantiation of more general biosemiosis,
language emerges as a “more-or-less” phenomenon in continuity with the rest
of the animal world.
   This Deaconian solution of the discontinuity puzzle on the exosemiotic level
may then be seen as a parallel to a complementary solution of the discontinu-
ity puzzle on the endosemiotic level. This is the duality that Pattee termed the
epistemic cut— i.e., the complementarity between the symbolic and the dynamic
modes of the cell. Let me remind the reader of my comment on this puzzle in
Chapter 4:
  The tendency of nature to generate regularities — or, as it is more commonly
  described today, to self-organize — may be understood as the very first exposition of
  the principle that will develop through cosmic evolution to become semiosis, the abil-
  ity of living systems on planet Earth (and possibly many other places in the universe)
  to form interpretants (or self-maintaining and self-perpetuating habits, if you like).

  This change of basic viewpoint will allow us to reach a solution to Pattee’s paradox
  of the epistemic cut, because now we can assume that not only the symbolic func-
  tional modes (related to DNA function), but a/so the dynamic functional modes
  (related to the functional cytoplasm) are both, in the end, semiotic functional
  modes. For the difference between the two modes is, at bottom, a difference in the
  kind of semiotic dynamics involved. Thus, the sign processes characteristic of the
  dynarnic functional mode — i.e., the protein world so to say— are indexical and
  iconic (i.e., analog-coded) rather than symbolic or digital as are the sign processes
  connected to DNA function. The analog-coded signs correspond to the jumble
  of topologically organized indexical and iconic sign processes in the cells that are
  responsible for the interpretation of the digital genetic instructions as well as for the
  execution of them (p. 95).

   Drawing this parallel between the origin of exosemiotic symbolic function-
ing (language) with the origin of endosemiotic symbolic functioning (Pattee’s
300        BIOSEMIOTICS    AND   THE HUMAN   BEING




symbolic mode of life) poses the problem of life in a new way, in its suggestion
that atemporalization of the Peircean sign trichotomy in the exosemiotic sphere
may also enable us to gain new insights in the endosemiotic sphere. Might, for
example, the establishment of the very first genetic reference relations some four
billion years ago — based on the conventional (not physically necessary) recod-
ings of peptide sequences to nucleic acid sequences — be considered ashift from
a purely indexical world of sign relations to a symbolic world?
   We know for certain that the single genes of contemporary prokaryotes are
not independent of each other, but rather, constitute a system of “menu choices”
whose activation always occurs in a cellular context that reflects what other
“menu choices” are presently activated. The signification of the single gene may
then well be indexically related to the synthesis of a given protein, but at the
same time, its full significance depends on a range of continually shifting gene-
to-gene relations.
   We saw for example in chapter 5 (section on “Organic Codes”) that while the
gene ApoB in liver cells specifies a version of apolipoprotein B of 4,536 amino
acids, the very same gene, if situated in the intestinal glands, will specify apoli-
poprotein molecules of only 2,152 amino aicds. This reflects — as we saw — the
necessity of the liver apolipoprotein B (but not the intestinal lipoprotein) to not
only assist in transporting lipids but also to activate further enzymes involved
in lipid biosynthesis. The significance of the ApoB gene thus cannot be confined
to an indexical interpretation (which in both cases would refer to the same pri-
mary mRNA transcript of 14,100 base pairs), but must include the full system
of operative genetic settings in the particular cell, where the gene is expressed.
The gene here is a symbol rather than an index.
   The origin of life, too, must have been closely connected to the formation of a
cellular system that would allow the loosening of an all too rigid binding between
the gene and the metabolic process that the gene contributes to — thereby facil-
itating the formation of contextual relations between the individual genes. The
operon structure and the establishment of regulatory activity at different levels
exemplify the concrete realization of such contextual mechanisms for direct-
ing genetic signification. The molecular geneticist James Shapiro (1999, 26)
even suggests that the pattern of repetitive DNA elements determines the sys-
tems architecture of a species: “From the systems architecture perspective, what
makes each species unique is not the nature of its proteins... but rather a dis-
tinct ‘specific’ organization of the repetitive DNA elements that must be recog-
nized by nuclear replication, segregation, and transcription functions. In other
words, resetting the genome system architecture through reorganization of
the repetitive DNA content is a fundamental aspect of evolutionary change.”
Depending on one’s conceptual perspective, such a scenario might perhaps be
construed as a naturalization oflanguage or as a linguification ofthe processes of
                                                       FROM    ANIMAL     TO HUMAN               301



life.”® No matter what one chooses to call it, however, there is no denying that it
certainly constitutes an emergent jump in the development of semiotic freedom
that is the history of life on Earth.


                            Corporeal-Kinetic Forms
Touching and being touched probably counts as the most basic dimension of
human experience, as well as of all other animals.”” “Without touch, it is impos-
sible for an animal to be,’ said Aristotle. (The earliest of the great thinkers, for
good reasons, formulated the most fundamental truths.) The idea that move-
ment and touch underlie the formation of language constitutes the central thesis
in Maxine Sheets-Johnstone’s sensoric-kinetic model for the origin of language.
“No language can be spoken for which the body is not prepared,” she says (1990,
135) as she sets out to show how this corporeal preparation for the realization of
language is decisive for an understanding of its nature and its origin. To touch
and to move are two sides of the same coin, she argues, and nothing in human
life makes sense in the absence of those two activities — not even language.
    Sheets-Johnstone rejects the now fashionable idea in cognitive science of
embodied image schemata (e.g., Lakoff 1987; Lakoff and Johnson 1999). This
idea she sees as a kind of grammatical, cosmetic covering-up of an underlying
Cartesian distinction between the self or the subject, on the one hand, and the
body, on the other. When calling something embodied one has already presup-
posed some essential belonging to a de-corporealized hypothetic domain of
reality that could, in principle, be somehow separated from the body. But how
can anything be embodied if it és itself abody?
   Sheets-Johnstone (1999, 151) instead prefers to talk about corporeal arche-
types or corporeal-kinetic forms — as, for example, the fundamental corporeal-
kinetic form in, inside, to be inside or, in general, insideness. The preposition in
has been shown to be an early “locative state and locative act type of being” that
pops up in the language of a child.” She explains,


26 Again, Susanne Langer (1942, 25), more than sixty years ago, saw this: “Man is doing in his
elaborate way just what the mouse in his simplicity is doing, and what the unconscious or semicon-
scious jellyfish is performing after its own chemical fashion. The ideal of “Nehil est in homine quod
non prius in amoeba erat’ is supported by living example. The speech line between man and beast
is minimized by the recognition that speech is primarily an instrument for social control, just like
the cries of animals, but has acquired a representative function, allowing a much greater degreee of
cooperation among individuals, and the focusing of personal attention on absent objects.”
27 See also the discussion of Guillan-Barrés syndrome in Chapter 2.
28   Commenting on this claim, Don Favareau (in a personal communication) suggested that
“the deictic there and its equivalent pointing/gesturing-towards comes earlier, but the point still
holds if amended with among.”
302            BIOSEMIOTICS     AND   THE HUMAN        BEING




      Being in or inside something, and placing in or inside something, constitute prime
      and ongoing experiences in infant and early childhood life and are the basis of the
      corporeal concept of insideness. Archetypal forms and relations are thus not precon-
      ceptual entities, as embodied image schemata are consistently described (Johnson
      1987), but are the substantive conceptual backbone of language when it appears.
      Neither are archetypal forms and relations vague mental means whereby we forge
      concepts, something on the order of Platonic conjurations having no direct cogni-
      tive reality. Archetypal corporeal-kinetic forms and relations are conceptual by their
      very nature.

The decisive point is that insideness is a corporeally constituted and absolutely
basic experiential category in the life of the child, one that cannot be contained
in or covered by concepts such as image schemata of containment, in-out orien-
tation, or boundary.
   Other examples of archetypal corporeal-kinetic forms are thickness, thinness
animate being, power, verticality, and force.” All such concepts are derived from
basic human experiences that precede the child’s use of them in language, and
Sheets-Johnstone therefore finds it unfortunate that the nonlinguistic body is
often called “pre-linguistic” in as much as the acquisition of language in her con-
ception is, instead, “post-kinetic” and should be considered as such. The fun-
damental concepts of language are anticipated in the experiential dynamics of
corporeal movements. Therefore, language can only retrospectively conceptual-
ize this primary dynamic.
   And evolutionarily speaking, long before the emergence of the sophisti-
cated linguistic mind, forerunners of this linguistic mind were already at work
in the world, in the form of even more obviously corporeal forms of communi-
cation.” In Sheets-Johnstone’s understanding, such forms of communication
were — and are — symbolic. One obvious example is the type of animal behavior
that ethologists have called ritualization — i.e., stereotypic behavioral patterns
with communicative content that are addressed to conspecific individuals (see
Chapter 6). A baboon displaying its teeth in an aggressive threat is, in a funda-
mental sense, doing exactly what the words say — it is threatening the recipient
of the display. This display symbolizes what might happen in just the same way

29     Thickness and thinness are important concepts for the production of tools and derive ulti-
mately from the experience of
                            one’s own teeth, claims Sheets-Johnstone (1999, 176): “Stone tools
replaced teeth.” The concept of being alive is the basis of the origin of the concept of death. Force
is a concept that is articulated in the context of a diversity of situations that involve bodily reci-
procity, etc.
30 Tinsert the modifier, even more obviously, to draw attention to the (too often under-noticed)
fact that all of our human linguistic communication today —from mouth and tongue to ear
and eye and brain — is fully corporeal through and through as well. Cartesianism still penetrates
enough of our thinking about mind and language that we still often need to be reminded of such
obvious facts.
                                              FROM   ANIMAL   TO HUMAN            303



that the clenched fists of people do when used in a threatening way — and by so
doing, the baboon engages itself in a communicative behavior implying that an
explicitly demonstrated dangerousness might be realized in a closely approach-
ing but still future act. Here it should be noticed, Sheets-Johnstone reminds us,
that the fundamental iconicity in the open-mouth-threat of the baboon does
not obliterate the ritualized distancing: “Iconicity is not the opposite of sym-
bolicity, but its fundament” (ibid., 160).
  In general, then, corporeal communication in animals occurs precisely as a
symbolization of the spatial and tactile dynamics that the animal itself experi-
ences — experiences that its biologically similar conspecifics also can be counted
on to share. Sheets-Johnstone in this connection refers to the concept of acom-
sign. As suggested by the primatologist Stuart Altmann (1967, 336), these are
signs that “are part of the behavioral repertoire of all members of the society.”
Common to these signs is the characteristic that the thing represented in the
communicative act — be it of a visual, auditory, or tactile-kinetic kind — has a
direct connection to the preceding corporeal experiences of the receiving ani-
mal. The invariance of bodily experiences (which is itself a consequence of the
invariance of a species’ body plan and its repertoire of possible activities) in this
way assures the understanding of the com-sign by the entire group. These tactile-
kinetic invariances predispose organisms for iconicity, writes Sheets-Johnstone
(1999, 126), “since the most easily formulated, consistently utilizable, and read-
ily understood signals are those that are similar to bodily behaviors and experi-
ences shared by all the members of a species.”


                           The Linguistic Organ

In Sheets-Johnstone’s understanding, the first approaches made by humans
towards the performance of linguistic skills —the human ursprache, as it
were — must have departed from this kind of communication. And the focal
point in this context is the tongue as considered as a linguistic organ, for the
tongue was —and is—the center for sensoric-kinetic linguistic competence.
The tongue that, according to Piaget, was not at first used for the experiencing
of taste at all, but exclusively for touch — an activity that, as we know, is highly
engaging for the baby — is not only the place where the infant's first explorative
gestures towards the world is located, but also the center from which a quali-
tative world first comes alive (Piaget 1968, 51, referenced in Sheets-Johnstone
1990, 159). The whole area of the mouth, and the lips especially, are involved in
these first explorative experiences, writes Sheets-Johnstone, but the extraordi-
nary mobility of the tongue gives it a special role: “While the tongue can glide
over the lips, for example, the lips cannot glide over the tongue” (ibid.).
304           BIOSEMIOTICS      AND    THE HUMAN      BEING




   The tongue also plays a central role in small children’s experiments with
sounds in the form of babbling during the first year of life. Babbling is often
explained as the child’s way of acquiring the skill of expressing itself in the
universe of sounds characteristic to the local language. But Sheets-Johnstone
emphasizes that the most significant quality of the child’s babbling is that it
establishes an intimate continuity in the passage from one kind of sensoric dom-
inance to another: “A purely tactile world awakens a world of sounds, and in
consequence, a new range of powers is discovered” (ibid., 160). This last point
is essential, for the child must not only learn to produce the distinctive sounds
of language in order for speech to be a communicative tool, but it must also
consciously experience the power of itself being a sound maker. It is, as previ-
ously mentioned, one of the deep insights that phenomenology has given us
that human experience and consciousness is rooted in a corporeal arsenal of “I
can’s.”’ “Consciousness is in the first place not a matter of ‘I think that’ but of ‘I
can’s,” wrote Merleau-Ponty (2002 (1945), 137; Hoffmeyer 1996a).
   A third major element in the passage into a world of expressive sounds is the
integration of the visual world into the already established domain of touch and
sound: “The tactile/aural tongue becomes a tactile/aural/visual organ. Its enunci-
ations are things — or relationships — seen. The most distant sensory world is thus
brought within the realm of touch” (Sheets-Johnstone 1990, 161; italics added).
“(And further, ]a verbally capable creature can tame the visual world — however
out of reach it might be — and make it her/his own. The appropriation is not
metaphorical. What is distant and not ready to hand must be corporeally appro-
priated in some way if it is to be part of a shared world — indeed, if it is to have a
fixed place in a creature's world to begin with” (ibid., 162).
   An interesting confirmation of Sheets-Johnstone’s theory of corporeal-
kinetic forms as the starting point for the earliest steps in language evolution
comes from studies of speech perception. These show that the listening per-
son responds as if he has interpreted the acoustic signals through the very same
articulatory gestures he should himself have used to pronounce the words. The
perception of human speech is generally structured in terms of the articulatory
gestures that underlie the acoustic signal (Lieberman 1975). An entirely differ-
ent kind of confirmation comes from studies of mother-child communication.
   In traditional communication theory, communication is conceived as consist-
ing of a series of delimited messages that flows through a channel. For instance,
when the child hands an object to the mother, this is seen as a sequence in which
first the child signals its wish to give the object by holding out the arm, and then
the mother signals her willingness to receive. The American psychologist Alan
Fogel, however, got the idea of analyzing this kind of interaction through the

31    See the section, “Intelligence and Semiosis” in Chapter 6.
                                                     FROM ANIMAL TO HUMAN                     305


slow-motion replaying of videotaped recordings of such naturally occurring inter-
action, where he discovered that, in practice, the temporal sequence of autono-
mous agency posited by the naive model collapsed to the extent that it was indeed
not possible to distinguish between who was the sender and who the receiver. The
movements of mother and child are practically simultaneous and the process of
delivering the object appears as a smooth reciprocally coordinated act, says Fogel
(1993). There is no exchange of fully-finished, mentally constructed and then
physically enacted messages going on here — rather, what we see happening is a
social loop being co-constructed by the participants for the pleasure of them both.
Communication, in the most proper sense of this word, is happening here.
     Although Fogel’s work does report directly on speech communication, it is
nevertheless remarkable how well the observed reciprocity in the senso-kinetic
relation between mother and infant supports Lieberman’s observation of the
reciprocity between listener and speaker in the senso-kinetic foundation of
language acts. Similarly, Favareau (2008) has argued that data from the rela-
tively recent fields of Interaction and Conversation Analysis (e.g., Schegloff
2007, Goodwin 2003) overwhelmingly confirm that the fine-grained, moment-
to-moment choreography of human beings in everyday conversation with one
another derives as much, if not more, of its meaning-making efficacy from the
minute
    — but ever-vigilantly perceived
                               — tracking of one another’s eye gaze,
head turns, breathing rhythms, body positions, and muscle movement, than
could ever be possible by a detached mental interpretation of sounds and words
alone.** This, perhaps, is what Gregory Bateson (1972, 11-13) was getting at
when he wrote, “The notion that language is made of words is nonsense. . . .
It’s all based on the idea that ‘mere’ words exist— and there are none.” Thus
our everyday experiences in interacting with one another linguistically do also,
I suppose, largely support the feeling of real communication as something like a
smile that breaks through without our knowing.


                                The Tone in the Talk
The notion that spoken language, in its earliest instantiation, was based on recod-
ings of basic (and therefore invariant) senso-kinetic schemes of experience, leads to
the further hypothesis that speech in its acoustic origins must have also been emo-
tionally connected to these schemes. This is a rather radical dimension of Sheets-
Johnstone’s theory, for the fundamental arbitrariness of the linguistic sign has been
a cornerstone in nearly everything written about language. That the arbitrariness
of the words — ite., the realization that the word spelled h-o-7-s-e itself bears abso-
lutely no likeness to any aspect of what a horse is as a real thing in the world, and

32                                       this work and its data appears in Favareau (2008).
      A biosemiotic analysis and review of
306           BIOSEMIOTICS      AND   THE   HUMAN    BEING




that a virtual infinity of entirely different words (such as cheval, uma, hest, kuda,
hobune, caballo, and Pferd) may just as legitimately mean horse — applies to the
linguistic surface of contemporary languages is not contested. But in the history
of language origins, this arbitrariness must itself have emerged (or in some way
have been segregated from) the nonarbitrary use of sound expressions. Sheets-
Johnstone claims that the alternative to this view would be some kind of hopeful
monster hypothesis — a “Gee, I ought to use arbitrary sounds and start talking!”
hypothesis that, from an evolutionary point of view, is not only quite unsubstan-
tiated, but virtually incomprehensible (ibid., 140).
  It is a telling fact, however, that the babbling that is unique to babies in the
human species does not at all occur in young of other primates. And it is tempt-
ing to infer that this playing with sounds could have been a point of departure
for the discovery of the potential benefits to be obtained from the free (i.e.,
unmotivated) use of sound expressions. For the vocalizations of babbling are
not just empty forms —as    is evident from their mutual variability concerning
qualitative properties such as pitch, timbre, intensity, rhythm, and duration.
Rather, sounds may be subdued, whispered, moaned, or mumbled; they can be
stressed or unstressed, full, thin, painful, explosive, soft, brief, etc. At some point
in time, our remote hominid ancestors must have discovered that one might
communicate with the help of such more or less arbitrary — but still emotionally
loaded — sound expressions.
   At first, the relationship to the nonarbitrary iconic-indexical sounds that all
primates use in communication may have had an infectious influence on the sig-
nificative possibilities connected to arbitrary sounds. But in the end, these hom-
inids must have realized, as Sheets-Johnstone puts it, “that a ‘sheer sound’ could
stand for something in the same way that an already significatory sound stood
for something” (ibid., 143). And this discovery must, by necessity, have taken
place within a sound-meaning paradigm that had no alternative models to build
upon, other than the nonarbitrary universe of sound-meaning associations that
preceded it in evolutionary history.
     Against the background of these observations, it may appear less surprising
that the American linguist and anthropologist Mare LeCron Foster has hypoth-
esized that the symbolic structure of the human ursprache was firmly attached to
what Foster calls elementary articulatory gestures — movements such as clicking
the lips to produce the sound 77 — and that such phenemes (corresponding to
Sheets-Johnstone’s senso-kinetic forms) will have in themselves a basic significa-
tive content, analogously connected to those movements of the mouth, tongue,
and vocal tract that call forth the particular pheneme.”

33    For example, Foster (1978) claims that all reconstructed root forms of the sound mm refer to
bilateral relationships (e.g., the fingers and hands in taking or grasping; two opposed surfaces in
                                                      FROM ANIMAL TO HUMAN                     307


                                Syntax as Movement
The word syntax comes from Greek syn + tassein, which in contemporary
English means “to put in order.” Implicit in this word lies the idea of a temporal
sequence — one where the thing to be ordered logically precedes the ordering of
it. It is, however, highly unlikely that individual words, in this way, preceded the
syntax that determines their sequence in linguistic utterances. The separation of
a syntactic level from a semantic level may be practical for analytical purposes,
but as far as their origin and contemporary use is concerned, the syntactic and
semantic levels are internally connected. Seen from Sheets-Johnstone’s theoret-
ical position, syntactic order must from the beginning have been wrapped into
corporeal movement: “There is an order in which things occur which is contin-
gent upon movement” (ibid., 168). Grammar (the sequences by which we put
our meaning-making tokens in order) —as much as semantics (the meanings
that we are making with these tokens) — is inextricably rooted in the body’s cor-
poreal-kinetic forms.


                            The Problem of Freedom
There are, of course, categorical dividing lines between humans and animals
other than the use of language. But from the moment that language grew its
hyphae into the vaults and architecture of the human brain, it became impossi-
ble for us to somehow “think it away.” For what kind of creature would a nonlin-
guistic (or zonsymbolic) human being amount to? The question is absurd — not
just because language may be seen as at the very source of human origins, but
also because it is impossible to abstractively look “behind” language compe-
tence in an analysis of human nature.
   Morality, self-reflective consciousness, and free will are some essential traits
of humanness that have been used to argue for the absolute unique position
of humans in the natural world. And, in fact, it is this central supposition of
humans as free and animals as unfree that lies at the root of the discourse on
human rights that arose in the wake of Enlightenment philosophy. Let us here
quote the famous passage from Rousseau (1910 (1755)).
   I can discover nothing in any mere animal but an ingenious machine to which
   nature has given senses to wind itself up, and guard, to a certain degree, against
   everything that might destroy or disorder it. I perceive the very same things in the
   human machine — with this difference: that nature alone operates in all the oper-
   ations of the beast, whereas man, as a free agent, has a share in his. One chooses by


tapering, pressing together, holding together, and crushing; chewing food) that are analogous to
the act of bringing the lips together in forming the sound mm (cit. in Sheets-Johnstone 1999, 165).
308           BIOSEMIOTICS        AND   THE HUMAN         BEING



                                    liberty; for which reason, the beast cannot deviate
     instinct; the other by an act of
     from the rules that have been prescribed to it, even in cases where such deviation
     might be useful, and man often deviates from the rules laid down for him to his
     prejudice. Thus a pigeon would starve near a dish of the best flesh-meat, and a cat
     ona heap of fruit or corn, though both might very well support life with the food
     which they disdain, did they but bethink themselves to make a trial of it: it is in
     this manner dissolute men run into excesses, which bring on fevers and death itself;
     because the mind depraves the senses, and when nature ceases to speak, the will still
     continues to dictate (see also Ferry 1992, 39).*

     The final sentence in this quote is telling. We humans are so free that we may
die from it. For Rousseau, the possibility of evil is inherent in the whole phe-
nomenon of human freedom. As the proverb has it: Man sees what is good but
chooses what is evil.*” And, paradoxically, this is exactly what justifies the unique
concept of human rights in the first place. For, seen historically, human rights
appeared as a defense against the inhumanity of the somewhat “more than mere
human” rulers (e.g., the English colonial power in the case of the United States,
the monarchy and nobility in the case of France). Human rights were meant to
function as the basis for a constitutional state — one that would be capable of
protecting human individuals against the evils of other individuals, not the least
of whom included the potentially evil-doing rulers.
     Biosemiotics rejects Rousseau’s narrow conception of the animal as an inge-
nious machine. But by so doing, does biosemiotics bring itself dangerously close
to a denial of the value set manifested in Enlightenment thinking and realized
in the most fundamental social institutions of the Western world? Other crit-
ical positions in the discourse regarding the interface of nature and culture in
Western societies have indeed embraced the anti-Enlightenment position that
human rights expresses an inadmissible species-ism — i.e., an oppression by the

34    “Jene vois dans tout animal qu'une machine ingénieuse, 4 qui la nature a donné des sens pour
se remonter elle-méme, et pour se garantir, jusqu’a un certain point, de tout ce qui tend a la détru-
ire, ou A la déranger. J’apergois précisément les mémes choses dans la machine humaine, avec cette
différence que la nature seule fait tout dans les opérations de la béte, au lieu que homme concourt
aux siennes, en qualité d’agent libre. L'un choisit ou rejette par instinct, et l'autre par un acte de lib-
erté; ce qui fait que la béte ne peut sécarter de la régle qui lui est prescrite, méme quand il lui serait
avantageux de le faire, et que l'homme sen écarte souvent ason préjudice. C’est ainsi qu’un pigeon
mourrait de faim prés d'un bassin rempli des meilleures viandes, et un chat sur des tas de fruits, ou
de grain, quoique l'un et l'autre piit trés bien se nourrir de ’aliment qu'il dédaigne, s'il sétait avisé
den essayer. C’est ainsi que les hommes dissolus se livrent 4 des excés, qui leur causent la fidvre et
la mort; parce que lesprit déprave les sens, et que la volonté parle encore, quand la nature se tait>
(Rousseau 1910 (1755)).
35    The Danish philosopher Villy Sorensen once said, “A human person can be inhuman, but a
wolf cannot be unwolfish.” This elegant formulation should not be romanticized, however, for the
internal relations between animals is no idyll! But the human talent for what seems to be gratu-
itous evil is, I think, somewhat striking.
                                                      FROM   ANIMAL    TO HUMAN               309



human species ofall other species on Earth (Regan 1983). It is therefore impor-
tant to state in exactly which ways biosemiotics differs from such ideas.
   Biosemiotics, admittedly, does not accept any essentialist, absolute, or a pri-
ori distinction between the human being and the rest of the creatures of this
world. But it also concurs with the previously mentioned characterization of
human beings by John Deely as those singular animals that — at least poten-
tially — may distinguish their own objects of consciousness from the world of
things as they are in themselves independent ofsuch consciousness. Biosemiotics is
therefore prevented from endorsing the reductive position that sees the human
being as nothing but one more animal absolutely indistinguishable from all the
other animals in any important sense. For by being linguistic creatures — and,
perhaps what is even more primary, by setting up symbol-based communal cul-
tures — humans come to acquire a semiotic freedom that is unparalleled any-
where else in the animal kingdom.
     What Sheets-Johnstone’s and Deacon’s analyses show (and especially so when
they are seen in combination) is that human freedom does not divert itself from
that of the animals by being merely semiotic. All creatures are semiotic creatures
in some sense, as I have argued extensively throughout this book. Rather, the
distinctive property is not that we are semiotic creatures but the way that we are
so —i.e., in the possession by the human species, held jointly by culture and by
biology, of a linguistic resource for thinking and communicating that reaches
far beyond the semiotic possibilities available to even the most intelligent of
other animals.
   Human rights, therefore, cannot be justified through the positing of an
absolute distinction between human and animal—but by the language-
and history-creating nature of human beings alone. The discourse of human
rights — and by extension, of the constitutional state — is therefore, in a deep
sense, the consequence of a dawning self-recognition of the human being as a
historical being.”°
   Neither, then, does biosemiotics see the division of knowledge production
into scientific and humanistic domains as one based on either essential or abso-
lute distinctions — such as is commonly done when the first regime is defined
as concerned with those parts of reality that are governed by unbreakable /aws,
while the second regime is confined to some small pockets in the universe
where freedom has attained (or preserved?) a certain latitude vis-a-vis these nat-
ural laws.



36    Human rights, then, amount to just this: the articulated realization of a historical experi-
ence that human civilizations have obtained. Attempts to legitimize human rights by appeals to
the (supposed) constitution of human nature — or to some kind of supposed ethical superior-
ity — are not only misdirected, but bound to fail.
310           BIOSEMIOTICS       AND   THE   HUMAN    BEING




   The absolutization of this distinction, although rarely explicitly declared,
seems implicitly present in most contemporary scientific work — where it
often permeates, and is hidden in, the value systems and exemplars (in the
Kuhnian sense) that ultimately legitimize scientific thinking as it unfolds
in peer review evaluations and editorial decisions. Such an absolute dichot-
omizing of the world of inquiry and knowledge necessarily leads our
thoughts into reductionism since, logically speaking, freedom cannot pos-
sibly evolve in an un-free world.*” The result of this is the well-known ten-
dency of science to consume increasingly larger chunks of the explanatory
and research funding possibilities, at the expense of the human and social
sciences — in the process, reducing these areas of human life to nothing but
lawful causality.
   But again, this division into two fundamental knowledge categories is — like
human rights    —a product of a historical experience. For centuries, it was an
exceedingly fruitful strategy to consider nature as a machine-like, law-bound
system— since this permitted the discovery of an apparently infinite series of
new deterministic relationships that could, in turn, support the more and more
powerful technological control of natural resources for use in human societies. **
However, the elevation of this historically useful working hypothesis to the status
of ultimate ontological truth has allowed an unwarranted arrogance to take hold
in the scientific society that has dangerously blinded our critical facilities to the
principle shortcomings — and, indeed, the often obvious inconsistencies — of
this hypothesis.”
      The basic epistemological problem of how to legitimize an internal relation
between scientific knowledge — which like all kinds of knowledge is necessar-
ily wrapped in language, even when it appears as couched in a mathematical for-
malism — and the fundamental world of things that science is supposed to be
concerned with, has, in fact, never been satisfactorily solved. Instead, the prob-
lem has been set aside — with reference partly, I suppose, to Kantian-type nomi-
nalist presuppositions, and partly (maybe especially) to the undeniable fact that
scientific knowledge in most cases actually does work in our real lives, and is thus




37     A natural law that stipulated a dynamics leaving some consequences undetermined would
hardly qualify as a true law —and even if it did, such a “law” would still have to be obeyed by
(what science often sees as) the passive pawns that inhabit physical reality. So, there is no freedom
in this worldview after all.
38 That the order of causality was often inverted, so that technological innovations would lead
to the construction of new scientific lawfulness rather than vice versa, doesn’t detract from the
functionality of the essentially dualistic logic at work here.
39     Such arrogance and hubris is often mirrored in the beliefs of those politicians who so admire
the technological strength and deterministic “single answers” of the scientific approach.
                                                           FROM    ANIMAL     TO HUMAN                 311



in no need of further legitimization.”® And in fact, I shall be the first to admit
that empirical confirmation — not the least of the incredible achievements that
science has afforded us — is a strong reason for believing a theory. But it is nev-
ertheless strangely unsatisfactory that, within this very same framework, we can-
not explain how something as elemental and critical to the entire success of the
project as linguistically expressed knowledge about an otherwise mind-indepen-
dent world is possible at all.
   In Peirce, the possibility of knowing is, in the end, justified by the adoption of
an evolutionary and realistic philosophy:

     In itself, no curve is “simpler” than another. A system of straight lines has inter-
     sections precisely corresponding to those of a system of like parabolas similarly
     placed, or to those of any one of an infinity ofsystems ofcurves. But the straight
     line appears to us [as being] “simple, because, as Euclid says, it lies evenly between
     its extremities; that is, because viewed endwise it appears as a point. That is, again,
     because light moves in straight lines. Now, “light moves in straight lines” because
     of the part which the straight line plays in the laws of dynamics. Thus it is that, our
     minds having been formed under the influence of phenomena governed by the
     laws of mechanics, certain conceptions entering into those laws become implanted
     in our minds, so that we readily guess at what the laws are. Without such a natural
     prompting, having to search blindfold for “a law which would suit the phenomena,”
     our chance ofinding it would be as one to infinity. [From this it follows that] the
     further physical studies depart from phenomena which have directly influenced the
     growth of the mind, the less we can expect to find the “laws” which govern them [as
     being] “simple” — that is, [as being] composed of afew conceptions natural to our
     minds (CP 1:10; italics added).

     An evolutionary realism of this kind presupposes an anchoring of human cog-
nition within a frame of evolutionary theory. And such a frame of understand-
ing is exactly what can be constructed on the basis ofabiosemiotic approach to
nature as a whole. Language then, as we have seen in this chapter, becomes an
extension of the principles discoverable in a general biosemiosis — and this is the
reason why veridical linguistic knowledge is possible. The perception by organ-
isms of their surroundings is, from the beginnings of life, already embedded in
their survival project, their corporeal intentionality. Thus the fact that language

40     Oneis, of course, often labeled anti-science or a crank if one points to things such as environ-
mental pollution, medical side effects, the rise of allergies, desertification, forest death, stress, psy-
chosomatic disease, and the general unease ofliving in modern society as evidence ofthe kinds of
nonknowledge (or anti-knowledge) that also seem inherent in this determinedly dualistic approach
to science and technology. Biosemiotics is attempting to overcome science’s preemptive dismissal
of its critics by engaging with arguments and evidence that are drawn from, and informed by, the
scientific literature itself. For what biosemiotics is working towards is not anti-science but better
science (in the original sense of science as a knowledge-bestowing explanation of the natural world
as it really is).
312       BIOSEMIOTICS    AND   THE HUMAN    BEING




permits humans access to an entirely unusual Lebenswelt, is in no way opposed
to the basic role of language (and semiosis more generally) as instrumental for
survival. As such, language is internally adjusted to the necessities that any pos-
sible human acts must obey, because such acts take place in a world that is itself
independent of language use. Language opens the door for humans to invent all
kinds of nonexistent and even impossible worlds, but it also endows us with the
ability to distinguish between all these nonexistent worlds, on the one hand, and
that one world, on the other hand, that we — like all the other animals — do not
long get away with consistently misjudging.
   As such, biosemiotics then offers a new fundament for an evolutionary epis-
temology. It does not derive an evolutionary epistemology from the neo-Dar-
winian belief that the cognitive worlds of organisms can in any simple way be
derived from survival-mechanical or game-theoretical scenarios operating on
populations of asemiotic entities and individuals. Rather, by recognizing semi-
otic capacity as an inherent property of all living systems, the task set for biose-
miotics in explaining the origin and nature of knowing in the biological world
becomes much less Sisyphusian. The human form of cognition is not, biose-
miotically speaking, solitary in the world (sensu Monod) but is an admirable
new and sophisticated elaboration of cognitive forms that, by the time hominids
finally appeared, had been at work in nature for hundreds of millions of years
(and, of course, still are).
   With this realization, the idea of human cognition as constitutive of an onto-
logically separate mental sphere, different in kind from all other ordinary natu-
ral phenomena, loses its raison d'etre. A biosemiotic evolutionary epistemology
deals in continuity and therefore encounters no puzzle of discontinuity that
must be solved by recourse to genetically improbable hopeful monsters, rad-
ically disjunctive evolutionary “just-so” stories, and the like. The explanatory
victory, rather, has in the end been obtained simply by accepting that living
systems from the very outset have been engaging in genuinely semiotic activi-
ties — and must have been so engaged if these systems were to successfully nego-
tiate the world, adapt to it, and survive. Thus, a relatively modest move in the
basic ontology of cognitive science — i.e., admitting the reality of sign processes
in even the simplest of living systems, an observation that is, in addition, well
supported by a century of empirical evidence — thus seems to help us solve one
of the hitherto most intractable problems in human evolution, as well as in nat-
ural philosophy.
   Biosemiotic epistemology, then, at last takes seriously the insight that Charles
Darwin expressed in The Descent ofMan in 1871: “The fact that the lower ani-
mals are excited by the same emotions as ourselves is so well established, that it
will not be necessary to weary the reader with many details. Terror acts in the
same manner on them as on us, causing the muscles to tremble, the heart to
                                            FROM    ANIMAL   TO HUMAN        313




palpilate, the sphincters to be relaxed, and the hair to stand on end”(Darwin
1981(1781), PAGE?). It is time that contemporary Darwinists start taking their
own hero just as seriously as we biosemioticians do as far as the nonanthropo-
morphic existence of cognition and feelings in animals are concerned. When
they do, they discover that Darwin essentially took the biosemiotic concep-
tion to be obvious — although he did not, in the nature of the case, know the
term, much less possess the means to make this idea useful in his own theoreti-
cal work. We today, however, have no such excuse.
/]
     =~
