9
                              Perspectives




                          Experimental Biology
When experimental biologists are confronted with the biosemiotic perspective,
they often ask what advantages might come from such an approach that, on the
face of it, appears to only make everything more complicated — and therefore,
more troublesome. This kind of response is often nourished by a widespread
instrumentalist attitude to scientific work, according to which theoretical posi-
tions must be judged on their ability to fruitfully guide experimental work.
   The concern is a valid one, for experimental work consists in creating intelli-
gent simplifications of the systems under study, and dyadic relations are for obvi-
ous reasons more easily adapted for this purpose than triadic. Thus, although
the experimentalist again and again will be challenged to explain the biochem-
ical signals he or she finds so clearly implicated in all life processes, trying to
investigate the cause and effect relations of such signaling is problematic in that
such relations are dependent, ultimately, on circumstances that cannot easily
be controlled in the experimental setup. Therefore, mechanistic dyadic mod-
els with many variables are still preferred in contemporary science over triadic
models that can not easily be mathematically formalized, and that carry onto-
logical undertones that are experienced as alien. In fact, the adoption of a gen-
uine (i.e., irreducibly) triadic model in place of a matrix of dyadic relations will
perhaps even be conceived as cutting corners, or as relinquishing the possibil-
ity that the standard dyadic approach will eventually result in an understanding
that goes to the very bottom of the matter.
   Regarded as a working hypothesis, this position must be respected. For when
it comes down to it, the whole argument of this book is based on millions of
reliable biochemical and biological experimental studies aimed at discover-
ing the dyadic relationships between phenomena. It is only due to the many
insights laboriously procured through this (standard dyadic) methodology that
enough genuine knowledge is now in place to suggest the hypothesis that such
mechanistic and dyadic logic itself, in a more profound analysis, should be seen
as subsumed under a more biologically primitive, interactive (triadic) logic.
Experimental biology thus, far from being a stumbling block to the biosemiotic
316          BIOSEMIOTICS    AND   THE   HUMAN   BEING




approach, is its necessary precondition. In the absence of the efforts of thou-
sands of experimentalists, whose work was — and is — driven by instrumental-
ist values, the biosemiotic approach would not have been capable of qualifying
itself, This said however, it should also be realized that the instrumentalist posi-
tion is itself seriously insufficient if the aim of the investigation is to understand
nature — not simply to continue the line of successful experimental work. It
may well be — to repeat a cliché — that the lost key is easiest to look for where
the streetlamp is shining, but if the key to nature’s principles for creating living
systems that can sense the world is hiding somewhere else, then this instrumen-
talist approach will never lead to the desired understanding.
    That many experimental biologists do not find it worth the trouble to exam-
ine this problem may seem legitimized by the sheer success of modern biochem-
istry. Confronted with the capacity of biochemistry to unite formerly separate
phenomena into one coherent picture by proving their common basis at the
biochemical bottom line (not to mention its function as the paradigmatic fun-
dament for a technological command of medicine and manufacture without
parallel in history), it is understandable that the practitioners of the discipline
do not themselves see any pressing need for questioning the theoretical funda-
ment of their scientific practice.
      In the long run, however, they too, may discover that it is not healthy to rest
on one’s past successes. And in this particular case, one may even add that is
has been precisely the extreme success of experimental biology that has now
brought us to a stage in scientific development where biochemistry should begin
to address, rather than continue to avoid, the recurrent problems inherent — in
spite of its success— in the chemical paradigm. For, although the strategy of
biochemical reduction may presumably still have many triumphs to celebrate, it
has nevertheless been taken so far now that, little by little, it has begun hitting
its own natural limits.
   That this may be the case was surprisingly revealed in the episode of what
surely must be considered biochemistry’s most striking accomplishment to
date — the mapping of the human genome. For the results of this gargantuan
project made it abundantly clear that genes do not constitute that unambiguous
key to an understanding of human biology (much less human nature) that many
scientists had expected — and that, indeed, several outstanding celebrities in the
scientific world had predicted. For it turns out that there are simply far too few
unique human genes to support the naive belief that genes can, in any straight-
forward or simplistic way, be the singular causes of specific human traits such as
personality characteristics or mental diseases. As we have seen already — and as
the studies of the neural and genetic grounding of behavior in the worm C. ele-
gans make clear— the conception of genes for specific traits is and always was
a gross misunderstanding. Even many geneticists of the old school may now
                                                            PERSPECTIVES           317



admit that a biosemiotic understanding of the genome as a sophisticated inven-
tory-control system that minutely furnishes components (enzymes) for the
semiotic scaffolding of ontogenesis on an as-called-for basis offers a more realis-
tic model of the relations between genes and traits.
   Exactly the uncovering of this previously assumed bottom line for the organi-
zation of life made it clear that evolution has worked an interactive, triadic logic
into the organization oflife processes — one that subsumes the otherwise organ-
ismic chaos of biochemical activities under its controlling agency. Dyadic mod-
eling (and dyadic thinking) simply does not suffice as an explanatory strategy
here. Thus, even though biochemistry as an experimental discipline may still,
and for a long time, profit from basing its lab-isolated piecework on a dyadic
simplification of naturally occurring biological chemistry, the discipline ought
to recognize this approach for what it is —a    very practical but necessarily artifi-
cial and incomplete working method, nota satisfactory theory or fully explana-
tory model of the actual organization of life processes as they occur in nature.
   Biochemistry needs to be put into its rightful place among the natural sciences
as the tool for analyzing the bottom-line processes of life, which is what this sci-
ence is about. And the more we learn about the biosemioric logic that organizes
the processes of life, the more we must expect that a triadic and semiotic under-
standing will replace the mechanistic and dyadic models of biochemistry. Indeed,
it is already now difficult to open a scientific journal (let alone a textbook) in the
area of biochemistry without encountering, on every page, semiotic terms such as
signal, messenger, communicates, and sign — yet these very terms hardly make any
sense inside of the reductionist framework adhered to by most biochemists (see
Yates and Kugler 1984; Yates 1985; Hoffmeyer 1997a). Claus Emmeche’s apposite
expression for this odd kind of doublethink is spontaneous semiotics(/Emmeche
1999a) — and it can presumably coexist effortlessly within the hegemonic para-
digm of biochemistry because of a tacit consensus that one is merely “speaking
in shorthand” and could, in the end, avoid the semiotic implications altogether,
if only one expressed oneself carefully enough (Emmeche 2002). The increas-
ingly widespread need to express one’s scientific findings in semiotic terminol-
ogy does, however, indicate that real and important insights are indeed hidden in
this unavoidable semiotization of the terminology — and that our overall under-
standing of the organization of living systems would suffer a decisive loss if ter-
minology more appropriate to the current dyadic paradigm were imposed upon
authors by the editors of scientific journals.
   In fact, after reading the current biochemistry literature, one might
claim — just a little ironically perhaps — that biochemistry has already become
biosemiotics, it just has not realized it yet. And this is why it is currently incapa-
ble of drawing the necessary theoretical implications of its own research data. In
the long run, however, this selective eclecticism probably cannot be sustained.
318          BIOSEMIOTICS     AND   THE   HUMAN    BEING




                              Man’s Place in Nature
The instrumentalist objection to biosemiotics may reflect a deeper source of
conflicted thinking in the general conception of science of the Western world.
Perhaps because many people see it as the task of religion, and not of science, to
understand the world as a coherent whole, the conception has gained footing that
science is to be defined by its methodology, rather than by its achievements, as
a tool for understanding (and not just for successfully manipulating) our world.
This limitation in the scope of science is probably reinforced by the Anglophone
conception of science as comprising mainly the natural sciences. The Scandinavian
term for science, naturvidenskab (like the German equivalent Naturwissenshaft)
implies an activity which concerns both nature and knowledge           — or, in fact,
knowledge about nature. The term thus is more comprehensive than the English
science, and it unambiguously indicates the aim of science as coming to under-
stand the workings of nature. The conception of science as limited to an approach
based on a certain (if rarely well-defined) scientific methodology has however now
become widespread even in continental Europe and Scandinavia.
      But, according to this latter, more restrictive conception of science, a proj-
ect like that of quantum mechanics already seems seriously close to being asked
to leave good company. Quantum mechanics, however, was perhaps freed from
this dangerous lure by complementarity theory. By epistemizing the inherent
holism of the subject-object relationship, complementarity theory protected
physics against the troublesome subjectivization of nature that would have
brought it into conflict with the ideal of science. The same maneuver was once
again put to use by John von Neumann and Howard Pattee when they — as we
saw in Chapter 4 — claimed complementarity between the symbolic and the
dynamic functional modes in living systems.
   By positioning the sign process (sevziosis) as an irreducible ontological cate-
gory in our universe, biosemiotics (standing on the shoulders of Peircean cosmol-
ogy) has definitively put itself beyond this methodologically justified limitation
of the scientific understanding of our world. And while it takes an agnostic atti-
tude to the question of religion, biosemiotics does aim toward an understand-
ing of the world of nature as a place that has produced human beings — and that
therefore may hold subjects. Biosemiotics has then, from its very point of depar-
ture, refused to accept the absolutization of the Cartesian subject-object dis-
tinction as an ontological reality in the sense of subject-object dualism.’
      Breaking the hold of the Cartesian mischief somewhat, Charles Darwin
indirectly established a cosmology that allowed humans to belong in the world


1 Tam speaking here in the normally understood sense of this dualism (and thus not in the sense
given to it byJohn Deely; see Chapter 8).
                                                                     PERSPECTIVES               319


without having to invoke any supernatural causes or beings. Since Darwin, as
 we saw in the preceding chapter, had no trouble accepting the idea that animals
 possess feelings — and that therefore in a very elementary sense they are sub-
jects — his conception of the human situation, vis-A-vis nature, was not very far
 from the biosemiotic one. However, with the fusion of Darwin’s theory with
 molecular genetics, a burden was placed upon the shoulders of natural selec-
 tion that slowly annihilated the original vision of Darwin. With that, even
 thoughts and feelings had to be understood as genetically-based components
 in the behavior of an animal —a kind of behavioral spasm or, at least, involun-
tary reflex, like the movements of a compass needle. And with this new perspec-
tive, gone was the possibility of visualizing animals as subjects in the same sense
that we see ourselves.
   So, while Darwin himself placed the human being safely and understandably
within the masterpiece of nature, the neo-Darwinist (not so safely) threw us out
again — telling us that our gees may well belong to the reality of nature, but our
thoughts and feelings are well outside of the reach of science. Consequently, those
previously least deniable aspects of our own biological experience  — because
they could not be reduced to a molecular explanation — came to be viewed with
increasing suspicion, as if they were Fata Morganas, or epiphenomena without
proper autonomous ontological reality.
   Biosemiotics, by denying this construction of living creatures as gene-
determined robots —or survival machines, in the hard-hitting terminology
of Dawkins (1976) — reestablishes the conception of living beings as subjects
whose activities are governed by internal models of their surroundings.” True,
we currently have little verifiable knowledge about what precisely these models
ofthe surrounding worlds actually consist in — we need a model of how it is that
animals can model, in other words — but we must at least recognize the reality|/
of the phenomenon. And in so doing, biosemiotics explicitly rejects the concep-,
tion of nature that the French molecular biologist, Jacques Monod, in his influ-
ential book, Le Hazard et la Neécessité, characterized with the following words:
“Il faut bien que Homme enfin se réveille de son réve millénaire pour decou-
vrir sa totale solitude, son étrangeté radicale. Il sait maintenant que, comme un
Tsigane, il est marge de l'Univers ot il doit vivre. Univers sourd a sa musique,
indifférent A ses espoirs comme & ses souffrances ou a ses crimes” (Monod 1970,
187-88).”


2 See Sebeok (1988, 72): “The recalcitrant term Umwelt had best be rendered in English by the
word model.”
3 English translation: “Ifheaccepts this message — accepts all it contains — then man must at
last wake out ofhis millenary dream; and in doing so, wake to his total solitude, his fundamental
isolation. Now he at last realizes that, like a gypsy, he lives on the boundary of an alien world. A
    320           BIOSEMIOTICS        AND   THE    HUMAN     BEING



       Biosemiotics, of course, agrees with Monod that the universe does not care
    for human hopes or traumas and is deaf to our music. But the simple fact that
    there is life in the universe already indicates that human solitude is less severe
    than claimed by Monod’s heroic philosophy of objectivity. For with the cre-
    ation of living systems, the universe has disclosed an inherent propensity
    that — although it surely does not include the possession of anything remotely
    resembling human emotional life of the kind that Monod mocks — neverthe-
    less seems much more related to that dimension of existence we call mental,
    spiritual, or (with a better word perhaps) minded, than it is to the more mechan-
    ical aspects of existence that the universe otherwise seems to specialize in.
       Peirce, as we saw, claimed that the the law ofmind amounted to the tendency
    of nature to form habits. By viewing this fundamental semiosis — for a habit is
    the general form of an interpretant— as the innermost property of the universe,
    he worked out a cosmology in which the individual life and the individual con-
    sciousness appeared as evolutionary concretizations of a more general propen-
    sity of the universe. Restricting myself only to the examination of Living (bio)
    systems, in this book, I have characterized this propensity among organisms as
    an evolutionary growth in semiotic freedom.
       Thus, the realization of Peircean cosmology in the form of modern biose-
So
 Lee
 *Y miotics becomes a lever for the repositioning of the human being as a part of
 c nature. Accordingly, Monod’ idea of the human being as “a gypsy at the edge of
    time” (ibid., 188) may finally be dismantled — to be replaced by a conception of
    human beings as embedded in the general biosemiosis of living nature. Human
    mind is not, then, an alien element in the universe — but rather, an instantia-
    tion of evolutionary trends that penetrate the life sphere and that (I suspect) is
    deeply rooted in the general dynamics of the universe.
       For the rest of this chapter, I wish to consider some of the consequences that
    may be drawn from this grand shift in the conception of Man’s place in nature
    in a range of disciplinary contexts where, until now, the rationale and impe-
    tus has been based on the philosophy of objectivity so eloquently expressed by
    Monod. But before leaving the discussion of the way human beings belong to
    nature, I want to briefly draw attention to the German-American philosopher
    Hans Jonas who, in many respects, has developed a view of human belonging in
    nature that is related to that of biosemiotics (Jonas 1966 (2001)); Weber 2002;
    Frolund 2002).
       Jonas, like Peirce, arrives at the conclusion that causality and teleology are
    not opposed to each other. On the contrary, teleology is needed for causal-
    ity to make any sense. And feos is something we know about before we know


    world that is deaf to his music, just as indifferent to his hopes as it is to his suffering or his crimes”
    (Monod 1971b, 172-73).
                                                                        PERSPECTIVES                321



about anything else — for we know ¢elos from our own bodily life. (Yet perhaps
even my saying that we know this from our bodies reflects my own lingering
Cartesianism — far truer to say that we know telos because we are our bodies
or our bodies are us.) If my body is hit by something solid, I get hurt — and my
attempts to avoid such situations nicely bring out the interrelation of materially
efficient cause and #eos. In much the same vein, Jonas’s philosophy attempts to
rehabilitate an anthropomorphic understanding of nature:
   Perhaps, rightly understood, man is after all the measure of all things — not indeed
   through the legislation ofhis reason, but through the exemplar ofhis psychophys-
   ical totality, which represents the maximum of concrete ontological completeness
   known to us: a completeness  from which, reductively, the species of being may have
   to be determined by way of progressive ontological “subtraction” down to the min-
   imum of bare elementary matter (instead of the complete being constructed from
   the basis by cumulative addition) (Jonas 1966, 23-24).

   Importantly, Jonas is careful to underline that this anthropomorphic concep-
tion of nature in no way implies vitalism. Driesch’s big error, according to Jonas,
was to understand final causality as a kind of efficient causality that, mysteri-
ously, worked backwards in time. This formulation, of course, got Driesch into
big trouble, because such inversed causes could not be made accessible to empir-
ical tests —as must be demanded if efficient causes are postulated. Driesch’s
misconceived vitalism, therefore, only helped to confirm prevailing prejudices
against all and any kind of finalistic thinking. But final causes should not be
confused with efficient causes since, as Jonas observes, the relation between
these two kinds of causes is not one of identity (x equals y), but one where final
causes make use of efficient causes as a means for executing their finality (x via y
(Frolund 2002). This, as we saw, was also the position ofPeirce.*
   How close Jonas gets to a biosemiotic understanding is perhaps especially evi-
dent in his critique of the cybernetic model of life that is based on a dyadic struc-
ture connecting perception and movement. Against this model, Jonas (1973)
claims that the processes of life “are composed of the triad of perception, mobil-
ity and feeling. Feeling, more basic than the two other capacities, and rather
linking them, is the animal translation of the basic tendency at work already
from the undifferentiated, pre-animal stage on, in the continuous realization
of metabolism” (cited from Weber 2002, 188). Thus, Weber notes that feeling
“is the interpretant necessary to make up a biosemiotic entity. ... Feeling that
rises from the intrinsic teleology of organism which Jonas is calling here ‘basic


4 This may be noted in Santaella-Braga’s paraphrasing of Peirce in Chapter 3: “Final causation
without efficient causation is helpless, but efficient without final is worse than helpless, “by far, it
is mere chaos; and chaos is not even so much as chaos, without final causation; it is blank noth-
ing” (CP 1:200; Santaella-Braga 1999, 502).
322           BIOSEMIOTICS      AND   THE HUMAN     BEING




tendency’ is the tertium comparationis that links the causa, perception, with its
effect, mobility” (ibid.).
   That Jonas in the above citation uses the word metabolism should be seen
against the background of his conception of metabolism as a defining qual-
ity of life. Jonas sees metabolism as the formative determination whereby sub-
stance— in the sense of the chance accumulation of molecules — is ordered in
the service of life’s capacity for self-integration. Seen from the point of view
of biochemistry, this identification of the formative aspect with metabolism may
seem a little confusing, for metabolism is nothing but a transfer of energy from
food (or sunlight) to a biologically useful form — usually ATP —and the utili-
zation of this energy to run the ordinary business of the body (e.g., supporting
the incessant maintenance work required by tissues and organs). Metabolism
thus may well be seen as the precondition for self-organizing life processes — but
only in the same way that a power station is a precondition for the continued
reproduction and growth of societal organization. The point is that in both
cases, what is being examined is brute energy production, without any necessary
specification of purpose or direction. Understood biochemically, metabolism is
connected to the dyadic — not the triadic — aspects of life. But this somewhat
pedantic terminological objection should not detract from the essential core of
a deep relatedness between Jonas’s philosophy and a biosemiotic conception of
human-hood as a legitimately understood part of nature.


                                Aesthetics and Ethics
The biosemiotic conception of the psychological life of humans as one mod-
eled upon mental themes that, in at least some very primitive proto-form, are
present already in animals, has implications both for our understanding of
human aesthetic needs and for the understanding of human ethical dilemmas.
Indeed —and perhaps most
                    mo: importantly of all — biosemiotics leads1
                                                               us to con-
sider these two aspects of human life as inherently bound toone another. “~~
   The oddly under- esteemed work of Susanne Langer, on the bodily and semi-
otic roots of human symbolism and mind, offers an unavoidable source for
insights concerning the biosemiotic analysis of these questions —a “treasure
house of precise, provocative, and empirical exemplifications,” as Robert Innis
(2007) has put it. Langer (1942, 32-33) writes,
      I believe there is a primary need in man, which other creatures probably do not
      have, and which actuates all his apparently unzoOlogical aims, his wistful fancies,
      his consciousness of value, his utterly impractical enthusiasms, and his awareness
      of a “Beyond” filled with holiness... this basic need, which certainly is obvious only
      in man, is the need ofsymbolization. The symbol--making function is one of man’s
                                                               PERSPECTIVES             323



   primary activities, like eating, looking, or moving about. ... It is not the essential
   act of thought that issymbolization, butan act essential to thought, and prior to it.
   Symbolization is the essential act of mind; and mind takesinmore than what is
   commonly   called thought. Only certain products of the symbol-making brain can             |
   be used according to the canons ofdiscursive reasoning. In every mind there is an
   enormous store of other symbolic material, which is put to different uses or perhaps
   even to no use at all —a mere result of spontaneous brain activity, a reserve fund of
           .                                                                                  i}
   conceptions, a surplus mental wealth.

   Langer, like Peirce and Dewey — and, as we saw, Deacon — is aware that we
share with other life forms “the dual functioning, and yoking together, of index-
icality and iconicity,” and that “these two ‘lower’ strata of semiosis prepare the
way for ‘symbolization’ proper, which makes the ‘great shift’ that Langer wants to
trace from animal mentality to human mind” (Innis 2007). Comparing Langer’s
conception of art with that of John Dewey, Innis (2007) quotes Langer (1953,
 397) from Feeling and Form: “In art, it is the impact of the whole, the immedi-
ate revelation of vital import, that acts as the psychological lure to long contem-
plation” (italics added) and goes on to observe that “Langer and Dewey both
share a noninstrumental notion of the primary value of art: long contemplation
culminates in a consummatory experience wherein the experience is savored for
its own sake or, for Langer, for the sake of ‘insight, since an art work gives us not
just heightened experience, but knowledge, although not in concepts.”
   Art is presumably the most uniquely human way to express one’s aesthetic
being — and for that reason, it has traditionally been the point of departure for
most attempts at defining human aesthetic psychology. Seen from a biosemi-~|
otic perspective, however, the essential question that must be asked is if a key
to an understanding of our human aesthetic being might eventually be discov-
ered through an analysis of the daily biosemiotic challenges that our big-brained
ancestors of millions of years ago had to cope with.
   Susanne Langer’s conception of aesthetics as based on a “general expressivity
of life” seems important in this context: “The same feeling may be an ingredi-
ent in sorrow and in the joys of love. A work of art expressing such an ambig-
uously associated effect will be called ‘cheerful’ by one interpreter and ‘wistful’
or even ‘sad’ by another. But what it conveys is really just one nameless passage
_of‘feltlife’knowable throwgh itsincarnation inthe art symbol— even if the
beholder has never felt it in his own flesh” (Langer 1953, 374). She, in this way, ,
sees art as springing from what might be called both the expressed objectiviza-
tion offeeling and the simultaneous subjectivization ofnature. Here, on the one
side, art is a kind ofinter-subjectivity guaranteed by the universal appeal of the |
aesthetic form as /iving form — and on the other side, such a guarantee is only
valid in the first place because of the universality
                                             ofsubjectivity forany currently _
living creature.
324          BIOSEMIOTICS   AND   THE   HUMAN   BEING




      That the aesthetic needs of humans are basically of flesh and blood implies
that they must have their roots in the conditions of human lifein general. These
conditions are, among other things, characterized by a range of biological uni-
versals, such as breathing, pulse, movement schemas, digestion, and rhythm — as
well as a long shared history of social universals such as threats, competition,
embracement, and prayer. And behind these human universals, we must sup-
pose the existence of a plethora of corporeal-psychological patterns that have
become incorporated in line with the establishment of such universals.
   Such corporeal-psychological interleavings open up the potential for an abun-
dance of both feelings and expressive forms. For in the daily attempts to cope
with the conditions of life, we all have to know how to interpret our own feel-
ings and expressions as well as the feelings and expressions of others. And since
this project is recursive and the possibilities of interpretation effectively infinite,
there must necessarily arise a need for some kind of formalization. I shall sug-
gest, then, that the biosemiotic core at the heart of the human aesthetic sense
is rooted in aneasing    of the burden of interpretive inventiveness, or — in cases
where this fails us — in the lowering of the level of social confusion that neces-
sarily follows from the formalizization, an thus the ‘making sensible, of human
expressions and feclings. ©
  To work out a natural history of aesthetics along these lines obviously tran-
scends the ambitions of the present work, and I shall pursue this question here
no further. I shall, however, shortly ask the reader to consider how this biosemi-
otic
  ‘icunderstanding of aesthetic origins might change our conception of the inter-
relationbetween aesthetics and ethics. For, perhaps more than anything else,
this whole discussion is important because it offers a new theoretical framework
for considering the possible existence of some universal constituents in the way
that human beings biosemiotically value their life- world,
  ‘It has been shown, for example, that most small children instantaneously dis-
tinguish between pictures depicting something alive from pictures depicting
something that is not alive. Children also much more easily imitate actions that
they can see a purpose to, than actions that seem random or purposeless — the
existence of purposiveness is, of course, the most striking, if gee          property
of animate nature.      Pre pr {0Cg (ari eee            Ce nel   nfve fe,
   Similarly, the unprecedented quantity of pet animals that have become so
much a part of family life in the modern world, testifies — like its mirror image,
the aversion to the pervasive insect world of creeping, crawling things, as well
as to slime, spit, blood, and excrement — _t0 the immediate and strong appeal
of 1life
     itself
         to our emotional life. For ultimately it is /ife that, depending on the
circumstances, calls out of us our gentleness, fear, fascination, awe, confidence,
brutality, loathing, and hate. And while the sea, a rainbow, the firmament, the
mountains, and the rivers may all raise strong feelings within some people, these
                                                          PERSPECTIVES           325



feelings rarely elicit the same degree of spontaneous concern. A stone in the road,
a cloud in the sky, a drop of rain, or a snowflake may all in some situations seem
cognitively interesting— but they do not, in general, appeal to our visceral and
emotional life with the same surprising intensity as do the howling of nearby
wolves or the peeping of just-hatched birds.                                  —
   There is an irreplaceability to living things, claims the Danish philosopher
Peter Kemp (1991), that we cannot avoid recognizing because it comes from a
corporeal existence that we know in ourselves. Likewise, in the phenomenol-
ogy of Merleau-Ponty, we exist corporeally neither as pure subject nor as pure
object. When I experience myself and when I experience another, corporeal- |
ity per se is acommon denominator — we are identical by being incarnated. My
experience of having any kind of sedfat all is therefore necessarily an experience
ofakind of corporeality. And, as such, it cannot be separated from the experi-
ence of something being outside of myself (Merleau-Ponty 2002(1945)).
   “I am always a stranger to myself and therefore open to others” is the way
that the Danish phenomenologist Dan Zahavi (1999) puts it. Theability to feel
empathy towards other_people is, in this philosophy, part of the fundamental
human condition, and it is this abiliry that makes us ethical beings. We can-
not avoid recognizing that every other human person is vulnerable and existen- |
tially irreplaceable like ourselves. “This idea of the irreplaceable,’ Kemp writes,
“derives from a growing consciousness of the fundamental importance for the
ethical life of the experience of loss, and it may be stretched to count for every-
thing that may irrevocably get lost, but which we do not want to disappear: |
the species of plants and animals, and the supporting natural cycles in general”
(Kemp, Lebech, and Rendtorff 1997, 28).
  Biosemiotics adds to these ideas the further standpoint that the psycholog-
ical and corporeal reality of each individual is so tightly interconnected that
the aesthetic and ethical needs of a human being can not any longer be coher-
ently understood as incorporeal —which is to say that, such needs cannot any
longer be conceived as being based only on intellectual will power but rather, as
always arising from a conjoined corporeal/intellectual effort. To accept an eth-
ics of vulnerability, justified by the fundamental irreplaceability of life, must be
seen, in this light, to be as much a bodily need as it is an intellectual decision.
Accordingly, the role played by intellectual judgment in this context is that of a
guide rather than that of an executive officer.
   This does not, of course, imply a reduction of ethics to brute ethology — for
the whole point of this argument is that the semiotization of the body has
already pushed the potential for genuinely free action back into corporeal
nature. Psychic life is enabled by the corporeal and corporeal life is in a deep
sense psychic (Chapter 7). The corporeality of the human being is therefore,
for better or worse (for not only the human good but also the human evil has
 326            BIOSEMIOTICS       AND   THE HUMAN       BEING




 human empathy as its precondition) , thekey to our ability to empathize with
 theother.This iis not because the other has a body, but because he or shesisa body

 ular is it not a duty, for it isgcororealh
                                  a         eltnecessity.” And dle fact that we
 often choose to disregard this necessity is the cause for much harm to ourselves
 as well as to others. In a modern society (as perhaps in every human society), the
 biosemiotic integrity of people is perpetually challenged by the sheer multitude
 of social and mental demands for interaction. And because no person is capable
 of honoring them all, such demands latently threaten to corrupt our corporeal-
psychological harmony. Ethics, in this view, is thus an expression of the cultur-
ally mediated experience of how to best protect the semiotized body self. We
must empathize with the other for the sake of the biosemiotic body itself.
a
   And here we can see how the aesthetic, as well as the ethical, demand on life is
 rooted in a biosemiosis that integrates body and mind. Our unquenchable long-
 ing for symbolizations of the felz life (to use Langer’s eloquent expression) orig-
 inates in the selfsame biosemiotic reality that also causes our empathy with the
 vulnerable irreplaceability of other human beings. Biosemiotics thus adds to the
 aesthetic and ethical discourse a possibility for the anchoring of such theories in
 the undeniable universality of the lived life.


                                     Medical Bioethics
 In our time, a threatening gap is widening between humankind’s customary
 conceptions of the human condition and the new understandings of life that
 relentlessly intrude upon us under the pressure of the provocative possibilities
 being offered by an ever-advancing medical technology. Not only have the many
 technical interventions in the reproductive process created new human dilem-
 mas, but even more fine-grained interventions such as gene therapy and organ
 transplantation are also critically challenging long-held moral and ethical tradi-
 tions (Wheeler 2006).
       The ethical problems connected to such new medical interventions involve
 both direct risk factors and the more general consideration of threats to human
 dignity and integrity. In the medical test called amniocentesis, for example, one
 of the risks concerns the occurrence offalse positives — i.e., embryos that return
 a result of “probable defects” in test samples although the embryos are, in fact,
 perfectly healthy. The direct risk in such cases is that parents decide to abort an
 otherwise healthy embryo. Procedures such as amniocentesis, however, also lead
 to worries that are more indirectly connected to the outcome, but more directly

 s     Inthis regard, see Favareau’s (2001) biosemiotic analysis on the data coming out of the research
 into mirror neurons.
                                                          PERSPECTIVES            327


connected to the entire purpose of the test —i.e., the elimination of eventual
embryos with genetic deficiencies or other traits that are potentially suboptimal
(as might be determined by the culture at the time). Here it might be claimed
that this purpose in itself goes against the Kantian imperative of never treating
another person (here an embryo) only as a means.
   While biosemiotics can hardly add anything important to the mistake risk
discussion as such, it does throw new light upon the question of the ethical sta-
tus of human life, personal integrity, and dignity. For, as we saw in Chapter 4,
the very concept of an individual being (human, animal, plant, or fungal) is far
from as obvious in a biosemiotic optic as it is when seen in the more traditional
light, and this leads to a certain ambiguity in the conception of irreplaceability.
For what exactly is it that is irreplaceable? Is it the germ cells? Is it the DNA? Is
it the fertilized egg cell? Or is it the newborn child? And what should be meant
quite generally by the beginning of a life — or the end of life for that matter?
    Seen from the biosemiotic perspective, these questions may perhaps not be as
decisive as is usually supposed. The semiotization of biological life implies a loos-
ening of the narrow binding of life to certain privileged and distinct structures, in
favor of a process conception that instead identifies the phenomenon of life with
a continued code-dual semiosis. In prokaryotes (who make up by far the major-
ity of all living creatures on Earth), life is indeed an unbroken chain of daughter
cells following upon daughter cells in a continuous flow of cell growth and divi-
sion. To ask when, exactly, any one of these given cells started its life is utterly
abstract   — since the cell, both as far as its substance (cytoplasm) is concerned,
and as concerns its form (both its membrane and its genome), is connected to
all ancestral organisms in the same unbroken line. In multicellular organisms
such as plants or animals, one may of course speak of an individual's life that
starts with the establishment of a single cell (the zygote in organisms that sexually
reproduce) that multiplies through a web of cellular divisions, leading to the for-
mation of an adult individual. But as soon as one turns to consider the life cycles
found in fungi, it readily becomes clear that the concept of the individual that
seems suitable for the life cycles of animals and humans cannot be generalized
to life processes per se. Many fungal species, for example, spend the major part
of their life cycle carrying two autonomous nuclei (one male and one female) in
each cell. Conception has been frozen in place, so to say, at the moment right
before these two nuclei would normally fuse in plants or animals. The fusion
of the two nuclei takes place only at the ultimate end of this phase of dikaryotic
life (karyon = cell nucleus) whereby, finally, a proper diploid cell is formed. This
“normal” diploid cell, however, does not last for long but instead quickly divides
itself again under the formation of haploid spores (sex cells with only one set of
chromosomes). These haploid cells are then ready to fuse with haploid cells of the
opposite sex whereby a new phase of dikaryotic life begins.
328        BIOSEMIOTICS    AND   THE   HUMAN   BEING



   Thus, in these fungi, the diploid phase   —that condition that we humans
without further reflection take to be a proper individual's life — is reduced to
only one short intermezzo in between two extended phases of tight common
haploid life. Here the process of fertilization has been stretched, so to say, to
occupy nearly the whole of the organism's life. Diploid life, such as we know
it from ourselves, cannot therefore bio-logically be seen as being the privileged
form of individual life. And one consequence of this is that the starting point of
an individual human life is not a biologically meaningful concept. To the extent
this concept has any meaning at all, it isa meaning that is derived elsewhere than
from biology. For human life, just like all other forms of life, is from the biolog-
ical perspective an unbroken chain of growth and cell divisions.
    However, the fact that every human being nevertheless is very intimately con-
nected to just one individual life therefore calls for an explanation that cannot
be derived from the mere biological fact that human beings are living creatures.
If we want to explain why human life is seen as so narrowly connected to our
experience as individuals, we had better search for the explanation in the pecu-
liarity of the human form of life, and not as the result of life processes in gen-
eral. And here the overarching distinguishing mark between the human form
of life and all others is the extraordinary semiotic agility possessed by this big-
 brained animal.
    From these deliberations follows a conclusion of deep significance for ethi-
 cal discussions in the medical area: The individuality ofa human life cannot be
justified by its uniqueness as a particular genetic combination, but must be justi-
fred by its uniqueness as a particular semiotic creature. Semiotic uniqueness is dif-
 ferent in kind from genomic uniqueness because it depends on a potential that
 bears an inherent indeterminacy and creativity — a potential, furthermore, that
 we humans know much better how to evaluate and enjoy than is made possible
 through the severe determinacy of genomic specification. Human uniqueness,
 then, is not molecular, but semiotic. And from this it follows that the readily felt
 irreplaceability of a human being is rooted in its semiotic individuation process.
   This conclusion leads us to the emotionally troublesome consequence that
an objective answer can not be given to the question of when a human life starts
and stops being irreplaceable. Considered as a genome, it is irreplaceable from
the moment of fertilization — and the ethics of irreplaceability within the optic
of genomic individuality logically leads to a rejection of any and all manipula-
tion with embryos. But if instead we ask the question of when the semiotic indi-
viduation process of a fertilized egg cell is so far advanced that a human life is
violated by its abortion, no such clear answer presents itself.
   The biosemiotic understanding in reality forces us into an evaluation of a
more-or-less situation. Humanhood thus becomes a more-or-less property!
And thus—as with most other essential questions of life— the question of
                                                        PERSPECTIVES           329


whether a technical intervention destroys a human life depends on a process of
reflexive pros and cons, and thus each single instance of technical intervention
must be evaluated through a concrete analysis. There simply is no unitary proce-
dure — neither rational nor ethical— upon which such ethical judgments can
otherwise be safely based.
   Through this loosening of individuality from the genomic absolute, the invi-
olability of life becomes not theoretical and absolute, but specifically embod-
ied and concrete. The stricture that you must not kill another human being does
not then depend on a principle of human inviolability, but upon the fact that
such an act will lead to the elimination of an invaluable semiotic richness — one
that demands our deepest empathy. For, as we saw in the preceding section, it
is precisely the existential ability to identify ourselves with other semiotically
free systems that stands as the pivotal point of ethics within the biosemiotic
perspective.
  Thus, the statement that she irreplaceability of a human being is connected
with its semiotic individuation process implies that an intervention at the early
stages of embryonic development — where semiotic individuation has not yet
proceeded very far —as for instance in early abortion or therapeutic cloning,
do not violate the ethic of irreplaceability. Also, at the other end of life, this
line of argumentation has ethical consequences. For it implies that patients
whose brain processes have become irreparably dysfunctional, and who are
therefore kept “alive” only by the mechanics of permanent treatment in a respi-
rator, can no longer be conceived of as genuinely human individuals. For when
only physiological and biochemical maintenance functions are left functional,
semiotic individuation has been brought to a definitive stop — and the super-
ficial similarity of such an artificially sustained body to a formerly alive per-
son is nothing but a cosmetic cover for this once fully human person’s current
state of nonlife. Life-maintenance practices of this kind are — seen from the
standpoint of biosemiotics — meaningless. What is being maintained here is
not life, but merely chemistry.
   And finally, a biosemiotic understanding of human life as an ongoing process
of open-ended change has deep implications for our conceptions of identity and
integrity. Semiotic individuation continues all through life, and the experience
that many elderly persons have of being, in some strange sense, another person
now than they were in their younger days is not wholly unfounded. We must
reject the popular idea of identity as being connected to a particular biologi-
cal entity or body, and learn to see identity rather as a temporary nodal point
along a process that each of us is ceaselessly engaged in —a process of identity
formation and change that does not end until death. It is, in other words, not in
the heritable endowment of genetic singularity that identity is to be found, but
rather in the lifelong attempt to adjust our personal development to our own
330          BIOSEMIOTICS   AND   THE   HUMAN   BEING




unique needs and experiences — often in spite of the genetically caused defects
that we might have to overcome. A person that is born blind is not, for that rea-
son, left to a certain destiny but can, as we all know, counter his or her handicap
in numerous semiotically unique and individuated ways. Integrity of identity is,
I suppose, before anything else, a designation for the coherent personality that
one tries ceaselessly all through life to work out, often against great odds.


                         Ecology and Environment
Much confusion surrounds the debates about human beings’ responsibility to
the environment. Are we to care for nature’s ecological richness and coherence
for the sake of its continued sustainability as our productive apparatus — or do
we, in addition to this notion of self-interested stewardship, have some more
profound moral obligation to protect nature’s numerous life forms against the
growing threat of their extinction? As is often the case in such situations, a polar-
ization has occurred between fundamentalists and pragmatists. One faction has
devoted itself to what they call deep ecology that ascribes an autonomous moral
status to nature itself (Naess 1989), while the other side holds that the purpose
of protecting nature is to maintain sustainable human societies (an attitude
deep-ecologists have somewhat self-righteously nicknamed shallow ecology).
      It probably won’t surprise the reader to learn that the biosemiotic position
opens up a possible intermediate theoretical standpoint — although deep ecol-
ogists conceivably might brush this off as shallow ecology in disguise. This
position recognizes that human utility does not exhaust our ethical obliga-
tions towards natural systems, but it also refuses to ascribe moral status to all
of nature’s products and effects as such. Life cannot — neither in all abstract-
ness, nor in the shape of individual living systems — be said to have a claim to
our protection at any price. What does have such a claim is not life per se, but
an emergent trait pertaining to life as an evolving process: semiotic diversity
and elegance.
   This position, it should be noted, is merely a logical extension of the ethical
reflections discussed in the preceding sections — but now applied to nature at
large. For if we accept vulnerability and irreplaceability as central ethical con-
cerns that we can not disregard without brutalizing our own human integrity,
then these two concepts can not a priori be delimited to the human sphere.
Even an earth worm is vulnerable in the sense that it risks destruction if one
treads on it. The same goes for bacteria in a test tube that may be killed by the
addition of just a dash of strong acid. And, more obviously, this is true for com-
plex creatures like bird young or mammals. Yet this designation does not apply
toa stone on the road which cannot be either hurt or offended by being stepped
                                                          PERSPECTIVES            331


on or kicked. True, a stone may lose some of its internal coherency by being
crushed into little pieces, but it seems misguided to use the term vulnerability
for this kind of material fragility.
   Still, even if most people will be willing to accept vulnerability as a general
characteristic of living systems, irreplaceability is yet another thing —a word
that, I suspect, most of us would not be predisposed to use with such overarch-
ing generality. To call a mosquito larva irreplaceable is, for most language users,
I suppose, to stretch the concept more than could be considered reasonable. In
Danish, for example, we use the expression to denote a nice person that “she
wouldn’t hurt a fly,’ but here the whole point is, of course, to stress how highly
unusual it is for a person to take pity on something as unworthy of our pity as a
fly. Normally we just kill them. Their irreplaceability doesn’t occur to us as any
kind of pressing concern.
  Yet seen from a genetics standpoint, each single fly may indeed be irreplace-
able, since most often there will not be another fly in the world that carries a
copy of the exact same genome. This objection, however, is not likely to carry
much weight with people on the street. For genomic uniqueness here is not the
thing that matters — though it és when it comes to human embryos. What mat-
ters, instead, is something very different — something that has to do, I believe,
with the degree of semiotic freedom that we see expressed in another living crea-
ture (Hoffmeyer 1996b, 140-42).
   From this, I shall suggest that the decisive factor in triggering empathic feel-
ings towards organisms of other species is the degree of semiotic individuation
that we perceive in them. For not only human beings — but, in fact, most liv-
ing organisms — will engage in at least some modest degree of semiotic indi-
viduation. And the fact that especially birds and mammals appeal intensely to
our capacity for empathy may be because these animals have extended personal
life histories that, like us, influence their whole life and behavior. We can there-
fore not, for the sake of our own peace of mind, content ourselves with protect-
ing nature merely for the sole purpose of sustaining business. Rather, we must
protect other life forms because we also, in a deep sense, are not able to ignore
their relatedness to ourselves. For in a universe that, as Monod said, is deaf to
our music and indifferent to our pains and hopes, it remains strangely reassuring
that at least some other kinds of life forms exist that do go through a process of
semiotic individuation that brings them into the same boat we are in.
   And here again it can be seen that the biosemiotic understanding leads to a
holistic yet more-or-less approach to life, rather than to dyadic and mechanistic
either-or thinking. Here, animals are not thought to have rights in the same way
that humans have human rights — for such human rights are not derived, in the
first instance, from any absolute principles, whether biological or philosophi-
cal, but reflect, as we saw, social and cultural experience in a certain historical
332       BIOSEMIOTICS    AND   THE   HUMAN   BEING




conjunction (see Chapter 8, the section entitled, “The Problem of Freedom’).
Neither can animals, as living creatures, automatically be considered to be moral
subjects with an a priori ethical claim to human protection. We nevertheless
must care for the living creatures on this Earth, because they all are expressions
(albeit more or less pronounced) of the general tendency of the evolutionary
process to create life forms with semiotically controlled life histories — and in
this semiotic expressivity, we cannot but recognize the relatedness of these life
forms to ourselves. It follows from this that our responsibility to other living
creatures must be gradated according to a scale that reflects the sophistication
and complexity of the semiotic individuation that individuals of a given species
are biologically able to attain.
   What I am vot arguing here is that environmental protection should then
mainly aim at conserving life conditions for panda bears, whales, rhinoceroses,
and other animals with similar appeals to human imagination and empathy.
That we may be emotionally disposed towards the plant and animal life on the
planet does not preclude us from also developing a rational and ecologically
informed relation to nature. On the contrary, the whole point is that ecolog-
ical diversity is iv itseifan important component in the semiotic freedom that
makes nature so appealing to us. The homogenous forests, the gigantic mon-
ocultures, or the impoverished plots of land left by rain forest clearings are not
only poor in species diversity, but are also — and for the same reason — poor in
semiotic diversity. A rich semiotic world goes hand in hand with a rich ecolog-
ical world.
   And it is no coincidence that the book that more than anything else contrib-
uted to raising a worldwide concern for the environmental question forty years
ago was titled Silent Spring. Rachel Carson's best-seller from 1962 described
how the spread of manmade pesticides to every corner of the planet threatened
to extinguish a huge number of bird species— and with them also, the exis-
tence in our world of bird song (Carson 1962). This last relation may have been
the crucial one, for it was not the de-semiotized image of nature drawn up by
university ecologists talking of energy flows or biotopes that had the potential
to mobilize whole populations to a defense of ecological diversity   —rather, it
was the fear of losing the semiotic diversity and pleasure of nature, as epito-
mized by bird song, that got people off their chairs and into action. An impor-
tant message is to be drawn from this, and it is one that should not be brushed
aside as naive or sentimental. The insignificant fungi that takes care of the deg-
radation of pine needles may, for all we know, have a greater importance for the
well-being of a pine forest than do all of its birds and mammals — but if peo-
ple did not value pine forests in and of themselves, the conservation of pine
plantations would be left strictly to those with economic concerns. If however,
in addition to the concerns for sustainability that supposedly will be met in a
                                                                       PERSPECTIVES                 333


functional democratic society, we also want to take responsibility for the spe-
cies diversity of natural systems for the sake of semiotic diversity itself, then it
will be important for us to accustom our understanding of, and thinking about,
natural systems in terms that will allow us to experience its richness. And this is
something the biosemiotic approach is naturally tuned to do. A semiotization of
ecology, then, will not only bring the discipline in harmony with a general biosemi-
otic understanding oflife processes, but will also revitalize ecology as a resource for
humane environmental administration.
    I have earlier in this book (and especially in Chapter 6) discussed the insufh-
ciency of the de-semiotized approach to understanding ecology, and have sug-
gested a perspective in which the ecological niche concept could be extended
and specified to cover the concept of a semiotic niche. I also suggested the term
semiosphere as a more holistic and, in fact, ecologically correct counterpart to the
rather physicalistic notion of the biosphere as usually defined. The point of the
present section has been to argue that this reframing of ecological terminology
and research horizons would not just be advantageous for the discipline of ecol-
ogy itself, but would also support exactly those aspects of our ecological insights
that call for human engagement in the fight for protection of the environment.
It is through a re-semiotization of nature that the science of nature will come to
stand as genuinely relevant for ordinary people —and, as a result, for nature.
One promising line of research here is the field of zoosemiotics as introduced in
1963 by Sebeok and currently pursued by Dario Martinelli (2002)


                                     Medical Science
Medical science may well be the area where the biosemiotic perspective might
have the greatest significance. For a hospital is the place where the conflict-
ing conceptions of the human being —as a person and as a biological piece of
machinery, respectively— reaches its most acute expression through the clini-
cal practice with patients. This conflict is rooted, of course, in the fact that the
ruling theoretical paradigm governing clinical work has no way of making these
two dimensions of human life meet. Understanding a human being (such as
yourself for instance) unavoidably presupposes that one comes to terms with
what it means to be an “I” (a first-person singularis phenomenon). But as we
have seen, biology is in principle prevented from including “I” phenomena into
its theory structure, and it does not even have the faintest theory to explain
how such a thing could occur in the world at all.° Instead, biology exclusively

6 Lhere deliberately disregard a currently fashionable approach to the positing of biological
foundations to human mental faculties called Evolutionary Psychology — an approach which, to
the extent its smart clichés are scientific at all, is built upon a surprising lack of insight into the
334          BIOSEMIOTICS       AND   THE HUMAN       BEING




deals with phenomena that may be described in the language of third-person
phenomena, and thus — in this very point of departure — excludes this science
from arriving at a theoretical understanding of the human biosystem as a first-
person being.
   In their clinical practice, physicians of necessity admit the assistance of psy-
chologists and psychiatrists whose task is to take care of the patient as a first-per-
son creature. And nurses are also primarily concerned with this dimension of
the patient’s needs, to the great (and underestimated) benefit of all concerned.
But these “assistants” are rarely considered worthy of influencing the treatment
of the patients as third-person cases. Since, however, (as we all know from per-
sonal experience) the first-person and third-person aspects of our being unavoid-
ably belong to the same undissolvable unity, it is some wonder that the borders
between these two aspects of a patient’s need for caretaking have persisted as
inviolable for so many years. But if, as one may well fear, the punishment for
breaking with the current scientific paradigmatic consensus may be permanent
exclusion from the social milieu of scientific medicine, then such a science has
effectively sealed itself off with an immunity against the open expression of
doubts concerning its own scientific fundament. The power structure of scien-
tific societies may at times exhibit almost Mafia-like coercion to “loyalty.”
  As we saw in Chapter 7, however, there are courageous breakaway physicians
who have insisted on dealing with the corporeal interrelations taking place
between the psychological and the somatic dimensions of human health. But, as
the reader may also recall from the discussion of the psychoneuroimmunologi-
cal (PNI) research field, such work as currently framed lacks a robust theoretical
foothold. And as I suggested earlier, this nascent field might greatly profit from
the transcendence of its still too narrowly conceived biochemical paradigm, in
order to attempt a more explicit integration ofthe biosemiotic approach into its
theoretical resource base.
      In fact, an explicitly biosemiotic understanding of health care was pro-
posed — at least in preliminary form — by the late Thure von Uexkiill (son of
Jakob von Uexkiill), who was at the time still professor emeritus in internal med-
icine at Ulm University (Uexkill 1999). Uexkiill introduced the Peircean cate-
gories of Firstness, Secondness, and Thirdness as a means for allocating patients’
symptoms into three feeling layers, each of which are manifestations of a phase


irreducible “I” aspect of human existence, the understanding of the human psychological world
as a home for experiences in the true sense of these words. It is interesting to note in this regard,
too, that in Scandinavian languages, the word for experience is oplevelse    — which literally trans-
lates as “living made up.” This aspect of experience as something occurring in the mind that is not
the same as — but nevertheless is closely related to or even formally identical to — what actually
occurs (or might have occurred), makes it intuitively obvious, I believe, that an experience (oplev-
else) cannot be an illusion unless life as a whole is an illusion.
                                                            PERSPECTIVES           335


in the early life history of the patient. Firstness thus rules the earliest stages of
development “where babies only experience qualities or differences of qualities
in the form of moods and impressions that are lived through. As in a ‘quasi-hyp-
noid state, quantities are not yet attributed as properties to particular phenom-
ena, but are experienced as ‘pre-actual atmosphere’ (vorwirckliche Atmosphare,
(Uexkiill 1953)) in which only the sign connection exists: that ofsimilarity (ico-
nicity) between different grades of intensity of a mood or of an impression, or
between moods and impressions” (Uexkiill 1999, 652).
    In this phase of a baby’s life, taste and smell are the dominating sense quali-
ties — and this is where the root forms are produced for the experience of qual-
ities of things, experiences of similarity with earlier experiences, and, more
generally, the correspondence between the organism and its environments. In
this connection, Uexkiill observes that the ability zo taste is at the core of the
Latin term for wisdom, sapientia (from sapere = taste) — which testifies to the
importance that, at least in an earlier time, was ascribed to this iconic layer of
the minded body. Such an iconic layer constitutes a semiotic core that, in many
patients, is expressed in the subjective aspect of symptoms such as the intensity
of pain.
   Ontop of this iconic layer of the developing child is settled another layer — one
that is concerned with specific acts. It is in the course of the establishment of
this layer of Secondness that the subject-object distinction is conceived. This is
an indexical layer, writes Uexkiill, which may express itself through the attitude
of the patient to his own body and in the body’s relation to its surroundings.
It is in this layer that the feeling of the specificity of a pain is grounded— for
instance, the feeling that the pain in the region of the heart (and the feeling that
this pain is the “same pain” that “grows worse” under certain conditions).
   Finally, there is a layer of Thirdness through which symbolic and social con-
ceptualizations become inscribed in the body. This layer has to do with the way
that the patient experiences his symptoms — e.g., the recall of the signification
that a given kind of pain had in the disease history of a relative or a sick friend.
   It is Uexkiill’s point that the life history of the patient is expressed through
these three layers “and the change of symptoms will depend on the weight that
each of these layers has added throughout his life” (ibid., 653). The symptoms
(which in medical terminology means “group of signs”) of the patient are in the
first place a message to the patient himself, leading to a resulting cascade of inter-
pretants that perhaps — if they become conscious — may then be told to a doc-
tor. The doctor’s task then is to create a meta-interpretant (an interpretation)
on the basis of his understanding of the patient’s own interpretations — and in
order to do this, it is important that the doctor succeeds in creating a shared real-
ity with the patient. It is in the handling of this task that the relation between
patient and physician will become decisive for a successful treatment. This is
336          BIOSEMIOTICS   AND   THE   HUMAN   BEING




consequently mismanaged when the nurse is the only caretaking person to
whom the patient is an “I” in the process.
   And this is where the poverty of modern medical practice is most evidently
illustrated. For while it is relatively easy to establish a shared code between the
physician and the patient where the indexical layer is concerned (i.e., as con-
cerns voluntary activities, surgical treatments or biotechnical interventions), it
is usually much harder to build the same kind of common code when it comes
to the symbolic or iconic layers. For the doctor and the patient do not ascribe
the same status of objective symptoms to the interpretants that are formed under
the influence of these ineliminable layers. To make the influences of these lay-
ers visible in clinical work will be a main task for a future biosemiotically based
medical science.
      And at this point a thread may be traced back to the physiologist Walther
Cannon’s seminal book from 1932, The Wisdom of the Body. Cannon showed
that the body possesses a wisdom that is difficult for the physician to imitate,
and he disclosed many of the relations that would contribute to the mainte-
nance of bodily health — but the deeper mechanisms behind this wisdom have
remained hidden to this day. Now, in the wake of decades of New-Age follies,
one should take care not to anthropomorphize or exaggerate this “wisdom of
the body” that, unfortunately, is too often defeated by life-threatening diseases.
Uexkiill’s approach suggests the possibility that the utterly natural secret behind
the body’s wisdom rests in the establishment of a harmonic interplay between
the iconic, indexical, and symbolic layers of the experiencing body. When we
get sick, something has gone wrong in this optimally balanced interaction. Yet
as long as physicians only take an interest in just one of three layers, the indexi-
cal layer, they will, of course, instead of wisdom, find only mechanics.


                              Cognitive Science

The term cognitive science initially referred to an attempt to produce a cross-dis-
ciplinary research area that could unite insights from formerly separate research
fields, each concerned with their own special aspect of the cognitive pro-
cesses — such as perception, categorization, language, memory, and thought.
The term still has the ring of a belief in computer models as a means for simulat-
ing cognitive processes, a belief that in the 1980s and 1990s was yet sufficiently
untested to support the cross-disciplinary optimism.
   It is undeniable that a cross-disciplinary undertaking is absolutely necessary
if genuinely new understandings are to be produced in this area, but I find it
misguided to build this ambition upon a belief in the all-embracing power of
computer modeling. In fact, in the light of biosemiotics, much — perhaps even
                                                                    PERSPECTIVES               337


most — of the work done in cognitive science seems more or less useless because
it has been ignorant of (or, worse, has deliberately chosen to disregard) the lit-
eral corporeality of cognition and the “I” aspect that is part and parcel of such
corporeality.
   One major step forward was taken when the idea ofcognition, as based upon
a “symbol-processing brain” (e.g., Chomsky 1965; Newell and Simon 1975), was
challenged by dynamic systems theory (Kelso 1995; Port and van Gelder 1995; van
Gelder and Port 1995). For where the symbol-crunching paradigm saw cogni-
tion and language use as based on calculation processes inherent to the brain,
the dynamic systems paradigm introduced real-time decision-making as an irre-
versible factor in the processes of cognition. In computer modeling, the prob-
lem of time is typically solved by the application of a series of distinct states, t,,
t),t3.... Time is converted to a series of discrete beats and the continuous inter-
vals in between the beats are effectively disregarded. Thus, in the proper sense of
the word, nothing really happens here — just logical operations clicking through
a series of static states. At a minimum, it may be said that a strange disregard for
biological realism is hiding in this computer-fixated way of thinking. Following
biological realism, it must be recognized that life processes happen in continu-
ous time, like a snail track slowly moving forward. Or, to allow myself the plea-
sure of my opponents’ brand of dualism, biological reality should be seen as
consisting of blood and slime — not of logical states.’
   Reflections in this direction were the starting point for Robert Port’s attempt
to show that when people think, they do a whole lot of things other than merely
manipulating symbols. There is nothing in the brain like the discrete beats of
the computer, says Port. Rather, it seems there are many systems simultaneously
operating that create oscillations at different rates. What happens seems to be
organized dynamically rather than linearly — that is to say, via processes in time
rather than via computer-like digital input/output transformations. Port (1998),
among many other things, studied the rhythms of people’s ways of talking in dif-
ferent languages and observed that the rhythms of human speech depend upon
the same few but apparently universal rules. It is significant that Port’s findings
confirm that there are universal components in our ways of thinking and talking,
but that, on the other hand these universals do not — as the Chomsky school has
claimed so ardently— mirror any logical context-free syntactic rules that might
lend themselves to simulations in the computer. Instead, they reflect dynamic
traits in the biological functionality of humans as interacting organisms.
    Yet, while dynamical systems theory thus puts cognition back into the bio-
logical organism (i.e., into the body) where it obviously belongs, the dynamicists


7   In Peirce’s philosophy, time is continuous —i.e., it does not consist in distinct points on an
axis of time.
338          BIOSEMIOTICS    AND   THE HUMAN      BEING



themselves do not incorporate first-person perspectives into their understand-
ing of cognition. Dynamicists therefore, no less than their adversaries in the
Chomsky camp, appear to have cut themselves off from explaining why humans
are not just zombies (to use the expression that has become standard in philo-
sophical discussions of these matters).
   The word zombie stems from Haitian folk-religion and refers to a person
who, after having being killed by sorcery and buried, is made to come alive once
again (by yet more sorcery, of course) and to continue a life where he, deprived
of all will, unresistingly executes the slave work he is set to do.* In cognitive sci-
ence, the term zombie is used to characterize a fictive robot-like creature that
has been constructed on the basis of a totally mechanical understanding of the
material and the computational capacity of a human being. Claus Emmeche
(1998, 51) has described this sad creature: “Even if we could construct, on the
basis of these principles, a robot that would be capable of answering ‘intelli-
gently’ on questions of the environmental crisis or the meaning of Shakespeare's
Hamlet, we could still not be assured that the robot would feel or experience
anything at all; it would be like an automatic zombie (although the intuitions
about this diverge).”
  Emmeche’s parenthetic remark may be central. Natural scientists mostly
do not seem too worried about the implications of this unsettling intu-
ition —which is, of course, the one that concerns biosemioticians so very
much. Such scientists       — and here we are, unfortunately, talking about many
scientists who belong to the absolute elite within the diverse fields of natural
science — do not apparently see any reason to believe that what happens in the
experiential life of human consciousness could voz, in principle, (and probably
in practice) be derived from processes that are perfectly describable in gram-
matical third-person terms. We are here confronted with a difficulty that does
not seem to have any easy solution. For how does one decide between disagree-
ments about intuitions? (And make no mistake, the mechanist’s intuition is no
less an intuition than the biosemiotician’s in this matter. One might even argue
that, of the two, the mechanist’s intuition is the one that is more at odds with
empirical reality).
      Given such an impasse, biosemiotics must take cognizance of the fact that
dynamic systems theory does not exhibit any apparent curiosity about the evo-
lutionary problem of deriving first-person experiential worlds from an ances-
try that exhibit nothing but third-person phenomena. Apparently, dynamical
systems theory assumes that purely dynamical processes     — perfectly describ-
able in third-person language — exhaust what we need to understand in order


8 My source for this explanation of the word zombie, the Danish National Encyclopedia (1998),
adds — somewhat reassuringly — that the phenomenon has not been scientifically confirmed.
                                                                      PERSPECTIVES               339




to describe and to explain human experiential and conscious life.” But again, as
first-person phenomena ourselves, it is hard to see how this could be so — and
thus the onus is on those who would argue otherwise to establish the validity of
their position (which is contrary to all human experience).
   Mainstream cognitive science in this regard puts itself very much in the same
position as traditional medical science.’® And it is my guess that the problems
that medical science has experienced in its clinical practice because of its inhu-
manely reductive strategy will also eventually come to cripple a cognitive sci-
ence too inanimately conceived. If and when such dead-end approaches come
to be known as such, might this lesson in the de-semiotization of living systems
count as support for the biosemiotic intuition? My personal expectation is that
it will, and that when it does, the conceptual tools made available by biosemiot-
ics will be turned to asa resource that will greatly stimulate cognitive science by
suggesting eye-opening new paths of investigation.




9 Here I should warn the reader to keep the qualia concept and the sign concept separate as
analytical concepts. Whether or not qualia covers a reality in primitive life forms is a fascinating
subject, but it would be unfortunate to decide a solution to this problem in advance. The semio-
sis concept, on the other hand, might fruitfully be applied in the living world at large, as has been
argued throughout this book. And my personal opinion is that it would be well-founded to con-
sider semiosis as an elementary trait pertaining to our universe at large —in accordance with
Peircean cosmology.
10 Tam aware, of course, that this over-generalized categorization of cognitive science does not
pertain to all the diverse fields that see themselves as belonging under this umbrella concept (e.g.,
see Roepstorff 2001; Roepstorff     and Jack 2004). What Iam speaking of here particularly are those
attempts to examine and explain cognition as a de-semiotized, computational process that can be
fully captured by third-person description.
                                                        peeve CURRIES
                                                               s
                                                                      Ue7 aR- 4 SE                                                                                                                           _—_

                                                                                                                                                                                                         -   —_—
                                                                                                                                                                                                     a



                  jl                       weaned |See                                                      ndings                                                                                       :
bse cw dhe Le: trate                                                                                                                                                                 al
 Ls yulvier a's fiipaerce
                       cree eit
                                                    2                                     es                    Lane                                                                           Pap                          ay         a         .
    mw                                              edoe                                           terrae                                                             Leekipe                  |) Sem              alepers qhaeeiteiail”   = Zi
 ech Fiaktnpaet ALLEN                                                                                                                                        az) Wh Seen                                                                   “ey
        eat                                        Ah,Eh                                                        a ~seiylioty Gavi ete eee
    qe                     MPT rh                                                    Sgraey                                                      rs                   A              a         ae        es Soe near                 OND
    peti en                                                     aeTge hare rah: & itn                                                                                                    ae —                                    *
    Petr yeaecd 9                                                                                       yrvtest nchaineirccoannh                                                          aaa            ae ri:
        oe                                         ope                                             Serpe»                                          ghee ‘ocmgt fie Dpamagpipetasl                                      i
 einige                                            mre ‘iidieetihidaidiakmeanl rite
“ely                                               s ona l-7 avn wr trandenrge ly
A                              =               =        =o                                                             =.

ai                                                          -

                               fn                   -                                                   ae                                       ai«@


                      DP                           =                                 oe            ie
                                                    ~

                                           =                                               oe
    .                                                                            j                                —
             Se                                                                                             <8                  e                                     a

                      -        «                                                                                                ——                 oe
            -_                                              7)                                 =                                a>                      Ge                    ieee
            oa                                 _                                                                                                             “a
    2arir                                               ——                                                                  -                                     i       2




                  :                                                                                         en                               =e
                 SS        as.
                                                                                           o                                    =                            _=—P
                                   q                            »                a                                eT                                     a
                                                                                                            =
        »             fore                         ~~                                                   ‘             ot            =        2                    =
        —"
                      i                                         =            a                                    a                 i              £


                           =                                    -                          =                      13                                                      -



                                       2                                a
                                                                                      Pa
                                                                                      =
                                                                                                                                             iy,                  stron
                               — 4                          =                                  !                  cee                              An                         -
                           =                                        :
                                                        a                    i                     -                                     ‘                                    >          >>        i6 iajo


             = PO                                       «ithptl                       “Sen                      Wir                     Ls                                et              vb       Sky Sei
                          oe                            4                                          aA                                        1} gle                           a Ain |
4                         eee                      ANS                                    1                 lee                                  ip                   RES                     ay

 >                         =                                    ow
                                                                 ey                                                                      {o¢
                                                                                                                                                        ,
<                          a                             oo


~ eg?                                              Por
    hes                                                         -                    a

real                                               ho                   =~                9a                     vs chop a
a.                                                                                                                                      td
                                               te,                           -¢ «i Rghoes Aims
                               ite)
