Biosemiotic Technology




    The Semiotization of Technology: A Historical Sketch
Classical technologies were concerned with upholding subsistence and ratio-
nalizing work load. The plow, for instance, was introduced when slash-and-
burn agricultural practices were challenged by an increase in population density.
Grass roots do not easily disappear and slash-and-burn practices were, contrary
to what most of us may have learnt in school, a quite efficient way of uphold-
ing subsistence, because the grass cannot grow in the deep shadows of the for-
ests so that no work had to be invested in removing it. But as population density
increased, cultivators were forced to reduce their share of forest — which meant
that the forest areas had to be cleared before they had fully regenerated, so that
the grass was no longer properly wiped out. And since grass roots resist the burn-
ing practice, cultivators now had no choice but to start plowing the fields.’
   Thousands of years later, water mills and wind mills were introduced to solve
corresponding problems with growing populations. The mills immediately fur-
nished a rotational power and the invention of the camshaft made it possible to
transform this to a vertical power used to lift a fall hammer. Apart from crush-
ing grain, such mill technology was also used for a variety of other produc-
tion processes, depending on local circumstances — to weave cloth, tan leather,
smelt and shape iron, saw wood, press olives, etc.. Productivity increased,
dependence on human- and animal-muscle power gradually declined, and
locations with good water-power resources became centers of economic and
industrial activity.
   Thus, in preindustrial peasant societies, nearly all energy consumption was
of biological origin and was directly or indirectly provided on the basis of the


1   This not only meant more work for cultivators, but also meant the introduction of draught ani-
mals — and thus the requirement for additional cultivated land to feed the animals. Consequently,
not only was the workload dramatically increased in the process, but the ownership of land, as
well as new needs for collaboration and planning, introduced a social stratification unseen in
egalitarian slash-and-burn farming groups — and, in fact, established the perfect conditions for a
propertied class to eventually arise. In the schools of my childhood, this process of loss was por-
trayed as a significant progress for civilization under the emblem of state formation.
      342          BIOSEMIOTICS      AND   THE   HUMAN     BEING




      photosynthetic processes of plants. These were food, feed, fuel, tractive power,
      materials for construction, fibers, fertilizer, etc. But as long as only biological
      power sources were accessible, there remained very narrow limits on productive
      possibilities. Milling technology, in this respect, constituted a radical new depar-
      ture, one fraught with radical historical consequences. With it, humans for the
      first time attained systematic access to the much larger, nonbiological energy
      resources beginning with natural energy flows such as wind and water—and
      later also, by drawing on artificial energy sources such as oil and coal.” Ina full-
      ing mill, one man manipulating the mill might replace forty fulling workers
      (Gimpel 1978, 22).
        The industrial revolution may then be seen as a chain of technological
      inventions based, in every case, on the principle of freeing the productive
      process from the limitations put upon it by the materials of living nature,
    | so that these materials were gradually replaced by materials from inanimate
      nature. Coal replaced wooden fuel; the locomotive replaced horses for trans-
      port; bricks, tile, and glass replaced trees as building materials; and a range
      of nonbiological chemicals such as chlorine and soda replaced the organic
      resources of an earlier time such as seaweed and sour milk (Wilkinson 1973;
      Hoffmeyer 1982; 1988). Against this background, it may be further claimed
      that the ecological basis for industrialization consisted in the transformation
      of biologically based energy and material economies into economies of non-
<> | biologically based energy and materials — and this transformation required
   | an increasing flow of energy to be released on the planet’s surface in order to
     sustain itself.
        For centuries, industrialization -— understood as the continuing effort to
     increase the efficiency of energy transformations of every kind — has remained
     the dominating trend in economic development. But towards the end of the
      twentieth century, a whole new set of principles started to get a foothold in the
      modes of production. At first these new principles were still directed at maxi-
      mizing efficiency of work, but it soon appeared that they had inherent possibil-
      ities of quite a different kind — possibilities which have only begun to be seen
    } more clearly in the last two decades. These new possibilities do not primarily
    _aim at streamlining the work load. Rather, they aim at coordinating work efforts
    \ in all directions and across traditional barriers. As an overarching term for the
     |focus of these new techniques we may suggest the term managing ofinterfaces,
      and for the main principle enabling it, controlled semiosis.                 “3


      2 Fossil fuels, of course, are not artificial as such, having been created through geological pro-
      cesses transforming the organic sediments of ancient oceans. But the extraordinarily rapid release
      of these huge energy stores up to the surface of the earth through a very short span of time is
      indeed artificial (the work of human craftsmanship).
                                                 BIOSEMIOTIC TECHNOLOGY                     343


   In everyday talk, these new techniques are most frequently designated by
the abbreviation JT (or in full, Information Technology) — indicating that the
public has pickedup the engineering
                               view that takes the basic property of such
techniques to be their huge capacity for information processing. In a purely
technical sense, this term is indeed correct, since an important property of such
 techniques is their unparalleled capacity to store, manipulate, and transport
 information. But this is only so in the technical sense of computer-switching-
 type Shannon information, as discussed in Chapter 3. And since the mathemat-
 ical concept of information that is being used there has really nothing at all to
 do with the more primary definition of information as referring to meaning-
ful messages  or instructions, the designation Information Technology is poten-
tially confusing. As a consequence of this unfortunate terminology, modern
society is often said to be an information society, which then is contrasted with
the term industrial society — indicating that the information society is a postin-
dustrial society.
   Here the ambiguity concerning the engineering way of understanding the
term information and the everyday language conception becomes directly
misleading. For if the technological principle at play behind the Industrial
Revolution was indeed the more and more powerful mastering of energy trans-
formations (i.e., the ability to manipulate and command the physical arrange-
ments of the natural world), then the corresponding technological principle
behind the present cultural transformation is not just the data-packet-transfer
kind of information processing, but rather controlled semiosis (i.e., the ability to
mediate the significations ofall the diverse ideas, expressions, thoughts, and events
that take place in the world).
  This does not mean that the perspective of physical command will now
become replaced by a perspective of mediation, for the need for sophisticated
physical command of energy transformations will continue to play a decisive
role for production in the future, just as agricultural production remained a
vital component of the industrial societies. What is new is that we now, in addi-
tion to food production, and in addition to our brute command over physical
processes, have also learned how to implement human interests, signification, in
the world of machines and media.”
   For indeed, the most pronounced feature of the new technologies is not just
their capacity for the mechanization of information processing, but their use-

3 I must stress here that this analysis is not about values. Whether these changes are also
good   — in the sense that they will bring about a progressive trend in cultural evolution (or
not) —is not of concern here. To be sure, I personally fear that the promising potentials of the
technological changes described here will need accompanying changes in the form of radical cul-
tural transformations if they are not to be harmful in many ways. Considering present political
trends, however, it is not easy to be optimistic in this respect.
344            BIOSEMIOTICS     AND   THE   HUMAN    BEING




fulness as tools for semiotic activity of every sort. Thus their proper designation
should be semiotic technologies instead of the ambiguous information technol-
ogies. Ninéteenth-century industrialists were indifferent to the actual physical
laws at work behind the steam engine. And in the same way, consumers of mod-
ern technology for the most part take no interest in the functional principles
behind the capacity of these machines to process (Shannon) information. What
does concern consumers, when they activate their cell phones or open a new
program at the computer, is the ocean of significations upon which he or she
is now going to surf. When the technologies are seen from the point of view of
the user, instead of the engineer, the technologies are more than anything else
semiotic technolo gies.
   Summing up this brief sketch of technological history, we may say that the
Stone Age was characterized by a technology that rarely, in any systematic way,
used energy forms surpassing that of human muscular power. The technology
and social organization of agricultural societies were designed to obtain the
maximum yield from available biological energy sources (e.g. the field and its
inherent photosynthesis). Industrial production transcended these limitations
by developing means of energy transformations of almost every conceivable
kind (including nuclear) — and accordingly based its huge productivity upon
the consumption of (seemingly) infinite sources of artificial energy. Finally,
the kind of society we are now entering appears to be one that will derive its
enabling power more than anything else from the ability to produce the techno-
logical means for ever more sophisticated command over the semiotic dimen-
sion of the natural world.*
    To the extent that this is true, we may further conclude that we are now finally
prepared to complete the project that was initiated in the late Middle Ages with
the introduction of windmills and water mills —i.e., to set societal production
free of the constraining bonds given by the peculiarities of organic life. The first
time around, under the Industrial Revolution, only the dimension of energy was
set loose from the constraints of organismic life. Therefore, what we are now
facing— and to some extent have already engaged in — is the setting free (and
harnessing) of the semiotic dimension from its bindings in organic life. This is
what I have called the development ofbiosemiotic technologies.



4     The parallel between energy consumption and semiotic control should not be neglected here,
as the importance of the entropy law (the second law of thermodynamics) has been severely under-
estimated in the industrial period. Most people recognize the importance of
                                                                          access to energy, but
few people know of the importance of reducing the entropy production that necessarily accompa-
nies all kinds of energy consumption. Since this control is no longer assured by the natural semi-
otics of living systems, semiotic control on energy expenditure has become as crucially necessary
as the access to energy per se.
                                                    BIOSEMIOTIC      TECHNOLOGY                 345




           The Biosemiotics of the Industrial Revolution
Throughout this book, I have been dealing with the analysis of the manifold
semiotic controlling mechanisms that have been developed by living systems.
Seen from a thermodynamic point of view, the      he overriding engineering task of
evolution consists Sn in the acco mplishment of the efficient use of0 the available
energy By flows that  organisms
                 hat organis     (or ecosystems)
                                          NA     ai ; analizin  through  themselves
as optimally as possible —in regard to the ongoing construction and mainte-
nance of the biological systems and their manifestations, as well as in regard
to the
   the ongoing export into the environment of the entropy produced by such
life
 ifeprocesses.
 ~And as notedJabove, I have argued that it is therefore the same two param-
eters — the ‘magnitude of | the flow of energy and the semiotic controls guid-
ingthe utilization ofthatTats that have constituted the pivotal points in

Eeoladon has Snes Serer to oe the semiotic control Best
of organisms to the nature of the surrounding environment’s available energy
flows, and evolution has therefore guaranteed an optimal fit between those two
essential parameters of life in the organisms of this Earth.
    I would like to propose that the proper term for this optimized organism-
environment relationship iis semiotic fitness. Semiotic fitness may —at least in
a heuristic sense — be formalizedasrelation
                                    a       between a component (S)refer-
ring to the efficiency of the semiotic control of life processes, and a component
(E) that expresses the magnitude of the energy flow canalized through the sys-
tem. If— for the sake of the argument — it was supposed that the size of the
S component might indeed be measured, for instance as some function of the
entropy efficiency, then on the basis of the above discussion, we would expect S
in natural systems to somehow balance the energy flow (E) so that, for the sake
of convenience, the ratio might be expressed as S/E = 1.” If we correspondingly
measured the S- and E-values of, for instance, a given instance of agricultural
production, we would arrive at a kind of measure for the sustainability of that
agriculture. For the trick behind agriculture is to produce a simplified ecosystem
(the field) through which a considerable amount of the locally available energy


5   It is of course not my intention to claim that a genuine numerical measure for semiotic fitness,
S, might be constructed, as S by its nature is almost incalculably complex. And while the E com-
ponent is measurable in normal energy units, the $ component can not of course be reduced to
units of the same sort. (We are not here intending to invent Maxwell demons!) But as a thought
experiment, I think that the very concept of such a measure may throw an illustrative light on the
main point that I am aiming at here — namely, that the disproportion between our semiotic and
our energetic command of natural systems is the key to the lack of sustainability of industrial and
agricultural production.
  346         BIOSEMIOTICS   AND   THE HUMAN    BEING




  flow is canalized towards the benefit of one single species (i.e., the crop species).
  In pre-industrialized societies, this took an enormous amount of human labor,
  which in industrialized agriculture is replaced by a diversity of petrochemi-
  cal products, such as fertilizer, herbicides, pesticides, and gasoline for motive
  power. Added to this, of course, are the indirect energy costs of draining and
  digging ditches and canals, and of distributing the agricultural input as well as
  the agricultural output. Thus, the energy-consuming (and entropy-producing )
  construction of roads, railroads, bridges, and transportation vehicles (including
  tankers transporting oil and materials around the globe) must also be factored
  into the thermodynamic cost here.
     Clearly, already in preindustrial agriculture, the amount of exosemiotic
  control (understood as the controlling activity of the cultivator) on energy
  flows is lowered relative to the tight endosemiotic control exerted by the
  totality of organisms in wild ecosystems. On the other hand, this lowering
  of the S/E ratio is at least partially compensated by human skill and inge-
 _nuity, and ultimately through the semiotic control exercised by the input of
 hiker knowledge. Thus, in healthy traditional agriculture, the yield is still
  low and essentially constrained by biosemiotically controlled natural nutri-
  ent cycles, as well as by a whole range of nonbiotic limit factors (weather, sea-
  sons, rainfall, etc.). The industrial revolution resulted in our learning how to
  bypass all or most of these natural constraints through an explosive increase
  in the use of artificial energy. In an agricultural production system based on
  the petrochemical service industry, an enormous homogenization of nature
_ can be obtained, yielding unequalled amounts of crop. Or to state this in dif-
  ferent words, industrializing agriculture meant that we learned to circumvent
  nature’s own semiotic controls on energy flows, replacing them with a few
  comparatively unsophisticated controls, such as market-driven time schedules
  for various operations such as sowing; irrigating; the spreading of fertilizer,
  herbicides, and pesticides; and harvesting.
      I do not pretend here to offer a satisfactory comparison between the ecose-
  miotics of petrochemical agriculture and the ecosemiotics of more traditional

|
  kinds of agriculture, but I think that even in the absence of such a deep analy-
  sis, the overall picture is indisputable: the S/E ratio is dramatically lower today.

| And this dramatic decrease, I suggest, is the deep source of the modern environ-
  mental crisis.
     In addition, when we talk about an industrialized production system, we can-
  not limit ourselves to analyzing just the agricultural sector, for agriculture is
  just one interdependently integrated component of the diversified production
  apparatuses of industrial society. From en ecological point of view, too, indus-
  trial agriculture may well be the worst single factor contributing to the deteri-
  oration of nature's capacity for sustainability—but it is by no means the only
                                         BIOSEMIOTIC   TECHNOLOGY            347



one. The overwhelming use of energy from chemicals ultimately derived from
oil in almost every context of modern society inevitably ends up destabilizing,
and often fatally overwhelming, the semiotic controls operative inside living
systems at both the organismic as well as the ecological level (our own bod-
ies included). Thus, into our estimate of the E component, we must include all
kinds of energy flows staged by our manifold production systems.
   In sum, we can see that the Industrial Revolution was, at best, only one half
of a full revolution. For starting with the water wheel in the Middle Ages,
and continuing through the mastery of coal, oil, and uranium, we gradually
liberated the energy component of natural systems from their biosemiotic
controls. However, we did not until very recently try to evolve techniques
to compensate for this liberation of the power of energy by a corresponding
mastering of the power inherent in the increasingly displaced biosemiotic
controls. As a result, we have created an ecological impoverishment of the
environment, reflecting the uninhibited dependence of our production sys,
tems on the brute force of artificial, non-biosemiotically controlled energy, |
And as a consequence, we are now unable to reestablish a sustainable produc
tion system, because we have neglected to take heed of the naturally occur-
ring checks and balances of life on Earth as a result of the second law of
thermodynamics.
   The task ahead of us is to embark upon the second half of the industrial rev-
olution. And this will consist in the development of a mastery of the biosemi-
otic controls that can match (and thus sophisticate) our present mechanical
mastery of the gigantic energy flows that, in an overpopulated world, neces-
sarily must destabilize nature’s optimal balance points. Another way to say this
is that we need to develop a biosemiotic technology base for our production sys-
tems — a technology base that can replace natural biosemiotic control mecha-
nisms with biosemiotic control mechanisms artificially set to fulfill human and
environmental needs.
  Therefore, instead of speaking about the industrial revolution, we should
now realize that the deeper principle at work behind this major, and yet sadly
unfinished, historical transformation has always been something quite differ-
ent — ie., the substitution of a resource base relying on naturally controlled
energy flows for a resource base relying on energy flows controlled by human
ingenuity and skill. In fact, what we are witnessing is one long process of the
humanization of nature. A process which slowly took off back in Neolithic
times, then acquired an enormous momentum through the industrial revo-
lution of the last three centuries, and is now reaching a final turn where the
dangerous destabilizing of the energetic, semiotic, and entropic aspects of the
natural world have to be continually restored artificially, and at an increas-
ingly high level.
348          BIOSEMIOTICS       AND   THE HUMAN        BEING




                                 Clever Technologies
The American plant physiologist J. $. Boyer once calculated that the average
harvest yield for a range of crops even in the most efficient US. agriculture was
only 21.6 percent of a calculated maximum (Boyer 1982). Diseases, weeds, and
pests would account for less than 10 percent out of this total loss of nearly 80
percent — whereas the rest would be due to suboptimal physico-chemical con-
ditions: lack of water, cold, high salt levels, etc. As Boyer himself pointed out,
the reason for this lack of efficiency is to be found in the current breeding strat-
egies of the crops chosen to be grown.
   Boyer found that breeders typically produce a small number of “miracle” vari-
eties that give extremely high yields, provided they are grown under favorable
conditions. Now, the bad thing about the natural world is that conditions in it
are rarely reliably favorable — resulting in the fact that farmers have to buy ser-
vices from the petrochemical industries in order to artificially create a situation
of favorable conditions. However, as Boyer’s numbers disclose, this strategy not
only makes farmers dependent on expensive and ecologically destructive prac-
tices, it also apparently fails to deliver the true product, i.e., the favorable con-
ditions promised.
    The obvious solution to this problem is that instead of homogenizing the
soils of the Earth so as to fit only a few new miracle crops, we should breed crops
that fit the multitude of “unfavorable” conditions under which real-world farm-
ers actually live. We need one particular kind of wheat for traditionally favor-
able conditions, another for salty soils, yet another for soils that are too wet, and
so on. Such a strategy, however, was not feasible within the paradigm of tradi-
tional crossbreeding, where typically ten to fifteen years would be needed for
the production of each new variety. But clever new breeding technologies based
on modern biotechnology, and particularly on genetic manipulation, have the
potential to support a diversified breeding strategy that is aiming at producing
varieties fitted to local conditions.®


6 Whether or not political and economic conditions will permit the implementation ofbreed-
ing for local needs is quite another question, of course. And since multinational petrochemical
industries are main actors in the breeding market, one should perhaps not be too confident that
breeding for the purpose of uncoupling agriculture from petrochemical services will soon become
a major priority. My purpose here is simply to point out the potential capacity of biosemiotically
influenced techniques to solve the environmental problems that have become endemic to high-
energy society. For if it is not possible to make profits by solving these problems with biosemi-
otic technologies, I find it hard to see how they are going to be solved at all. While many people
believe in a return to the frugal ways of life that characterized the societies of our grandparents, I
personally find such suggestions to be nothing but escapist daydreams, considering how many bil-
lions of poor people are still in need ofanelementary subsistence that can only be supplied at the
cost of higher energy consumption in the areas where they live. Thus, it seems to me that the main
                                                     BIOSEMIOTIC       TECHNOLOGY                 349



   Using gene-technology-based breeding strategies to produce varieties for the
world’s variable local conditions is fundamentally a biosemiotic strategy — first,
because it aims at naturally persuading the plant species to grow well under
specified conditions, rather than commanding them to do so by the application
of brute force (petrochemistry), and second, because the strategy will only suc-
ceed if actually developed in a collaborative effort with local farmers.
   The strategy of breeding for local conditions is just one example out of a
multitude of cases where the use of biosemiotic technology instead of petro-
chemical technology would move our production systems towards the goal of
sustainability. To mention just one other example, let me point out the strik-
ing fact that fewer than thirty plant species cover 95 percent of our total need
for living provisions, and that just three grasses — wheat, rice, and corn — alone
furnish 75 percent of the total human need for food. Why, then, are so few of
the world’s estimated 300,000 species of plants in human use?
   The explanation seems to be nothing more than historical contingency — and
this promises that unknown potentials are hiding in many other plant species,
not only for the production of crops for food and fodder, but also for the pro-
duction of crops intended as raw materials for the fermentation industry, e.g.
the making of biodegradable plastic. Indeed, prior to World War II, chemical
engineering was based mainly on biological raw materials, but this has all been
forgotten in the subsequent petrochemical rush. Returning to biomass that has
been biosemiotically tuned to our needs as raw material will also fight the green-
house effect, because the CO, intake of growing biomass balances out the CO,
output from using that same biomass.
  And agriculture is by no means the only sector in which biosemiotic tech-
nology holds great promise for the goal of sustainability. Substituting chemical
technology with biosemiotic technology in many cases would be clearly favor-
able to the environment and probably less hazardous to health, too. I would
suggest, therefore, that the formula S/E = K (with K in naturally occurring eco-
logical contexts attaining the average value of one) be considered as a guiding
heuristic in our reflections on ecosemiotic strategies. The general effect of intro-
ducing biosemiotic technologies will be to decrease the necessary deployment
of energy, due to a far better control of its effect on specific parameters. And
this, of course, amounts to saying that S is increased at the same time that E is
decreased in the system. Thus, the introduction of biosemiotic technology will
contribute to our goal of approaching the situation where S/E 2 1, i.e. a sustain-
able production system.


difficulty in this case is not the absence of technological possibilities, but the absence of the abil-
ity (or will) to find new and more appropriate political possibilities —a problem that this book, I
am sad to say, takes no direct aim at solving.
350          BIOSEMIOTICS   AND   THE   HUMAN   BEING




                            Modern Biotechnology
The misguided belief in the autonomy of the gene as the controlling agency
in the processes of life characterized much of the early work in biotechnol-
ogy — but has now gradually been replaced by a growing preoccupation with the
signal processes responsible for the integration of gene functions into the whole
matrix of cellular and organismic life (such as, for instance, obeying boundary
conditions as determined by the state of the organ or tissue in which the cells are
situated, or with controls induced upon cells from neighboring cells as well as
from more distant sources, such as in the psychoneuroimmunological system).
The power of modern biotechnology, in fact, is based exactly on its ability to
hitchhike upon the semiotic controls that are native to the cell or organism.
   For an illustration of this phenomenon, let us here consider just one clas-
sical case. In their ongoing fight against pests, farmers long ago learned to use
the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) as an ally. Like so many other bacteria,
when starved, Bt forms a very resistant spore to keep it alive until better condi-
tions arise. Inside the spores, the bacteria leaves a protein crystal, an endotoxin,
that dissolves in the intestine of susceptible insects, should they be unfortunate
enough to munch upon leaves sprayed with Bt spores. The crystals paralyze the
cells in the gut, interfering with normal digestion and triggering the insect to
stop feeding on host plants. Bt spores can then invade other insect tissue, multi-
plying in the insect’s blood, until the insect dies.
   Bacillus thuringiensis was first isolated in 1911 from sick Japanese silk worms
and from 1958, the bacterium was brought to commercial use as a biopesti-
cide — a biological weapon to fight pests. A suspension of Bt is sprayed over the
crop when certain specific pest attacks begin. The toxin has no effect in mam-
mals, but specifically targets the species of a particular group of insects called
Lepidoptera, i.e., butterflies and moths. Using this biopesticide, however, is not
without problems. Often the crops may have to be sprayed repeatedly, because
most of the time the lepidopteran larvae are hiding inside the stalks, where the
bacterial poison cannot reach them. And although Bt has a rather high specific-
ity, benign insect species are often also damaged by the treatments.
      With the help of gene technology, the gene for the same toxic protein that is
secreted by Bt has now been transferred directly into a range of ordinary crop
species such as tobacco, cotton, and corn — and this results in a much narrower
coupling of the toxic effect to the actual cause for the damage. For since the
toxin is now excreted by the plants themselves, it will destroy the larvae no mat-
ter where they are located in the plant. Ideally, and perhaps in the future, the
gene can be implemented in the genome in such a way that it would only be
expressed when induced by the saliva from lepidopteran larvae munching upon
the plant.
                                                     BIOSEMIOTIC       TECHNOLOGY                 351



   But many environmentalists have protested against the introduction of such
genetically modified crop plants, and the reader may remember the story about
how the beautiful monarch butterfly was severely threatened by the use of
GM (genetically modified) crops. Accordingly, the Danish Society for Nature
Conservation inserted full-page ads in major newspapers telling readers that
“American experiments have shown that larvae of the Monarch butterfly are
dying from feeding on pollen from corn plants genetically modified to produce
insect toxins.” But ecological concerns are not well managed by conservation
groups blowing hot air and barking up the wrong old-growth-forest tree. For
since the larvae of butterflies are themselves agricultural pests, it is obviously not
possible to have rational farming without somehow hampering the life of but-
terflies. It is also unavoidable that problems of resistance will appear, but plant-
ing GM crops, in this respect, is no worse than spraying with Bt. And, as might
have been expected, Monarch butterflies do, in fact, persist quite well in the
vicinity of fields with GM crops. In fact, repeated Bt sprayings probably have
far worse effects upon neighboring insect species than do GM crops with local-
ized and specific effects.
   Naturally, however, since the flow of money into this developing field of com-
merce is so incredibly huge, it will be important to watch over the whole busi-
ness very carefully. But if the intent really is to care for the conservation of living
nature without giving up on the need for rational farming, then some of the
key concepts needed will be precision and gentleness — and the operationaliza-
tion of such concerns is exactly what biosemiotic technology offers as its most
important potential.


                                         Proteomics

The study of genomics (i.e., the study of all the genetic material in a genome) has
lately become supplemented by a new and far more complex field of investigation
called proteomics —i.e., the study of all the proteins expressed by a genome, or in
more practical terms, the study of the totality of protein-based activity that goes on
in a cell.’ And because of the incredible complexity involved, sophisticated com-
puters are an absolutely necessary tool for this new kind of research — research
that also includes the still-developing field of bioinformatics, which attempts to
simulate cellular processes based on huge amounts of empirical data.
   These new research strategies will no doubt drive even further the innova-
tion of new biotechnological processes, as, for example, the development of

7 The tacit implication of this term is that a functional entity, a proteome, exists in cells just as
does the physical entity of the genome. The idea seems a little far-fetched, since a structural and
temporal definition equivalent to that ofthe genome cannot be given to this proteome.
352        BIOSEMIOTICS    AND   THE   HUMAN   BEING




new pharmaceuticals based on the specified interference of interaction patterns
between cellular proteins is expected to profit from these new techniques. It will
be interesting to follow the development of this field, and to see how far that it
will get us. For from the theoretical perspective, the big question is whether or
not the implied systems approach will manage to overcome the handicap intro-
duced by the fact that the computer operates according to dyadic machine logic,
and not according to triadic bio-logic.
   And yet, the pivotal point where triadic logic may be expected to make a crucial
difference is at the dynamic interfaces between different compartments of a biolog-
ical system. These are the previously discussed interfaces that inevitably come into
play as soon as semiotic control functions begin exerting influence across differ-
ent levels in the hierarchical arrangement of interaction. An animal, for instance,
has an immediate level of behavioral activity that is regulated through the intricate
interactions between its brain and its endocrine system. Yet this endocrine system
likewise depends upon the activity of a distributed gland tissue, each of whose sin-
gle cells must respond accordingly to the holistic requirements of the moment.
And inside each of these glandular cells, millions of highly integrated catalytic
processes are continually taking place, some to maintain normal cellular metabo-
lism, and some to assure the required production and secretion of specific signal
molecules (e.g., hormones) to the surrounding cell media, as such secretion itself
has been requested by signals instantiated by higher level controls.
   So, in this case the activities of (at least) three highly interactive levels — the
level of the single glandular cell, the level of the endocrine system, and the level
of animal behavior— must be tuned to each other. This process of a reciprocal
tuning between activities at different levels presupposes the presence of signifi-
cant semiotic competence at each of the levels. The endocrine system produces
a hormonal output that is supposed to optimize the ability of the animal to
execute the activities that the brain tells it to initiate. But for this to work, the
organism must be capable of regulating the activity of a variety of glandular tis-
sues under the guidance of multiple signals from the nervous system, as well as
from the immunological system, simultaneously.
   Seen from a biosemiotic point of view, the activity of the endocrine system
from moment to moment instantiates interpretants in the form of (evolution-
arily established) weighted adjustments to the multitude of sign inputs by which
the momentary situation of the organism (spatially as well as temporally) lets
itself be felt in the body—while corresponding sets of sign relations take place
on the level of the cell and on the level of the animal’s behavior. It seems likely
that any technological intervention in complex biosemiotic networks such as
this one would stand a better chance of success if it was based upon an under-
standing of the triadic relations operative in the maintenance of the target sys-
tem’s own biochemical organization.
                                           BIOSEMIOTIC    TECHNOLOGY            353



  There are, however, no principled reasons to deny a priori that a dyadic sys-
tems-based technological solution could not function well, even in the absence
of any knowledge of the triadic relations that are actually ruling the system. The
degree of genuine semiotic freedom — both at the level of the single cell and at
the level of the endocrine system — is, as we well know, very limited. Thus, a rep-
ettoire of possible responses could presumably be enumerated in a matrix that
might catch as many as perhaps 99 percent of all situations, and this might be
seen as satisfactory from a technological point of view. Another way to express
this is to say that the semiotic buttressing of the organismic interaction patterns
via evolution have been frozen to such an extent that they may well now be
treated with a model based on purely dyadic relations. Such a model does not, of
course, explain why the patterns of interactions have become frozen in exactly
the way they have. But with a sufficient amount of empirical data and calcula-
tory power, one may quite possibly make some qualified guesses about how such
interaction patterns work.
  In principle, this task is somewhat like the task that a visitor from Mars would
face if asked to discover the dynamic organization of, say, the electricity supply
in New York City without taking any notice of the lifestyle and the customs of
the inhabitants. Perhaps it might indeed not be necessary for such a calculation
to know anything about the circadian rhythms of the population, the activi-
ties of their family and work lives, their habits of entertainment consumption,
or their methods of transport and social organization. The only thing needed
would be a combination of enough raw empirical data and calculatory tools and
then, sooner or later, the Martian and his machine could come up with a model
that — to an extent — could predict regular changes in the pattern of electricity
consumption in New York.
   Or could it?
  There is no need even to venture an answer to this question, for in any case,
such a procedure is, on the face of it, both counterintuitive and clumsy. The
more promising approach, of course, would be to invest the proper resources
into a study of what really goes on within the system (the metropolis) each time
power is applied around the city. In the absence of a theory of what electricity is
good for, the task of calculating its dynamics based solely on raw (unprocessed)
empirical data would be unnecessary difficult, and perhaps ultimately futile.
   And yet proteomics essentially builds upon the conception of computer cal-
culation as a substitute for a theoretical understanding, and although the tech-
nique most probably will lead to many important results, the idea that it will
really help us understand what is going on within and between all these net-
worked interactions seems dubious. Indeed, Nobel Prize laureate and biochem-
ist Alfred Gilman has told Scientific American, “I could draw you a map of all
the tens of thousands of components in a single-celled organism and put all the
354           BIOSEMIOTICS   AND   THE   HUMAN   BEING



proper arrows connecting them (and even then) I or anybody else would look at
that map and have absolutely no ability whatsoever to predict anything” (Gibbs
2OOI, 53).
      But even if the supposition that using computer simulations is a superior way
of understanding cellular life bears some practical fruits, it is, in a way, pulling
the wool over our own eyes. For one should not let the occasional success of a
dyadic-systems approach be sufficient reason for believing that organisms do
in reality function in the same way as do systems of dyadic relations. Perhaps
it might be useful, in this connection, to ponder what might have happened if
the physicists at the time of Copernicus had had access to computers. In that
case, the need for rejecting the fundamental belief in the Sun as moving around
the Earth   — rather than the opposite— might not have been felt as pressing.
For a computer could surely come up with a satisfactory model of a geocen-
tric universe based, as required, on infinitely many epicycles. And if such soft-
ware was then installed on the computers to be used by the officers of ships, they
may have equally managed to navigate just fine by this Advanced Geocentric
Model — perhaps dubbing the project astronomics.
   In all seriousness however, there is little doubt that proteomics promises to
develop as an important technological tool. But since the essential principle
pertaining to a genuinely biosemiotic technology is based on the possibilities of
taking advantage of our knowledge about the biosemiotic controls that actually
do govern the processes of life, a biosemiotically informed technology must take
care not to forget these irreducibly triadic, naturally occurring (not merely com-
puter-simulated) controls. For nature is not stupid — although science has more
or less treated it as such, at least ever since Newton. Nature, in fact, is incredibly
refined in its internal ways of regulation. So if we want high productivity based
on a sustainable technology, we must make the effort to arrange our technolog-
ical means in such a way that it works in accordance with, rather than against,
the internal workings of nature. We must learn to speak with nature in its own
language. And to do so, of course, is to implement a biosemiotic technology.
