Postscript:
                      Short Historical Notes




                          Sebeok’s Vision Comes True
A biosemiotic approach to life had been independently suggested several times
throughout the twentieth century, yet — in all but one case — without getting
any firm hold. Only in the last decade of the century did the different and spo-
radic attempts that had nourished the idea in its preliminary phases assemble to
become a stronger current. Most decisive for this combining of the efforts was
the unremitting diligence that the late Thomas Sebeok (1920-2001), American
linguist and semiotician, invested in furthering the development and general
recognition of the attempt to bridge biology and semiotics. This he did for
more than four decades, and in the 1990s, the time finally was ripe for the bio-
semiotic project to take hold.
   During most of these decades, Thomas Sebeok was the head of the world’s
leading center for semiotics, the Center for Language and Semiotic Studies,
at Indiana University in Bloomington, and president of the International
Association for Semiotic Studies — as well as editor-in-chief of the scientific jour-
nal of this association, Semiotica. Throughout his life, Sebeok nourished an
intense interest in animal communication as well as in biology in general. It was
Sebeok who, as early as 1963, launched the interdisciplinary field of zoosemiot-
ics — and who, in 1968, suggested that “a full understanding of the dynamics of
semiosis (may), in the last analysis, turn out to be no less than the definition of
life” (Sebeok 1968; Sebeok 1985 (1976), 69).
    Sebeok often mentioned that he had read a1926 English translation of Jakob
von Uexkiill’s book Theoretiche biologie in 1936, but found it uninteresting and
nearly incomprehensible. Only many years later did he come upon an original
German edition of the book, and there the text was both clear and meaningful.
He concluded that the quality of translation in the English version had been
miserable — and that this may have been a significant reason for the scant atten-
tion paid to Uexkiill’s work in the anglophone world at that time.’ At this point,

1 However, the English version that Sebeok read in 1936 was based on the German first edition
from 1920. In 1928, Uexkiill’s book appeared in a new revised edition, and this was the one Sebeok
much later read in German (Sebeok 20018).
356           POSTSCRIPT:   SHORT   HISTORICAL   NOTES



Sebeok sought out Uexkiill’s entire oeuvre, and arranged for competent English
translation of his 1940 Bedeutungslebre. The book appeared in 1982 in a special
issue of Semiotica that included an introductory article by Jakob von Uexkiill’s
son, the late Thure von Uexkiill, chen professor emeritus of internal medicine at
the University of Ulm (Uexkiill, T. v. 1982; Uexkiill, J. v. 1982 (1940)).
   It was through their collaboration on this project that Tom Sebeok and Thure
von Uexkiill became personally acquainted, and the friendship between these
two men resulted in the first English-language international meeting devoted
exclusively to biosemiotics, held in Glottertal, Germany in 1990. The meeting
was organized by Jorg Hermann and took place in the beautiful Schwartswald
landscape at the ReHa Klinik Glotterbad where Herman was, and still is, head
of the medical section. This meeting resulted in the publication of a book assem-
bling contributions from many of the people that were to go on to develop the
field over the course of the next decade (Sebeok and Umiker-Sebeok 1992). This
first meeting was followed in 1991 by a second meeting on biosemiotics, and I
vividly remember the euphoric mood characterizing these early meetings which
— at least as we attendees saw it — ushered in the birth of a frail but exciting
new field of research that all of us were extremely enthusiastic about.
    Biosemiotics has since then become a featured theme of many special ses-
sions at scientific conferences on biology, semiotics, and philosophy, and a fast-
growing number of publications on biosemiotically focused topics continues to
appear each year. At the University of Copenhagen in 2001, the first of a series
of annual international conferences entitled “Gatherings in Biosemiotics” was
convened around the study of biosemiotics — with a special focus on its signif
icance for theoretical biology.’
      Needless to say, however, biosemiotics still plays only a marginal role, if any,
in mainstream biological thinking. Perhaps this is partly due to the inherent
resentment of science against the seemingly anthropomorphic and teleological
aspects that — admittedly — inevitably accompany the idea of natural semio-
sis (as discussed in depth several times in the present volume, most notably in
Chapters 3 and 4), as well as to the instrumentalistic preferences of empiricist
experimentalists (as discussed in Chapter 9). (I shall not rehash the rebuttals to
all those arguments here.)
   My intention here, rather, is to offer a brief account of the early beginnings
or root forms of the biosemiotic approach to the study of life, as can be found
in twentieth-century biological and philosophical thinking. It is, of course, a


2 Gatherings Two took place in Tartu, Estonia in 2002; Gatherings Three in Copenhagen,
Denmark in 2003; Gatherings Four in Prague, Czech Republic in 2004; Gatherings Five
in Urbino, Italy in 2005; Gatherings Six in Salzburg, Austria in 2006; Gatherings Seven in
Groningen, Netherlands in 2007, and Gaterings Eight is scheduled for Syros, Greece 2008.
                              POSTSCRIPT:   SHORT   HISTORICAL   NOTES          357



task for a historian of science to unravel all the relevant threads. The following
account should be seen only as an attempt to single out some of the contribu-
tions seen — through the biased eyes of this author — to have been impor-
tant for the unfolding of the biosemiotic idea. For a more thorough analysis of
the history of biosemiotics, the reader is referred to Don Favareau’s extensive
chapter in Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis (Favareau
2006), and Kalevi Kull’s shorter account in Biosemiotica (Kull 1999).


                                  Beginnings

The two main pioneers in this story, as I see it, are the American scientist and
philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce (1839-1914) and the Estonian-born German
biologist Jakob von Uexkiill (1864-1944). As far as we know, these two major
figures were not acquainted with each other’s work — and it is also somewhat
dubious, I believe, to suppose that their respective intellectual styles would have
been conducive to a reciprocal understanding. Their thinking was, however,
undoubtedly connected by their broad-minded conceptions of the phenome-
non of life, which was not current, let alone acceptable, in their own time (or
today, for that matter).
   Peirce’s semiotics was taken up again after his death by Charles Morris (1901-
79), while Uexkiill’s Umwelt theory continued as behavioral biology (ethology)
through his pupil, Konrad Lorenz (1903-89). But the radical dimensions that
lay hidden in Peirce’s and Uexkiill’s ideas were left behind by their successors in
the next generation. A main cause for this may be that scientistic conceptions
hardly ever exerted a more hegemonic hold over scientific inquiry than in the
first half of the twentieth century, before the innocence of science was lost due
to the atomic bomb and other technological disasters such as those caused by
thalidomide.
    Nevertheless, Morris's and Lorenz’s work, each in its own ways, has provided
insights that, in the end, have helped combine the two separate streams of bio-
semiotics — biology and semiotics. Morris’s foremost contribution here was
his insistence that the science of signs must to built upon biological science,
which in his context meant a science of behavior — and this has led many to
call Morris a behaviorist. But in her biographical essay entitled “Charles Morris's
Biosemiotics,’ Susan Petrilli emphasizes that Morris’s use of this word behav-
ior does not imply behaviorism in the proper sense of the philosophical-psy-
chological trend of B.F. Skinner and the like. Rather, the idea is that a special
science must be created to study behavior as a biologically anchored phenom-
enon (Petrilli 1999). According to Petrilli, this proposal does not imply the
same reductionist naturalism that would so forcefully come to characterize later
358          POSTSCRIPT:     SHORT    HISTORICAL      NOTES



behavioral science under the headings of ethology, sociobiology, and (lately)
evolutionary psychology (ibid., 67).
   Admittedly, Morris’s semiotics does part from Peirce’s semiotics at several
points, the most important of which is his tight coupling between semiosis
and behavior that has, as its implication, the result that the concept of inter-
preter mote or less fuses with the concept of interpretant. For Morris, semio-
sis was always connected to an organism (an interpreter) — and for that reason
he could not accept Peirce’s suggestion that shought (and thus semiosis) “is not
necessarily connected with a brain. It appears in the work of bees, of crystals,
and throughout the purely physical world, and one can no more deny that it
is really there than that the colors, the shapes, etc., of objects are really there”
(CP 4:551).
   This is a point of view Morris rejects as “idealistic metaphysics” (Petrilli 1999),
and it must be admitted that the quotation above puts one’s tolerance for Peirce
to a serious test. Peirce here, as Frederik Stjernfelt (2007, 43) has noticed, may
be seen to have fallen into the trap of absolute idealism: “The Hegelian ten-
dency to globalize notions like mind, teleology, even personality to the whole
of cosmic evolution and the whole of the universe.” Yet although it is tempting
to agree with Morris against Peirce on this point, it should be remarked that the
idea of bee intelligence, at any rate, has been taken up lately within the research
field of artificial life under the designation swarm intelligence. Peirce thus has a
strong point in rejecting the notion that thinking should be reserved for brains,
which Morris surely took for granted.”
   For Morris, semiosis is connected specifically to the behavior of animals, for
semiosis presupposes an ability of the organism to respond to stimuli, and this
again requires, he assumes, the presence of both sensory receptors, as well as
effectors (¢.g., muscles and glands). Therefore, for Morris, microorganisms —
as well as individual cells within an organism’s body — fall below the threshold
where semiosis can take place. Although Petrilli may be right in claiming that
Morris did not nourish reductionistic inclinations, it seems to me that Morris's
strict localization of the agency of nature in the muscular processes of individual
organisms implies an inherent reification of behavior that can not properly be
reconciled with a processual (biosemiotic) conception of nature. For as I have
maintained throughout this work, semiotic causation, and thus agency, is a pro-
cess inherent in life from the earliest formation of living systems.



3 [personally would reject the notion that thought should appear in crystals or “throughout the
purely physical world” since I don’t believe that the necessary semiotic sophistication has evolved
in such inanimate systems. But as soon as living creatures are found populating the world, I find it
fruitful to imagine that thinking-like processes do occur within them — or at least between them,
as with the bees — and at the meta-level of the evolution of their lineage.
                                   POSTSCRIPT:     SHORT    HISTORICAL     NOTES             359



    Thomas Sebeok tells us that Morris, in the late 1930s, had been the first to
urge him to “assiduously read whatever fragments of Peirce’s semiotics were
accessible at Chicago.” Nevertheless, in the same paragraph, Sebeok (1986,
66-67) quotes John Dewey, who dubbed Morris’s behavioral semiotics “a com-
plete inversion of Peirce” — “a judgment,” Sebeok adds, “with which I happen
to concur.”
   Similarly, Konrad Lorenz is probably best known as the founder of ethology
— ascience that in 1973 became canonized through the awarding of the Nobel
Prize in Physiology and Medicine to be shared among Lorenz and fellow ethol-
ogists Karl von Frisch and Nicolas Tinbergen. Although Lorenz has clearly
stated the debt of ethology to the early work of Jakob von Uexkiill,* it must be
admitted that the recognition of ethology as a proper scientific discipline was
obtained only because Lorenz turned his attention away from the Uexkiillian
Umwelt. The question of how animals conceive their surroundings was replaced
in ethology by the question of animal behavior, which was then described to a
large extent as the result of inborn instincts.
   And so, instead of seeking a proximal explanation of behavior from the spe-
cific Umwelt of the animal, ethology devoted itself to the study of more distal
explanations based on genetic dispositions and, ultimately, on natural selection.
Thus, Tinbergen (1942, quoted in Lehrman 1953 (2001), 26) defines instinc-
tive behavior as “highly stereotyped, coordinated movements, the neuromotor
apparatus of which belongs, in its complete form, to the hereditary constitution
of the animal,” and Lorenz (1939, (quoted in Lehrman 1953 (2001), 26) talks
about characteristic behavior as “hereditary, individually fixed, and thus open
to evolutionary analysis.”
   The American psychologist Daniel S. Lehrman (from whom the above quo-
tations are taken) objected to these conceptions as early as in 1953 since, as he
pointed out, patterns of instinctive behavior — such as, for example, the ability
of newly hatched bird young to peck seeds, or a female rat's typical nest-build-
ing behavior — only superficially appear to be unitary behaviors. When stud-
ied in more detail, such instinctive behaviors are found to actually consist rather
of conglomerates of motoric activities, each with its own developmental dynam-
ics (Lehrman 2001 (1953)). The strong focus of ethology on the conception of
instincts as unitary packages of behavior thus became a sort of midwife for the
concept of genes for traits that has distorted our understanding of the role of
genes up to this day (see Chapter 5, and particularly the section on C. elegans
and the human genome).


4   In 1971 he wrote that ethology “certainly owes more to his [Uexkiill’s] teaching than to
any other school of behavior study” (Lorenz 1971, cited in Sebeok 20014, 72; also see Stjernfelt
2001).
360        POSTSCRIPT:    SHORT   HISTORICAL   NOTES




   Against this, Lehrman observed that inborn instincts usually arise only
through the real-time accomplished interplay between many independent
factors that all must be in place for a successful behavior to obtain. For
example, the communicative activity inside the embryo is decisive to the
realization of such behaviors, as it assures the coordination of activities into
one functional unit (e.g., reflexes and motor schemas). And in many cases,
as for instance in the nest-building behavior of rats, the necessary coupling
between the separate activities that, taken together, constitute the “instinct”
can only occur in interaction with the external environment. The distinc-
tion between instinct and learning, then, is far from as clear-cut as has often
been assumed.
   In the same year that Lehrman launched this critique of ethology’s concept
of instinct, an epoch-making new discovery took place that signaled the estab-
lishment of a third — and wholly different — track leading to the biosemiotic
conception of life. For in 1953, James Watson and Francis Crick published their
famous double-helix model for the structure of the DNA molecule, and this
discovery opened the doors to a deep understanding of the nature of the genes
that, at the same time, made exhaustive explanations in terms of gene action very
attractive to many scientists.


                         The Language Metaphor
With such fundamental concepts as genetic code, messenger RNA, transcrip-
tion and translation it is obvious that the revolution of molecular biology, right
from its beginnings, implied a powerful semiotic input to biology. But unfortu-
nately, the communication sciences of that time were strongly attached to clas-
sical (dyadic and mechanistic) information theory, with the result that this ripe
moment for the long-overdue semiotization of biology was castrated, so to say,
at the outset by the ontological reduction of semiosis to information transfer (see
Chapter 3, the section “The Central Dogma’).
  Nevertheless, molecular biology, the field in which I myself was trained,
soon gave rise to a deep understanding of cellular communication processes
that indirectly came to pave the way for the formulation of the modern proj-
ect of biosemiotics. For very early on in the development of molecular biol-
ogy, attempts were made to apply linguistic analysis to DNA’s sequential
syntax and coding function. Laura Shintani (1999) reports that, in 1968,
French TV broadcast a debate with the title “Vivre et parler” (“To Live and To
Speak”) that featured the participation of two biologists, Francois Jacob and
Phillipe L'Héritier; the anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss; and the linguist
Roman Jakobsen.
                                     POSTSCRIPT:      SHORT    HISTORICAL      NOTES             361



   Strongly impressed by Jacob’s farsighted book The Logic ofLife: A History of
Heredity (1974), Jakobsen returned several times in the ensuing years to the rela-
tion between DNA and language, and he treated this idea quite extensively in
several chapters of his Main Trends in the Science ofLanguage (Jakobsen 1973).
Jakobsen finds that the genetic texts and their structure involves the same prin-
ciple of double articulation that is operative in all human language — and which
in both cases is responsible for the ability to produce an infinite quantity of
messages from a finite quantity of sign vehicles (phonemes and trinucleotide
codons, respectively). In this connection, Shintani (1999, 109) offers us the fol-
lowing quotation from an undated manuscript of Jakobsen’s (once scheduled
for publication in the New York Review ofBooks which, for unknown reasons,
never published the article):
   The two turning points in evolution are, first, the emergence oflife and, nearly
   two billion years later,” the evidently conjoint emergence of thought and language.
   Thus, perhaps, the biological confrontation of these two widely separated evo-
   lutionary gains — life and language — from the perspective ofthe earlier turn-
   ing point, may be supplemented by attempts toward a retrospective, ergo initially
   “linguistic” interpretation, the more so as Frangois Jacob himself
                                                                    has convincingly
   endowed the linguistic model with “an exceptional value for the molecular analysis
   of heredity” (Paris journal Critique, March 1974).°

Jakobsen did not go on to develop these ideas any further, but the conception
of DNA as a linguistic-like system has since then inspired many theoreticians
in linguistics as well as in biology (Emmeche and Hoffmeyer 1991; Ji 2002). In
the context of this book, we have seen this conception in Pattee’s distinction
between the dynamic and linguistic aspects of life processes (Chapter 4).
    Gregory Bateson, too, had concerned himself with language as a model for
life, but his conception of this model stretched beyond the level of the DNA, not
limiting itself to the merely syntactical level, but drawing in also the pragmatic
dimensions of language: “Both grammar and biological structure are products
of communicational organizational process. The anatomy of the plant is a com-
plex transform of genotypic instructions, and the ‘language’ of the genes, like


5 Today this span of time normally is given as nearly four billion years.
6 Icannot in this context resist the temptation to quote my own first book (from 1975, not
translated to English): “Over the entire course of evolution, only one event may perhaps be com-
parable in kind to the evolution of the human species, and this is the formation of the first cell
out oflifeless nature. The point of similarity between these two radical departures is this: The cell
transcended the dictates of physical law by making chemistry biological. Humans transcended
the control of chemistry by making biology mental. The human being has by force of its ‘free
will’ evaded the dictates of the chemical code in exactly the same way that the cell evaded the dic-
tates of the second law of thermodynamics — i.e., by the help ofits biological organization that
(locally) allowed it to decrease the surrounding entropy” (Hoffmeyer 1975, 104-5).
362        POSTSCRIPT:   SHORT   HISTORICAL   NOTES




any other languages, must of necessity have contextual structure. ... The tis-
sues of the plant could not ‘read’ the genotypic instructions . . . unless [both]
cell and tissue exist, at that given moment, in a contextual structure” (Bateson
1972, 154). Through this and similar observations, Bateson brings us from the
purely linguistic to a proper biosemiotic frame of understanding, although he
never used the term biosemiotics. Seen from a biosemiotic point of view, the
whole problem with the linguistic metaphor for the genetic system is precisely
that it serves all too well to privilege the digitally coded communication system
of the organism that is based on the sequential structure of the DNA molecules
— at the expense of communicative activities based upon analog codes that, in
this context, are often seen as just a biochemical substrate without autonomous
communicative function. Indeed, I would argue that Bateson’s most important
contribution to the later development of the biosemiotic approach to the study
of life was exactly his unfailing emphasis on the interplay between analog and
digital codings in the organization of living systems.
   Thus, while Bateson’s work has only been touched upon sporadically in this
book, it has indeed been a decisive source of inspiration for modern biosemi-
otics and, not the least, for this author (Hoffmeyer 2008a). Most importantly,
Bateson’s famous definition of the smallest unit of information being a differ-
ence that makes a difference has been an early eye-opener for all of us in the field
— for this definition stems from Bateson’s insight that everything that may be
subjected to our understanding must rely on temporal or spatial differences in
order to be so apprehended. Receptors and sense organs can only react upon dif-
ferences or changes, and everything that may be known must therefore in the
final analysis be built upon the detection and analysis of differences. But a dif-
ference is par excellence a subjective phenomenon, one that does not exist or
occur as a difference in the real world unless someone makes it so by responding
to it as one — unless, in other words, the difference makes a difference to some-
one (or to some receptive system).
  Another central preoccupation in Bateson’s work that has been influential
in biosemiotics is that of the pattern that connects. This notion expresses the
basic problem that fascinates him in the study of the living world in its broad-
est sense — i.e., as comprising both the biological and the social. Here the idea
comes expressed as the question he asks himself in the introduction to Mind
and Nature: “What pattern connects the crab to the lobster and the orchid to
the primrose and all the four of them to me? And me to you? And all the six
of us to the amoeba in one direction and to the back-ward schizophrenic in
another?” (Bateson 1979, 8). Behind this attempt to trace the pattern that con-
nects, we find Bateson’s concept of abduction as an unavoidable methodological
principle in the sciences of communication — and biology, in his conception,
belongs to the sciences of communication.
                                POSTSCRIPT: SHORT HISTORICAL NOTES                 363


  Abduction — a concept that he explicitly acknowledges to have inherited
from Peirce — was, as Bateson understood it, a way of constructing hypotheses
by use of an associative transfer of abstract relations from one area to another,
under the presumption that the two areas are governed by similar rules. As such,
abduction has close relations to another central element in Bateson’s thinking,
the principle of double description, a method that was inspired by the concept
of logical types which he borrowed from the work of Russell and Whitehead
(1910-13). Bateson claimed that the product of double description belongs to
a higher logical type than do the phenomena that were abductively compared.
The similarities reached by abduction are here seen as cases on which to build an
inductive inference that brings us to a higher logical type.
  In a recent analysis of this aspect of Bateson’s thinking, Julie Hui, Ty
Cashman, and Terrence Deacon (2008) suggest that even Bateson’s seemingly
far-fetched claim of a unifying pattern connecting the crab-lobster pair to the
orchid-primrose pair may be seen to hold true when analyzed in terms of molec-
ular genetics: “The general developmental logic of duplication and differenti-
ation is effectively a unifying pattern underlying the generation of biological
form in organisms with respect to environmental constraints.”
  Peter Harries-Jones (1995, 177) notes,

  [For Bateson, ]abduction was like qualitative modeling — a means of undertak-
  ing formal comparisons through contrasts, ratios, divergences of form, and con-
  vergences. His uses of the techniques of abduction were remarkably similar to
  those of identifying “resemblances” in a comparison of “language games” which
  Wittgenstein had originally proposed. ... The notion of resemblances derived
  through comparison of differences is vividly captured in Wittgenstein’s image of the
  thread among resemblances in language games: or, as Wittgenstein puts it, in over-
  lapping and criss-crossing fibers of a woven pattern.

Seen from the biosemiotic standpoint, the reason why abductive inferences
lead to fruitful results — even though such kinds of inferences are not logically
“clean” — is that nature itself possess semiogenic creativity, or the tendency of
things to take habits, as Peirce called it. What this means is that natural sys-
tems tend to arrive at available solution models that, due to the inherent univer-
sals of life processes, tend to exhibit important common features. The feathers
of extinct dinosaurs that in their origins were means of thermoregulation, were
later in evolution — abductively, so to say — to become the means of flight in
birds, through the process that Gould and Vrba (1982) call exaptation. Sciences
based on the ideal of induction may thus well abhor abduction, but — as
Bateson reminds us — nature itself does not. Accordingly, he felt that natural-
ists afraid of tautologies will overlook “many important orders of phenomena”
(cited in Harries-Jones 1995, 179).
364         POSTSCRIPT:     SHORT   HISTORICAL     NOTES



   Among the many scientific approaches that have been inspired by Bateson, I
must mention here second-order cybernetics — a field that Soren Brier, since the
19908, has led in an effort to combine cybernetics with biosemiotics to form
the new discipline of cybersemiotics (Brier 1995; 1999). Also, Maturana’s and
Varela’s autopoetic analysis — which in many ways is related to the biosemiotic
approach — should be mentioned here, although space considerations deny me
the opportunity for a comparative analysis.



                           Code-Tappping Animals
As mentioned, it was Thomas Sebeok who had the broadminded intellect and
indefatigable energy to assemble all the threads that would serve as the founda-
tion for the modern biosemiotic project, both intellectually and socially.’ Yet
Sebeok’s own major interest was the semiotic relations between humans and
animals (Sebeok 1963; 1968; 1972; 19773; 1979; Sebeok and Umiker-Sebeok
1980). In this connection, Sebeok called attention to Heini Hediger as one of
the biosemiotic pioneers. Hediger was professor in ethology at the University
of Zurich and the head of Zurich’s zoological garden — and his contribution
to the development of biosemiotics mainly stems from his deep grasp of the
semiotic dynamics involved in the taming and training of wild animals (Sebeok
20o1b). Hediger, as Sebeok (2001b, 19) puts it, “remained perennially intrigued
by the theoretical, as well as the applied, aspects and consequences of animal
taming. He famously defined saming as the reduction or even elimination of the
‘flight-distance. .. . In this frame of reference, he, increasingly after 1934, came
to perceive, perhaps more than any other scientist in our time, an important
connection with understanding possibilities for communication between man
and animals that continued to concern him to the end of his life.”
   The flight-distance referred to here denotes the distance between the animal
and other animals (or humans), that can not be trespassed without provoking
the animal to flee or attack. Sebeok termed the space around the animal that was
delimited by the flight-distance the Hediger bubble (see Chapter 6), in obvious
reference to the Umwelt notion ofJakob von Uexkiill. Unlike most other ethol-
ogists, Hediger felt comfortable with the Uexkiillian Umwelt concept, and he
considered Sebeok’s zoosemiotics to be a legitimate extension of his work. And
like Sebeok, Hediger was extremely interested in the multiple reports of animals
that are alleged to be capable of executing the most surprising operations.



7 Sebeok's far-reaching disciplinary and social network was legendary. I have hardly mentioned
a figure here from the early history of biosemiotics that Sebeok didn’t know personally (apart
from the long-deceased “fathers,” Charles Sanders Peirce and Jakob von Uexkiill)
                                   POSTSCRIPT:      SHORT    HISTORICAL      NOTES   365



   The most well-known of these is Clever Hans — the famous German horse
that, it was claimed by its owner, could “do arithmetic” by its tapping out with
one hoof the correct answer to a simple arithmetic question.® The psycholo-
gist Oscar Pfungst took an interest in the horse and subjected its behavior to a
closer examination, which disclosed that Clever Hans, firstly, could not perform
its “math” unless it could see the trainer during the performance, and, secondly,
that he could not answer correctly when the questioner did not himself know
the correct answer. The experiments showed that the horse would just keep tap-
ping with its foreleg until the trainer by the slightest of body movements, unwit-
tingly, indicated that it should stop.
    Commenting on this paradigmatic story, Hediger (1974, 27-28) remarks,
“The apparent performance of these ‘code-tapping’ animals is only explainable
by the continually repressed fact, that the animal — be it horse, monkey, or pla-
narian — is generally more capable of interpreting the signals emanating from
humans than is converse the case. In other words, the animal is frequently the
considerably better observer of the two, or is more sensitive than man; it can
evaluate signals that remain hidden to man” (cited in Sebeok 2o001b, 23). The
Clever Hans phenomenon repeatedly reappears in new disguises and was, for
example, involved again in many of the early attempts at proving apes’ capac-
ity for linguistic expression. Another recent example is the sorry story about
how severely mentally retarded children were thought to exhibit surprising abil-
ities for reading when guided by a teacher with a so-called spelling plate — an
example that, by the way, once again indicates the skills of pre-linguistic chil-
dren in reading bodily cues that the adults are not themselves conscious of hay-
ing offered.
   Another central figure in the final establishment of modern biosemiotics is
Jakob von Uexkiill’s son, Thure von Uexkiill, whose contribution to the semi-
otics of medical care we discussed in Chapter 10. In addition to his pioneer-
ing efforts to establish a semiotic track within psychosomatic medicine, Thure
von Uexkiill has himself made decisive theoretical contributions to biosemiot-
ics and has helped in bringing his father’s work into harmony with a modern
Peirce-inspired biosemiotics (Uexkiill 1982; 1986; 1999; Uexkill, Geigges, and
Hermann 1993).


                                   The Tartu Group
In choosing to put the Glottertal meetings as the dividing line between what we
might call the initial period in the establishment of the modern interdiscipline
of biosemiotics, and biosemiotics as it is presently practiced, we shall not pursue

8   In Chapter 6, this case was discussed as an example of semethic interaction.
366           POSTSCRIPT:     SHORT HISTORICAL NOTES



the history beyond these meetings.” It must be mentioned, however, that among
the participants in the Glottertal meetings was the Estonian ecologist Kalevi
Kull, who had arrived at the biosemiotic synthesis through paths that we have
not yet portrayed. Kull is a professor at Tartu University — the same univer-
sity that also hosted the Russian semiotician Yuri Lotman — and Lotman nour-
ished a strong interest in living systems, an interest that was reinforced when his
son, Alexei Lotman, chose to study biology.
   Kull (1999¢, 117) recounts that in 1978, “the Tartu group of theoretical biol-
ogy, together with similar groups from Moscow and St. Petersburg, organized
a conference entitled ‘Biology and Linguistics; and this conference was held in
Tartu on February 1-2 of that year. One of the key lecturers was Yuri Lotman,
and many of his colleagues also participated.” During the ensuing years a fruit-
ful exchange was upheld between the Estonian and Russian researchers, and
this collaboration prepared the way for an independent development of a bio-
semiotic understanding. Lotman is generally considered to be the originator of
the term semiosphere’® — a term that Lotman claims to have coined through his
inspiration by the Russian geologist and biogeographer V. I. Vernadsky. Kull
(1999¢, 120-21) quotes Lotman as reporting,

     I’m reading Vernadsky with much interest and find in him many ideas of my own.
     ... lam amazed by one ofhis statements. Once in our seminar in Moscow, I was
     brave enough to declare my belief that “text” can exist (i.e., can be socially recog-
     nized as a text) if it is preceded by another text, and that any developed culture
     should be preceded by another developed culture. And now I find Vernadsky’s
     deeply argued idea arising from his great experience of investigations in cosmic
     geology that life can arise only from the living, i.e., that it is preceded by life... .
     Only the antecedence of a semiotic sphere makes a message a message. Only the exis-
     tence of mind explains the existence of mind.



                             The Copenhagen Group
It might perhaps be appropriate to end this with the personal story of how Claus
Emmeche and I also independently arrived at the concept of biosemiotics near
the end ofthe 1980s.
   Impressed by the radical new agendas of technological development open-
ing up in the 1970s in biochemistry (my own discipline), I had, for an extended
period in the late 1970s and early 1980s, spent a considerable amount of time
studying the significance of ecological factors for technological development,

9 But again, see Favareau (2006) and the volume Introduction to Biosemiotics (Barbieri 2006)
for more on the subsequent history of biosemiotics from that time till now.
10    But see note 4 in Chapter 1.
                              POSTSCRIPT:   SHORT   HISTORICAL   NOTES          367



as seen in a macrohistorical perspective (Hoftmeyer 1982; 1987; 1988). (I pre=
sume that these kinds of studies have come to be called ecological history, but
this concept as such didn’t really exist at the time.) One result of this work
was an understanding of human history as essentially interwoven into ecolog-
ically-based thresholds that could be transcended only by the introduction of
radically new technological principles — principles that so changed the living
conditions of people that decisive changes were bound to occur subsequently
at even deeper explanatory levels (e.g., how people would see and understand
their world), and that such changes would subsequently hold great conse-
quences for philosophy, religion, and science. It followed from this understand-
ing that the rapid introduction of information technologies in the 1970s should
be expected to set off rather radical changes even inside single sciences such as
biology and biochemistry.
   Simultaneously, in 1985 Claus Emmeche started working on the thesis for
his PhD degree with the aim of throwing light upon the concept of infor-
mation as this concept was at that time being used within the life sciences.
Through our frequent discussions of the set of problems connected to the
application of the information concept in biology, the realization eventually
became clear to us that what biologists used to call information was indeed,
properly speaking, a lot closer to what semioticians call signs than it was to
the denuded, quantized conception of information that was being used in the
exact sciences (physics and IT mathematics) at the time. We therefore set out
to examine the eventual gains that might be had by applying a semiotic under-
standing to informational biology. The dominating tradition in semiotics in
Denmark at the time was still strongly based on French structural linguis-
tics, and accordingly, in Emmeche’s and my first publications in biosemiotics
(which, at the time, we called investigations into the semiotics of nature) the
Saussurean inspiration is still evident.
   Gradually, however, it dawned upon us that the Peircean tradition offered a
more obvious starting point for this seiotics ofnature project that, at the time,
we still naively imagined we had invented ourselves. The Danish physicist Peder
Voetmann Christiansen was very influential in opening our eyes to the poten-
tial of Peircean semiotics. Christiansen had for years taken an intense interest in
Peirce’s semiotics and especially in the possibility he saw for building a nonpar-
adoxical interpretation of quantum mechanics based upon Peircean semiotic
philosophy. Christiansen was at the time the leading figure in a cross-disciplin-
ary study group in Copenhagen among philosophers, scientists, and other peo-
ple with a keen interest in taking a scientific approach to “the big questions.”
And through the many meetings of this little group, he came to exert a deci-
sive influence upon the development of a Peirce-inspired semiotics of nature in
Denmark. If today we may, with a certain right, talk about a new Copenhagen
368          POSTSCRIPT:     SHORT   HISTORICAL      NOTES



school™ in semiotics, it is now not so much Hjelmslev that we should thank, as
it is Christiansen.
    But of course, and as always, it is forebears such as Niels Bohr, Soren
Kierkegaard, and Hans Christian Andersen that constitute an inescapable —
although largely unconscious — ballast for all attempts of Danish thinkers to
reach a theoretical grasp of the world.




11 This designation was suggested by Frederik Stjernfelt (2002, 337), who himself has contrib-
uted to the school — which, by the way, has more the character of a local milieu for discussions
than of any close-knit movement or doctrine.
