Hill AE le                                            ee
                                     (itore C ests
                                        Yhe anew     is
                                         crealed [he pallern
                                          8 estebhehed    [—vie


                   erie                   avers 1 entropy)
                       a Ae     UUM~ Ybare ore two
                        bende ¢ anos      (one are fausienale
  te
  Sa
  ae
   5




                       te       ee     baat tHe drh           x   &
                                         UMN do   WOR     A
                        apt ‘s Ag

                        fo   Lense     Whos ove uire df lan4
                       (any      your otra laghs f id
jh
Yas
 8B
    ‘fal
    [8]
    heme
     causes,
     €
 Away,
  teusesLe
        hin
        Aims
         lenddmiilig
         pha,
                        ken spice)
                    () Hunk            Hur   big~ amo eae
                         poet        rey mean                  el
                                                     by €Le wd ee

               Phonrwond        best understood           gat
                                                            malt
p-Y:
hin.
2>                wile Hf (reduchovwen)
                 (nether      do quantven Hells sene)
er      2   ontolory of (Moss             orn anand       ,’nee         }
                                                          a
                                                          a
    \                                       a €       v
    ’
    7
    ’
                                                          q
                                            BS            on
2                          ,       ?         (        >           -
                                        _
                                       ob
                                       -—
                                       ‘
                                       ar
                \
                hive               q
                                       ;9         g       a




            ‘
            7
        a              ‘       D                              *
“lesper Hoffmeyer has produced a worthy successor to and culmination of his
previous work in biosemiotics.    This book, through a series of nuanced interconnec-
tions, establishes a wide-ranging conceptual framework for further research and ar-
gument in the life sciences that opens rather than closes doors of inquiry. It is a
remarkably clear blend of exposition, application, and analysis.A critical reader is con-
stantly stimulated to respond to the argument, in detail and as a whole, not just with
a ‘yes, but’ so much as with an ‘and then ...?’”
                                             —Robert E. Innis, Professor of Philosophy,
                                                   University of Massachusetts, Lowell

“Biosemiotics, as it has been articulated by one of its pioneering and most articulate
advocates, Jesper Hoffmeyer, brings to light what is often implicitly dismissed in bio-
logical theorizing: that biology cannot be properly understood without recognizing
the centrality of a semiotic foundation.As Hoffmeyer enigmatically notes: ‘biochem-
istry has already become biosemiotics, it just has not yet realized it’. Hoffrneyer’s ap-
proach is as solidly grounded in molecular-celiular biology (which daily adds to the
list of semiotic processes that need to be explained) as it is in semiotics (with its
recognition that language is only a single idiosyncratic form of semiosis). His work —
shows us that the Cartesian rift between the domains of matter and mind concerns
the whole of biology, suggesting also that the rift between the human and the natural
sciences is bridgeable. His stepwise analysis of semictic processes identifies analogous
semiotic dynamics that occur at all levels of life, including human mental life, exem-
plifying a necessary continuity between the levels. In this respect, Biosemiotics is a call
for intellectual reunification that, with its magisterial integration of these many domains,
provides essential tools for the task ahead.”
                       —Terrence W. Deacon, Professor of Biological Anthropology and
                      Neuroscience at the University of California, Berkeley; author of
                          The Symbolic Species:The Co-evolution of Language and the Brain

“Scientists will be pleased by Hoffmeyer’s tough-minded insistence that the new bi-
ology remain empirical, testable, and evidence-based. Philosophers and humanities
scholars will welcome his biosemiotic approach, which establishes a crucial role for
meanings, goals, and purposes in the natural worid. This is the most systematic pres-
entation yet of one of the fastest growing schools in evolutionary theory today.After
this book there can be no return to ‘business as usual’ in biology.”
                                Philip Clayton, Professor of Philosophy and Religion,
                                                      Claremont Graduate University

Jesper Hoffmeyer is Professor of Molecular Biology at the University of Copenhagen.




                                                 University of Scranton Press
                                                          A Member of the Association
                                                           of Jesuit University Presses

                                                Cover    by Grapevine-Design.
